An Algorithm for Anaphora Resolution in 
Spanish Texts 
Manuel Palomar* 
University of Alicante 
Lidia Moreno t
Valencia University of Technology 
Jesfis Peral* 
University of Alicante 
Rafael Mufioz* 
University of Alicante 
Antonio Ferr~indez* 
University of Alicante 
Patricio Martinez-Barco* 
University of Alicante 
Maximiliano Saiz-Noeda* 
University of Alicante 
This paper presents an algorithm for identifying noun phrase antecedents ofthird person personal 
pronouns, demonstrative pronouns, reflexive pronouns, and omitted pronouns (zero pronouns) 
in unrestricted Spanish texts. We define a list of constraints and preferences for different ypes 
of pronominal expressions, and we document in detail the importance of each kind of knowledge 
(lexical, morphological, syntactic, and statistical) in anaphora resolution for Spanish. The paper 
also provides a definition for syntactic onditions on Spanish NP-pronoun oncoreference using 
partial parsing. The algorithm has been evaluated on a corpus of 1,677 pronouns and achieved 
a success rate of 76.8%. We have also implemented four competitive algorithms and tested their 
performance in a blind evaluation on the same test corpus. This new approach could easily be 
extended to other languages uch as English, Portuguese, Italian, or Japanese. 
1. Introduction 
We present an algorithm for identifying noun phrase antecedents of personal pro- 
nouns, demonstrative pronouns, reflexive pronouns, and omitted pronouns (zero pro- 
nouns) in Spanish. The algorithm identifies both intrasentential and intersentential 
antecedents and is applied to the syntactic analysis generated by the slot unifica- 
t ion parser (SUP) (Ferr~ndez, Palomar, and Moreno 1998b). It also combines different 
forms of knowledge by distinguishing between constraints and preferences. Whereas 
constraints are used as combinations of several kinds of knowledge (lexical, mor- 
phological, and syntactic), preferences are defined as a combination of heuristic rules 
extracted from a study of different corpora. 
We present he following main contributions in this paper: 
? an algorithm for anaphora resolution in Spanish texts that uses different 
kinds of knowledge 
* Department of Software and Computing Systems, Alicante, Spain. E-mail: (Palomar) 
mpalomar@dlsi.ua.es, (F rr~ndez) antonio@dlsi.ua.es, (Martfnez-Barco) patricio@dlsi.ua.es, (Peral) 
jperal@dlsi.ua.es, (Saiz-Noeda) max@dlsi.ua.es, (Mufioz) rafael@dlsi.ua.es 
t Department of Information Systems and Computation, Valencia, Spain. E-mail: hnoreno@dsic.upv.es 
@ 2001 Association for Computational Linguistics 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 4 
? an exhaustive study of the importance of each kind of knowledge in 
Spanish anaphora resolution 
? a proposal concerning syntactic onditions on NP-pronoun 
noncoreference in Spanish that can be evaluated on a partial parse tree 
? a proposal regarding preferences that are appropriate for resolving 
anaphora in Spanish and that could easily be extended to other 
languages 
? a blind test of the algorithm 
? a comparison with other approaches to anaphora resolution that we have 
applied to Spanish texts using the same blind test 
In Section 2, we show the classification scheme we used to identify the different ypes 
of anaphora that we would be resolving. In Section 3, we present he algorithm and 
discuss its main properties. In Section 4, we evaluate the algorithm. In Section 5, we 
compare our algorithm with several other approaches to anaphora resolution. Finally, 
we present our conclusions. 
2. Our Classification Scheme for Pronominal Expressions in Spanish 
In this section, we present our classification scheme for identifying the different ypes 
of anaphora that we will be resolving. Personal pronouns (PPR), demonstrative pro- 
nouns (DPR), reflexive pronouns (RPR), and omitted pronouns (OPa) are some of the 
most frequent ypes of anaphoric expressions found in Spanish and are the main 
subject of this study. Personal and demonstrative pronouns are further classified ac- 
cording to whether they appear within a prepositional phrase (PP) or whether they 
are complement personal pronouns (clitic pronouns1). We present examples for each 
of the four types of common anaphora. Each example is presented in three forms: as a 
Spanish sentence, as a word-to-word translation into English, and correctly translated 
into English. 2
2.1 Clitic Personal Pronouns (CPPR) 
In the case of clitic personal pronouns, I0, la, le 'him, her, it' and los, las, les 'them', we 
consider that the third person personal pronoun plays the role of the complement. 
(1) Ana abre \[la verja\]i y lai cierra tras de si. 
Ana opens \[the gate\]/ and it/ closes after herself 
'Ana opens the gate and closes it after herself.' 
2.2 Personal Pronouns Not Included in a PP (PPanotPP) 
We include in this class the personal pronouns ~l, ella, ello 'he, she, it' and ellas, ellos 
'they'. 
(2) Andr6si es mi vecino, t~li vive en el segundo piso. 
Andr6si is my neighbor Hei lives on the second floor 
'Andr6s is my neighbor. He lives on the second floor.' 
1 According to Mathews (1997), aclitic pronoun is a pronoun that is treated as an independent word in 
syntax but that forms a phonological unit with the verb that precedes or follows it. 
2 Coindexing indicates coreference b tween anaphor and antecedent. 
546 
Palomar et al Anaphora Resolution in Spanish Texts 
2.3 Personal Pronouns Included in a PP (PPRinPP) 
We include in this class the personal pronouns dl, ella, ello 'him, her, it' and ellas, ellos 
'them'. 
(3) Juan/ debe asistir pero Pedro lo har~i por 61i. 
Juani must attend but Pedro it will do for himi 
'Juan must attend but Pedro will do it for him.' 
2.4 Demonstrative Pronouns Not Included in a PP (DPRnotPP) 
We include in this class the demonstrative pronouns ~ste, dsta, esto 'this'; ~stos, ~stas 
'these'; dse, ~sa, aqu~l, aqu~lla 'that'; and dsos, dsas, aqu~llos, aqudllas 'those'. 
(4) E1 Ferrarii gan6 al Ford. t~stei es el mejor. 
the Ferrarii beat the Ford This/ is the best 
'The Ferrari beat the Ford. This is the best.' 
2.5 Demonstrative Pronouns Included in a PP (DPRinPP) 
We include in this class the demonstrative pronouns ~ste, ~sta, esto 'this'; ~stos, ~stas 
'these'; dse, ~sa, aqudl, aqudlla 'that'; and dsos, ~sas, aqu~llos, aqudllas 'those'. 
(5) Ana vive con Pacoi y cocina para 6stei diariamente. 
Ana lives with Pacoi and cooks for this/ every day 
'Ana lives with Paco and cooks for him every day.' 
2.6 Reflexive Pronouns (RPR) 
We include in this class the reflexive pronouns e, sL si mismo 'himself, herself, itself' 
and consigo, consigo mismo 'themselves'. 
(6) Anai abre la verja y la cierra tras de sfi. 
Anai opens the gate and it closes after herself/ 
'Ana opens the gate and closes it after herself.' 
2.7 Omitted Pronouns (Zero Pronouns OPa) 
The omitted pronoun is the most frequent ype of anaphoric expression in Spanish, as 
we will show in Section 4.2. Omitted pronouns occur when the pronominal subject is 
omitted. This kind of pronoun also occurs in other languages, such as Portuguese or 
Japanese; in these languages, it can also appear in object position, whereas in Spanish 
or Italian, it can appear only in subject position. In the following example, the omission 
is represented by the symbol 13 (the symbol does not appear in the correct ranslation 
into English). 
(7) Anai abre la verja y (~i la cierra tras de sf. 
Anai opens the gate and Oi it closes after herself 
'Ana opens the gate and she closes it after herself.' 
3. Anaphora Resolution Algorithm 
In the algorithm, all the types of anaphora are identified from left to right as they 
appear in the sentence. The most important proposals for anaphora resolution--such 
as those of Baldwin (1997), Lappin and Leass (1994), Hobbs (1978), or Kennedy and 
Boguraev (1996)--are based on a separation between constraints and preferences. 
547 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 4 
Constraints discard some of the candidates, whereas preferences simply sort the re- 
maining candidates. A constraint defines a property that must be satisfied in order 
for any candidate to be considered as a possible solution of the anaphor. For example, 
pronominal anaphors and antecedents must agree in person, gender, and number. 3 
Otherwise, the candidate is discarded as a possible solution. A preference is a charac- 
teristic that is not always satisfied by the solution of an anaphor. The application of 
preferences usually involves the use of heuristic rules in order to obtain a ranked list 
of candidates. 
Each type of anaphora has its own set of constraints and preferences, although 
they all follow the same general algorithm: constraints are applied first, followed by 
preferences. 
Based on the preceding description, our algorithm contains the following main 
components: 
? identification of the type of pronoun 
? constraints 
- -  morphological greement (person, gender, and number) 
- -  syntactic onditions on NP-pronoun oncoreference 
? preferences 
In order to apply this algorithm to unrestricted texts, it has been necessary to use 
partial parsing. In our partial-parsing scheme, as presented in Ferr~ndez, Palomar, and 
Moreno (1999), we only parse coordinated NPs and PPs, verbal chunks, pronouns, and 
what we have called free conjunctions (i.e., conjunctions that do not join coordinated 
NPs or PPs). Words that do not appear within these constituents are simply ignored. 
The NP constituents include coordinated adjectives, relative clauses, coordinated PPs, 
and appositives as modifiers. 
With this partial-parsing scheme, we divide a sentence into clauses by parsing first 
the free conjunction and then the verbs, as in the following example: 
(8) Pedro compr6 un regalo y se lo dio a Ana. 
Pedro bought a gift and her it gave to Ana 
'Pedro bought a gift and gave it to Ana.' 
In this example, we have parsed the following constituents: np(Pedro), v(comprO), np(un 
regalo),freeconj(y), pron(se), pron(lo), v(dio), pp(a Ana). We are able to divide this sentence 
into two clauses because it contains the free conjunction y 'and' and the two verbs 
compr6 'bought' and clio 'gave'. 
3.1 Identification of the Kind of Pronoun 
The algorithm uses partial-parse trees to automatically identify omitted pronouns by 
employing the following steps: 
? The sentence is divided into clauses (by parsing the free conjunction 
followed by the verbs). 
3 In our implementation, thismorphological information is extracted from the part-of-speech tagger. 
548 
Palomar et al Anaphora Resolution in Spanish Texts 
An NP or pronoun is sought for each clause by analyzing the clause 
constituents on the left-hand side of the verb, unless the verb is 
imperative or impersonal. The chosen NP or pronoun must agree in 
person and number with the clausal verb. (In evaluating this algorithm, 
Ferr~ndez and Peral \[2000\] achieved a success rate of 88% for detecting 
omitted pronouns.) 
The remaining pronouns are identified based on part-of-speech (POS) tagger out- 
puts. 
3.2 Morphological Agreement 
Person, gender, and number agreement are checked in order to discard potential an- 
tecedents. For example, in the sentence 
(9) Juanj vio a Rosa/. Ella/ estaba muy feliz. 
Juanj saw to Rosa/ Shei was very happy 
'Juan saw Rosa. She was very happy.' 
there are two possible antecedents for ella 'she', whose slot structures 4 are 
np (conc (sing, masc), X, Juan) 
np (conc (sing, fem), Y, Rosa) 
whereas the slot structure of the pronoun is 
pron (conc (sing, fem), Z, ella). 
In order to decide between the two antecedents, he unification of both slot struc- 
tures (pronoun and candidate) is carried out by the slot unification parser (Ferr~ndez, 
Palomar, and Moreno 1999). In this example, the candidate Juan is rejected by this 
morphological greement constraint. 
3.3 Syntactic Conditions on NP-Pronoun Noncoreference 
These conditions are based on c-command and minimal-governing-category constraints 
as formulated by Reinhart (1983) and on the noncoreference conditions of Lappin and 
Leass (1994). They are of great importance in any anaphora resolution system that 
does not use semantic information, as is the case with our proposal. In such systems, 
recency is important in selecting the antecedent of an anaphor. That is to say, the 
closest NP to the anaphor has a better chance of being selected as the solution. One 
problem, however, is that such constraints are formulated using full parsing, whereas 
if we want to work with unrestricted texts we should be using partial parsing, as 
previously defined. 
We have therefore proposed a set of noncoreference onditions for Spanish, using 
partial parsing, although they could easily be extended to other languages such as En- 
glish. In our system, the following types of pronouns are noncoreferential with a noun 
phrase (NP) under the conditions noted (noncoindexing indicates that a candidate is
rejected by these conditions). 
4 The term slot structure is defined in Ferr~ndez, Palomar, and Moreno (1998b). The slot structure stores 
morphological and syntactic information related to the different constituents of a sentence. 
549 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 4 
. 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
. 
(a) 
Reflexive pronouns are noncoreferential when: 
(b) 
(10) 
the NP is included in another constituent (e.g., the NP is 
included in a PP) 
Ante Luisj sei frot6 con la toalla. 
in front of Luisj himself/ rubbed with the towel 
'He rubbed himself with the towel in front of Luis.' 
In this sentence, we would have obtained the following sequence 
of constituents after our partial-parsing scheme: pp(prep(ante), 
np(Luis )) , pron(se) , v(frot6 ) , pp(prep( con) , np(la toalla) . Following 
the above-stated condition, the NP Luis cannot corefer with the 
reflexive pronoun se since Luis is included in a PP (ante Luis). 
the NP is in a different clause or sentence 
(11) Anaj trajo un cuchillo y Eva/ sei cort6. 
Anaj brought a knife and Eva/ herself/ cut 
'Ana brought a knife and Eva cut herself.' 
the NP appears after the verb and there is another NP in the 
same clause before the verb 
(12) 
(13) 
Juan/ sei cort6 con el cuchilloj. 
Juan/ himself/ cut with the knifej 
'Juan cut himself with the knife.' 
Under these conditions, coreference is allowed between the NP 
and the reflexive pronoun, since both are in the same clause. For 
example: 
Juan/ queria verlo por s~ mismoi. 
Juan/ wanted see it for himself/ 
'Juan wanted to see it for himself.' 
In this example, Juan and the reflexive pronoun si mismo 
'himself' corefer since Juan is in the same clause as the anaphor, 
it is not included in another constituent, and it appears before 
the verb. 
Clitic pronouns are noncoreferential when: 
the NP is included in a PP (except hose headed by the 
preposition a 'to') 
(14) Con Juan/ loj compr6. 
with Juan/ itj bought 
'I bought it with Juan.' 
the NP is located more than three constituents before the clitic 
pronoun in the same clause 
(15) En casai \[el martillo\]j no se loj di. 
at home/ \[the hammer\]j not him itj gave 
'I didn't give him the hammer at home.' 
550 
Palomar et al Anaphora Resolution in Spanish Texts 
. 
(a) 
(17) 
(b) 
In this example, the direct object el martillo 'the hammer '  has 
been moved from its common position after the verb, and it is 
necessary to fill the resulting gap with the pronoun lo 'it' even 
though it does not appear in the English translation. This 
phenomenon 5 can be considered an exception to the c-command 
constraints as formulated by Reinhart when applied to Spanish 
clitic pronouns. 
Moreover, if the last two conditions are not fulfilled by the NP and the 
verb is in the first or second person, then this NP will necessarily be the 
solution of the pronoun: 
(16) \[El boligrafo\]i 1Oi comprar~s en esa tienda. 
\[The pen\]/ iti will buy in that shop 
'You will buy the pen in that shop.' 
Personal and demonstrative (nonclitic) pronouns are noncoreferential 
when the NP is in the same clause as the anaphor, and: 
the pronoun comes before the verb (in full parsing, this would 
mean that it is the subject of its clause) 
Ante Luisi 61j salud6 a Pedrok. 
in front of Luisi hey greeted to Pedrok 
'He greeted Pedro in front of Luis.' 
the pronoun comes after the verb (in full parsing, this would 
mean that it is the object of the verb) and the NP is not included 
in another NP 
(18) \[El padre de Juanj\]i le venci6 a 41j. 
\[Juanj's father\]/ him beat to himj 
'Juan's father beat him.' 
In this example, the pronoun ~I 'him' cannot corefer with the NP 
el padre de Juan 'Juan's father', but it can corefer with Juan since it 
is a modifier of the NP el padre de Juan. 
It should be mentioned that the clitic pronoun le is another 
form of the pronoun dl 'him'. This is a typical phenomenon i
Spanish, where clitic pronouns occupy the object position. 
Sometimes both the clitic pronoun and the object appear in the 
same clause, as occurs in the previous example and in the 
following one: 
(19) A Pedro/ yo lei vi ayer. 
to Pedroj I himi saw yesterday 
'I saw Pedro yesterday.' 
This example also illustrates the previously mentioned exception 
of c-command constraints for Spanish clitic pronouns. In this 
case, the direct object a Pedro 'to Pedro' has been moved before 
the verb, and the clitic pronoun le 'him' has been added. It 
should also be remarked that, as noted earlier, the clitic pronoun 
does not appear in the English translation. 
5 Mathews (1997) calls this phenomenon "clitic doubling" and defines it as the use of a clitic pronoun 
with the same referent and in the same syntactic function as another element in the same clause. 
551 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 4 
(c) the pronoun is included in a PP that is not included in another 
constituent and the NP is not included in another constituent 
(NP or PP) 
(20) \[El padre de Luisj\]i juega con 61j. 
\[Luisj's father\]/ plays with himj 
'Luis's father plays with him.' 
In this example, the pronoun ~I 'him' is included in a PP (which 
is not included in another constituent) and the NP el padre de 
Luis is not included in another NP or PP. Therefore, the NP 
cannot corefer with the pronoun. However, the NP Luis can 
corefer because it is included in the NP el padre de Luis. 
(d) the pronoun is included in an NP, so that the NP in which the 
pronoun is included cannot corefer with the pronoun 
(21) Pedro/ vio \[al hermano de ~li\] j. 
Pedro/ saw \[the brother of himi\]j 
'Pedro saw his brother.' 
(e) the pronoun is coordinated with other NPs, so that the other 
coordinated NPs cannot corefer with the pronoun 
(22) Juan/, \[el tio de Ana\]j, y 61k fueron de pesca. 
Juan/, \[Ana's uncle\]j, and hek went fishing 
'He, Juan, and Ana's uncle went fishing.' 
(f) the pronoun is included in a relative clause, and the following 
condition is met: 
. 
(24) 
i. the NP in which the relative clause is included does not 
corefer with the pronoun 
(23) Pedroj vio a \[un amigo que juega con 41j\]i. 
Pedroj saw to \[a friend that plays with himj\]i 
'Pedro saw a friend that he plays with.' 
ii. the NPs that are included in the relative clause follow 
the previous conditions 
iii. the remaining NPs outside the relative clause could 
corefer with the pronoun 
Personal and demonstrative (nonclitic) pronouns are noncoreferential 
when the NP is not in the same clause as the pronoun. (In this case, the 
NP can corefer with the pronoun, except when this NP also appears in 
the same sentence and clause as the pronoun, in which case it will have 
been discarded by the previous noncoreference onditions.) 
Anaj y Evai son amigas. Evai lej ayuda mucho. 
Anay and Evai are friends Evai herj helps a lot 
'Ana and Eva are friends. Eva helps her a lot.' 
It is important o note that the above-mentioned conditions refer to those coor- 
dinated NPs and PPs that have been partially parsed. Moreover, as previously men- 
tioned, NPs can include relative clauses, appositives, coordinated PPs, and adjectives. 
552 
Palomar et al Anaphora Resolution in Spanish Texts 
We should also remark that we consider aconstituent A to be included in a constituent 
B if A modifies the head of B. Let us consider the following NP: 
(25) \[el hombre que ama a \[una mujer que lei ama\]j\]i 
\[the man who loves to \[a woman who him/ loveslj\]i 
'the man who loves a woman who loves him.' 
We consider that the pronoun le 'him' is included in the relative clause that mod- 
ifies the NP una mujer que le ama 'a woman who loves him', which then cannot corefer 
with it due to noncoreference ondition 3(f)i. Under condition 3(f)iii, however, the 
pronoun le 'him' could corefer with the entire NP el hombre que area a una mujer que le 
area 'the man who loves a woman who loves him'. 
Another example might be the following: 
(26) Eva/ tiene \[un tio que lei toma el pelo\]j. 
Evai has \[an uncle that heri teases\]j 
'Eva has an uncle who teases her.' 
In this example, the pronoun is included within the relative clause that modifies un 
tio 'an uncle', and therefore cannot corefer with it. But, following condition 3(f)iii, it 
can corefer with Eva. 
3.4 Preferences 
To obtain the different sets of preferences, we utilized the training corpus to identify 
the importance of each kind of knowledge that is used by humans when tracking 
down the NP antecedent of a pronoun. Our results are shown in Table 1. For our 
analysis, the antecedents for each pronoun in the text were identified, along with their 
configurational characteristics with reference to the pronoun. Thus, the table shows 
how often each configurational characteristic is valid for the solution of a particular 
pronoun. For example, the solution of a reflexive pronoun is a proper noun 53% of the 
time. The total number of pronoun occurrences in the study was 575. Thus, we were 
able to define the different patterns of Spanish pronoun resolution and apply them in 
order to obtain the evaluation results that are presented in this paper. The order of 
importance was determined by first sorting the preferences according to the percentage 
of each configurational characteristic; that is, preferences with higher percentages were 
applied before those with lower percentages. After several experiments on the training 
corpus, an optimal order--the one that produced the best performance--was obtained. 
Since in this evaluation phase we processed texts from different genres and by different 
authors, we can state that the final set of preferences obtained and their order of 
application can be used with confidence on any Spanish text. 
Based on the results presented in Table 1, we have extracted a set of preferences for 
each type of anaphora (listed below). We have distinguished between those pronouns 
that are included within PPs and those that are not. That is because when a pronoun 
is included in a PP, the preposition of this PP sets a preference. 
Preferences of omitted pronouns (OPR): 
1. NPs that are not of time, direction, quantity, or abstract type; that is to 
say, inanimate candidates are rejected (e.g., hal~past en, Market Street, 
three pounds, or a thing) 
2. NPs in the same sentence as the omitted pronotm 
553 
Computat ional  Linguistics Volume 27, Number  4 
Table 1 
Percentage validity of types of pronouns for different configuration characteristics of the 
training corpus (n = 575). 
CPPR RPR OPR PPRinPP DPRinPP PPRnotPP DPRnotPP 
Intrasentential 66 97 57 70 100 60 75 
Intersentential 34 3 43 30 0 40 25 
NPSentAnt ~ 9 3 4 16 50 9 38 
AntPPin b 7 9 14 27 50 20 25 
AntProper c 57 53 63 35 0 43 0 
AntIndef a 13 0 7 0 0 6 13 
AntRepeaff 72 66 79 65 50 71 50 
AntWithVerb f 14 94 20 24 0 26 25 
EqualPP g 100 100 100 78 100 97 100 
EqualPosVerb h 79 84 89 46 0 86 38 
BeforeVerb i 83 91 89 65 50 86 13 
NoTime d 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 
NoQuant i ty  k 100 100 100 100 100 97 100 
NoDirect ion I 100 100 100 97 100 100 100 
NoAbstract m 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 
NoCompany n 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 
a If the NP 
b If the NP 
c If the NP 
d If the NP 
e If the NP 
f If the NP 
g If the NP 
h If the NP 
i If the NP 
j If the NP 
k If the NP 
1 If the NP 
m If the NP 
n If the NP 
is included in another NP 
is included in a PP with the preposition en 'in' 
is a proper noun 
is an indefinite NP 
has been repeated more than once in the text 
has appeared with the verb of the anaphor more than once in the text 
has appeared in a PP more than once in the text 
occupies the same position with reference to the verb as the anaphor (before or after) 
appears before its verb 
is not a time-type 
is not a quantity-type 
is not a direction-type 
is not an abstract-type 
is not a company-type 
3. NPs  that  are in the same sentence  as the  anaphor  and  are also the  
so lu t ion  for  another  omi t ted  pronotm 
4. NPs  that  are in the prev ious  sentence  
5. NPs  that  are not  inc luded  in another  NP  (e.g., when they  appear  ins ide  
a re la t ive  c lause  or  appos i t i ve )  
6. NPs  that  are not  inc luded  in a PP or  are  inc luded  in a PP  when its 
p repos i t ion  is a ' to '  or  de ' o f '  
7. NPs  that  appear  be fore  the  verb  
8. NPs  that  have  been  repeated  more  than  once  in the  text  
Preferences of clitic personal pronouns (CPPR): 
1. NPs  that  are not  of  t ime,  d i rect ion ,  quant i ty ,  or  abst ract  type  
2. NPs  that  are in  the  same sentence  as the  anaphor  
554 
Palomar et al Anaphora Resolution in Spanish Texts 
3. NPs that are in the previous sentence 
4. NPs that are not included in another NP (e.g., when they appear inside 
a clause or appositive) 
5. NPs that are not included in a PP or are included in a PP when its 
preposit ion is a 'to' or de 'of '  
6. NPs that have appeared with the verb of the anaphor more than once 
Preferences of personal and demonstrative pronouns that are included in a PP 
(PPRinPP and DPRinPP): 
1. NPs that are not of time, direction, quantity, or abstract ype; moreover, 
in the case of personal pronouns, the NP cannot be a company type 
2. NPs that are in the same sentence as the anaphor 
3. NPs that are in the previous sentence 
4. NPs that are not included in another NP (e.g., when they appear inside 
a relative clause or appositive) 
5. NPs that have been repeated more than once in the text 
6. NPs that are included in a PP 
7. NPs that occupy the same position (before or after) with respect o the 
verb as the anaphor 
Preferences of personal and demonstrative pronouns that are not included in a PP 
and of reflexive pronouns (PPRnotPP, DPRnotPP, and RPR): 
1. NPs that are not of time, direction, quantity, or abstract ype; moreover, 
in the case of personal pronouns, the NP cannot be a company type 
2. NPs that are in the same sentence as the anaphor 
3. NPs that are in the previous sentence 
4. NPs that are not included in another NP (e.g., when they appear inside 
a relative clause or appositive) 
5. NPs that are not included in a PP or that are included in a PP when its 
preposit ion is a 'to' or de 'of '  
6. For the case of personal pronouns (PPRnotPP), NPs that are not 
included in a PP with the preposit ion en ' in' 
7. NPs that appear before their verbs (i.e., the verb of the sentence in 
which the NP appears) 
3.5 Resolution Procedure 
The resolution procedure consists of the following steps: 
1. Identify the type of anaphora: pronominal  (PPRinPP or PPRnotPP), 
demonstrat ive (DPRinPP or DPRnotPP), reflexive (RPR), or omitted 
(oPR). 
555 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 4 
2. Identify the NP candidate antecedents of a pronoun in order to create a 
list L. The list created will depend on the type of anaphor and the 
anaphoric accessibility space (empirically obtained from a deep study 
of the training corpus) and will be developed according to the 
following criteria: 
? For pronominal anaphora, demonstrative anaphora, and 
omitted pronouns, NP candidates will appear in the same 
sentence as the anaphor and in the four previous sentences. 
? For reflexive anaphora, NP candidates will appear in the same 
sentence as the anaphor. 
3. Apply constraints to L to obtain LI: 
(a) morphological agreement 
(b) syntactic onditions on NP-pronoun noncoreference 
4. If the number of elements of L1 - 1, then the solution is that element. 
5. If the number of elements of L1 = 0, then the solution is an exophor. 
6. If the number of elements of L1 > 1, then apply preferences to L1 to 
obtain L2. Depending on the type of anaphora, a different set and order 
of preferences will be applied (see Section 3.4). 
7. If the number of elements of L2 = 1, then the solution is that element. 
8. If the number of elements of L2 > 1, then apply the following three 
basic preferences in the order shown until only one candidate remains 
(these three preferences are common to all the pronouns): 
? NPs most repeated in the text 
? NPs that have appeared most with the verb of the anaphor 
? the first candidate of the remaining list (the closest one to the 
anaphor) 
After applying these basic preferences, the antecedent is obtained. 
4. Empirical Evaluation 
4.1 Description of Corpora 
We have tested the algorithm on both technical manuals and literary texts. In the first 
instance, we used a portion of the Spanish edition of the Blue Book corpus. 6 This 
corpus contains the handbook of the International Telecommunications Union CCITT, 
published in English, French, and Spanish; it is one of the most important collections of 
telecommunications texts available and contains 5,000,000 words automatically tagged 
by the Xerox tagger. In the second instance, the algorithm was tested on Lexesp, a 
corpus 7 that contains Spanish literary texts from different genres and by different 
6 CRATER (Proyecto CRATER 1994-1995) Corpus Resources and Terminology Extraction Project. Project 
supported by the European Community Commission (DG-XIII). Computational Linguistics Laboratory, 
Faculty of Philosophy and Fine Arts, Autonomous University of Madrid, Spain. 
7 The Lexesp corpus belongs to the project of the same name carried out by the Psychology Department 
of the University of Oviedo and developed by the Computational Linguistics Group of the University 
of Barcelona, with the collaboration fthe Language Processing Group of the Catalonia University of 
Technology, Spain. 
556 
Palomar et al Anaphora Resolution in Spanish Texts 
Table 2 
Pronoun occurrences in two types of texts. 
Total BB Corpus Lexesp Corpus 
Number of pronoun occurrences 
in the training corpus 575 123 
Number of pronoun occurrences 
in the test corpus 1,677 375 
452 
1,302 
authors. These texts were mainly obtained from newspapers and were automatically 
tagged by a different agger than the one used to tag the Blue Book. The portion of 
the Lexesp corpus that we processed contained various stories, related by a narrator, 
and written by different authors. As was the case for the Blue Book corpus, this 
corpus also contained 5,000,000 words. Since we worked on texts from different genres 
and by different authors, the applicability of our proposal to other kinds of texts is 
assured. 
We selected a subset of the Blue Book corpus and another subset of the Lex- 
esp corpus, and both were annotated with respect o coreference. One portion of the 
coreferentially tagged corpus (training corpus) was used for improving the rules for 
anaphora resolution (constraints and preferences), and another portion was reserved 
for test data (Table 2). 
The annotation phase was accomplished in the following manner: (1) two annota- 
tors were selected, (2) an agreement was reached between the annotators with regard 
to the annotation scheme, (3) each annotator annotated the corpus, and, finally, (4) a 
reliability test (Carletta et al 1997) was done on the annotation in order to guaran- 
tee the results. The reliability test used the kappa statistic that measures agreement 
between the annotations of two annotators in making judgments about categories. In 
this way, the annotation is considered a classification task consisting of defining an ad- 
equate solution among the candidate list. According to Vieira (1998), the classification 
task when tagging anaphora resolution can be reduced to a decision about whether 
each candidate is the solution or not. Thus, two different categories are considered 
for each anaphor: one for the correct antecedent and another for nonantecedents. Our 
experimentation showed one correct antecedent among an average of 14.5 possible 
candidates per anaphor after applying constraints. For computing the kappa statistic 
(k), see Siegel and Castellan (1988). 
According to Carletta et al (1997), a k measurement such as 0.68 < k < 0.8 allows 
us to draw encouraging conclusions, and a measurement k > 0.8 means there is to- 
tal reliability between the results of the two annotators. In our tests, we obtained a 
kappa measurement of k = 0.81. We therefore consider the annotation obtained for the 
evaluation to be totally reliable. 
4.2 Experimental Work 
We conducted a blind test over the entire test corpus of unrestricted Spanish texts by 
applying the algorithm to the partial syntactic structure generated by the slot unifica- 
tion parser. 
Over these corpora, our algorithm attained a success rate for anaphora resolution 
of 76.8%. We define "success rate" as the number of pronouns successfully resolved, 
divided by the total number of resolved pronouns. The total number of resolved pro- 
nouns was 1,677, including personal, demonstrative, reflexive, and omitted pronouns. 
557 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 4 
Table 3 
Results of blind test. 
CPPR RPR OPR PPRinPP DPRinPP PPRnotPP DPRnotPP Total 
Num. of 
pronoun 
occurrences 228 80 1,099 107 20 94 49 1,677 
Num. of 
cases 
correctly 162 74 868 70 17 64 34 1,289 
resolved 
Success 
rate 71.0% 92.5% 78.9% 65.4% 85.0% 68.0% 69.3% 76.8% 
All of them were in the third person, with a noun phrase that appeared before the 
anaphor as their antecedent. Our algorithm's "recall percentage," defined as the num- 
ber of pronouns correctly resolved, divided by the total number of pronouns in the 
text, was therefore 76.8%. A breakdown of success rate results for each kind of pro- 
noun is also shown in Table 3. The pronouns were classified so as to provide the 
option of applying different kinds of knowledge to resolve each category of pronoun. 
One of the factors that affected the results was the complexity of the Lexesp corpus, 
due mainly to its complex narratives. On average, 16 words per sentence and 27 
candidates per anaphor were found in this corpus. 
In our experiment, a "successful resolution" occurred if the head of the solution 
offered by our algorithm was the same as that offered by two human experts. We 
adopted this definition of "success" because it allowed the system to be totally auto- 
matic: solutions given by the annotators were stored in a file and were later automat- 
ically compared with the solutions given by our system. Since semantic information 
was not used at all, PP attachments were not always correctly disambiguated. Hence, 
at times the differences imply corresponded to different subconstituents. 
After the evaluation process, we tested the results in order to identify the lim- 
itations of the algorithm with respect to the resolution process. We identified the 
following: 
? There were some mistakes in the POS tagging (causing an error rate of 
around 3%). 
? There were some mistakes in the partial parsing with respect o the 
identification of complex noun phrases (causing an error rate of around 
7%) (Palomar et al 1999). 
? Semantic information was not considered (causing an error rate of 
around 32%). An example of this type of error can be seen in the 
following text extracted from the Lexesp corpus: 
(27) Recuerdo, pot ejemplo, \[un pequefio claro en un bosque en 
medio de las montafias canadienses\]i, con tres lagunas diminutas 
que, a causa de los sedimentos del agua. tenfan distintos y chocantes 
colores. Esta rareza habia hecho del sitioi un espacio sagrado al que 
peregrinaron los indios durante siglos y seguramente antes los 
pobladores paleolfticos. Y eso se notaba. 
558 
Palomar et al Anaphora Resolution in Spanish Texts 
(28) 
Canad~i es un pals muy hermoso, y aqu41i no era, ni mucho 
rnenos, el lugar m~s bello: pero guardaba tranquilamente d ntro de sf 
toda su arrnonfa, como los melocotones guardan dentro de sf el duro 
hueso. 
'1 remember, for example, \[a small clearing in the woods in the 
middle of the Canadian mountains\]/, with three tiny lagoons that, 
due to the water sediments, had different and astonishing colors. 
This peculiarity had made the place/into a sacred site, to which the 
Indians made pilgrimages over the centuries, and surely even the 
Paleolithic Indians before them. And you could feel it. 
'Canada is a very beautiful country and that one/was by no 
means the most beautiful place: but it calmly kept within itself all of 
its harmony, like peaches that keep the hard seeds within.' 
In this text, the demonstrative pronoun aqudl 'that one' corefers with the 
antecedent un peque~o claro en un bosque n medio de las monta~as canadienses 
'a small clearing in the woods in the middle of the Canadian mountains', 
which is also linked to the definite noun phrase el sitio 'the place'. Our 
algorithm identified the proper noun Canadd, which is in the same 
sentence, as the anaphor, since the proper noun could only have been 
discarded by means of semantic information. 
As an example of an anaphor that was correctly resolved by the 
algorithm, we present he following sentence xtracted from the Blue 
Book corpus. In this case, the antecedent los sistemas de transmisidn 
analdgica 'the systems of analogue transmission' was correctly chosen for 
the personal pronoun ellos 'them': ' 
En las conexiones largas o de Iongitud media, es probable que la 
fuente principal de ruido de circuito estribe en \[los sistemas de 
transmisi6n anal6gica\]i, ya queen ellosi la potencia de ruido suele 
set proporcional  la Iongitud del circuito. 
'In long or medium connections, it is probable that the main source of 
circuit noise comes from \[the systems of analogue transmission\]/, 
since in them/the noise capacity is usually proportional to the length 
of the circuit.' 
The remainder of the errors were due to split antecedents (10%), 
cataphora (2%), exophora (3%), or exceptions in the application of 
preferences (43%). 
5. Comparison with Other Approaches to Anaphora Resolution 
5.1 Anaphora Resolution Approaches 
Common among all languages i the fact that the anaphora phenomenon requires im- 
ilar strategies for its resolution (e.g., pronouns or definite descriptions). All languages 
employ different kinds of knowledge, but their strategies differ only in the manner by 
which this knowledge is coordinated. For example, in some strategies just one kind 
of knowledge becomes the main selector for identifying the antecedent, with other 
kinds of knowledge being used merely to confirm or reject the proposed antecedent. 
In such cases, the typical kind of knowledge used as the selector is that of discourse 
structure. Centering theory, as employed by Strube and Hahn (1999) or Okumura and 
Tamura (1996), uses this type of approach. Other approaches, however, give equal 
559 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 4 
importance to each kind of knowledge and generally distinguish between constraints 
and preferences (Baldwin 1997; Lappin and Leass 1994; Carbonell and Brown 1988). 
Whereas constraints tend to be absolute and therefore discard possible antecedents, 
preferences tend to be relative and require the use of additional criteria (e.g., the use of 
heuristics that are not always satisfied by all antecedents). Nakaiwa and Shirai (1996) 
use this sort of resolution model, which involves the use of semantic and pragmatic 
constraints, such as constraints based on modal expressions, or constraints based on 
verbal semantic attributes or conjunctions. 
Our approach to anaphora resolution belongs in the latter category, since it com- 
bines different kinds of knowledge and no knowledge based on discourse structure 
is included. We choose to ignore discourse structure because obtaining this kind of 
knowledge requires not only an understanding of semantics but also knowledge about 
world affairs and the ability to almost perfectly parse any text under discussion (Az- 
zam, Humphreys, and Gaizauskas 1998). 
Still other approaches to anaphora resolution are based either on machine learn- 
ing techniques (Connolly, Burger, and Day 1994; Yamamoto and Sumita 1998; Paul, 
Yamamato, and Sumita 1999) or on the principles of uncertainty reasoning (Mitkov 
1995). 
Computational processing of semantic and domain information is relatively expen- 
sive when compared with other kinds of knowledge. Consequently, current anaphora 
resolution methods rely mainly on constraint and preference heuristics, which employ 
morpho-syntactic information or shallow semantic analysis (see, for example, Mitkov 
\[1998\]). Such approaches have performed notably well. Lappin and Leass (1994) de- 
scribe an algorithm for pronominal anaphora resolution that achieves a high rate of 
correct analyses (85%). Their approach, however, operates almost exclusively on syn- 
tactic information. More recently, Kennedy and Boguraev (1996) proposed an algorithm 
for anaphora resolution that is actually a modified and extended version of the one 
developed by Lappin and Leass (1994). It works from the output of a POS tagger and 
achieves an accuracy rate of 75%. 
There are other approaches based on POS tagger outputs as well. For example, 
Mitkov and Stys (1997) propose a knowledge-poor approach to resolving pronouns 
in technical manuals in both English and Polish. The knowledge mployed in these 
approaches i limited to a small noun phrase grammar, a list of terms, and a set of 
antecedent indicators (definiteness, term preference, lexical reiteration, etc.). 
Still other approaches are based on statistical information, including the work of 
Dagan and Itai (1990, 1991) and Ge, Hale, and Charniak (1998), all of whom present a 
probabilistic model for pronoun resolution. 
We have adopted their ideas and adapted their algorithms to partial parsing and 
to Spanish texts in order to compare our results with their approaches. 
With reference to the differences between English and Spanish anaphora resolu- 
tion, we have made the following observations: 
Syntactic parallelism has played a more important role in English texts 
than in Spanish texts, since Spanish sentence structure is more flexible 
than English sentence structure. Spanish is a free-word-order language 
and has different syntactic onditions, which increases the difficulty of 
resolving Spanish pronouns (hence, the greater accuracy rate for English 
texts). 
? A greater number of possible antecedents was observed for Spanish 
pronouns than for English pronouns, due mainly to the greater average 
560 
Palomar et al Anaphora Resolution in Spanish Texts 
length of Spanish sentences (which also makes the resolution of Spanish 
pronouns more difficult). 
Spanish pronouns usually bear more morphological information. One 
result is that this constraint tends to discard more candidates in Spanish 
than in English. 
For comparison purposes, we implemented the following approaches on the same 
Spanish texts that were tested and described in Section 4.1. 
5.2 Hobbs's Algorithm 
Hobbs's algorithm (Hobbs 1978) is applied to the surface parse trees of sentences in 
a text. A surface parse tree represents the grammatical structure of a sentence. By 
reading the leaves of the parse tree from left to right, the original English sentence is
formed. The algorithm parses the tree in a predefined order and searches for a noun 
phrase of the correct gender and number. Hobbs tested his algorithm for the pronouns 
he, she, it, and they, using 100 examples taken from three different sources. Although 
the algorithm is very simple, it was successful 81.8% of the time. 
We implemented a version of Hobbs's algorithm for slot unification grammar for 
Spanish texts. Since full parsing was not done, our specifications for the algorithm 
were adjusted, as follows: 
? NPs were tested from left to right, as they were parsed in the sentence. 
? Afterward, the NPs that were included in an NP (breadth-first) were 
tested. 
? This test was interrupted when an NP agreed in gender and number 
with the anaphor. 
The problems we encountered in implementing Hobbs's algorithm are similar to 
those found in implementing other approaches: the adaptation to partial parsing, and 
the inherent difficulty of the Spanish language (i.e., its free-word-order characteristics). 
The results of our test of this version of Hobbs's algorithm on the test corpus 
appear in Table 4. 
5.3 Approaches Based on Constraints and Proximity Preference 
Our approach as also been compared with the typical baseline approach consisting of 
constraints and proximity preference; that is, the antecedent that appears closest o the 
anaphor is chosen from among those that satisfy the constraints. For this comparison, 
the same constraints that were used previously (i.e., morphological greement and 
syntactic onditions) were applied here. Then the antecedent a the head of the list of 
antecedents was proposed as the solution of the anaphor. These results are also listed 
in Table 4. As can be seen from the table, success rates were lower than those obtained 
through the joint application of all the preferences. 
5.4 Lappin and Leass's Algorithm 
An algorithm for identifying the noun phrase antecedents of third person pronouns 
and lexical anaphors (reflexive and reciprocal) is presented in Lappin and Leass (1994); 
this algorithm has exhibited a high rate (85%) of correct analyses in English texts. It 
relies on measures of salience that are derived from syntactic structures and on simple 
dynamic models of attentional state to select he antecedent oun phrase of a pronoun 
from a list of candidates. 
561 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 4 
We have implemented a version of Lappin and Leass's algorithm for Spanish texts. 
The original formulation of the algorithm proposes a syntactic filter on NP-pronoun 
coreference. This filter consists of six conditions for NP-pronoun oncoreference within 
any sentence (Lappin and Leass 1994, page 537). In applying this algorithm to Span- 
ish texts, we changed these conditions o as to capture the appropriate context. As 
mentioned previously, our algorithm does not have access to full syntactic knowledge. 
Accordingly, we employed partial parsing over the text in our application of Lappin 
and Leass's algorithm. The salience parameters were weighted (weight appears in 
parentheses) and applied in the following way: 
? Sentence recency (100): Applied when the NP appeared in the same 
sentence as the anaphor. 
? Subject emphasis (80): Applied when the NP was located before the 
verb of the clause in which it appeared. This heuristic was necessary 
because of our algorithm's lack of syntactic knowledge. It should be 
noted, however, that since Spanish is a nearly free-word-order language 
and the exchange of subject and object positions within Spanish 
sentences i common, the heuristic is often invalid. For example, the two 
Spanish sentences Pedro compr6 un regalo 'Pedro bought a present' and Un 
regalo compr6 Pedro 'A present bought Pedro' are equivalent to one 
another and to the English sentence Pedro bought a present. 
? Existential emphasis (70): In this instance, we applied the parameter in 
the same way as Lappin and Leass, since the entire NP was fully parsed, 
which allowed us to tell when it was a definite or an indefinite NP. 
? Accusative emphasis (50): Applied when the NP appeared after the verb 
of the clause in which it appeared and the NP did not appear inside 
another NP or PP. For example, in the sentence Pedro encontr6 el libro de 
Juana 'Pedro found Juana's book', a value was assigned to el libro de Juana 
'Juana's book' but not to Juana. Once again, it should be noted that this 
heuristic was necessary because of our algorithm's lack of syntactic 
knowledge. 
? Indirect object and oblique complement emphasis (40): Applied when 
the NP appeared in a PP with the Spanish preposition a 'to', which 
usually preceded the indirect object of its sentence. 
? Head noun emphasis (80): Applied when the NP was not contained in 
another NP. 
? Nonadverbial emphasis (50): Applied when the NP was not contained 
in an adverbial PP. In this case, its application depended on the kind of 
preposition in which the NP was included. 
? Parallelism reward (35): Applied when the NP occupied the same 
position as the anaphor with reference to the verb of the sentence (before 
or after the verb). 
Finally, we followed Lappin and Leass in assigning the additional salience value 
to NPs in the current sentence and in degrading the salience of NPs in preceding 
sentences. 
Our results exhibited some similarities with Lappin and Leass's experiments. 
For example, anaphora was strongly preferred over cataphora, and both approaches 
562 
Palomar et al Anaphora Resolution in Spanish Texts 
preferred intrasentential NPs to intersentential ones. These results can be seen in 
Table 4. 
5.5 Centering Approach 
The centering model proposed by Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein (1983, 1995) provides 
a framework for modeling the local coherence of discourse. The model has two con- 
structs, a list of forward-looking centers and a backward-looking center, that can be 
assigned to each utterance Ui. The list of forward-looking centers Cf(Ui) ranks dis- 
course entities within the utterance Ui. The backward-looking center Cb(Ui+l) con- 
stitutes the most highly ranked element of Cf(Ui) that is finally realized in the next 
utterance Ui+l. In this way, the ranking imposed over Cf(Ui) must reflect he fact that 
the preferred center Cp(U/) (i.e., the most highly ranked element of Cf(Ui)) is most 
likely to be Cb(Ui+l). 
The ranking criteria used by Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein (1995) order items in 
the Cf list using grammatical roles. Thus, entities with a subject role are preferred to 
entities with an object role, and objects are preferred to others (adjuncts, etc.). 
Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein (1995) state that if any element of Cf(Ui) is realized 
by a pronoun in Ui+l, then Cb(Ui+l) must also be realized by a pronoun. 
Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard (1987) applied the centering model to pronoun 
resolution. They based their algorithm on the fact that centering transition relations 
will hold across adjacent utterances. 
Moreover, one crucial point in centering is the ranking of the forward-looking 
centers. Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein (1995) state that Cf may be ordered using different 
factors, but they only use information about grammatical roles. However, both Strube 
(1998) and Strube and Hahn (1999) point out that it is difficult to define grammatical 
roles in free-word-order languages like German or Spanish. For languages like these, 
they propose other anking criteria dependent upon the information status of discourse 
entities. They claim that information about familiarity is crucial for the ranking of 
discourse ntities, at least in free-word-order languages. 
According to Strube's ranking criteria, two different sets of expressions, hearer- 
old discourse ntities (OLD) and hearer-new discourse ntities (NEW), can be distin- 
guished. OLD discourse ntities consist of evoked entities---coreferring resolved ex- 
pressions (pronominal and nominal anaphora, previously mentioned proper names, 
relative pronouns, appositives)--and unused entities (proper names and titles). The re- 
maining entities are assigned to the NEW set. The basic ranking criteria for pronominal 
anaphora resolution prefer OLD entities over NEW entities. 8 
Strube (1998) thus proposes the following adaptation to the centering model: 
The Cf list is replaced by the list of salient discourse ntities (S-list) 
containing discourse ntities that are realized in the current and previous 
utterance. 
? The elements of the S-list are ranked according to the basic ranking 
criteria and position information: 
If X E OLD and y C NEW, then x precedes y. 
If x, y ~ OLD or x, y E NEW, 
8 To resolve functional naphora,  third set, MED, which includes inferable information, must be added 
between the OLD and the NEW sets. However, this set is not needed to resolve pronominal naphora 
(Strube and Hahn 1999). 
563 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 4 
Table 4 
Comparative r sults of blind test. 
Total CPPR RPR OPR PPRinPP DPRinPP PPRnotPP DPRnotPP 
Num. of 
pronoun 1,677 228 80 1,099 107 20 94 49 
occurrences 
Hobbs's 
algorithm 62.7% 61% 85% 62% 62% 50% 66% 52% 
Lappin & 
Leass's 67.4% 66% 86% 67% 65% 60% 67% 60% 
algorithm 
Proximity 52.9% 55% 86% 47% 65% 85% 61% 65% 
Centering 
approach 62.6% 60% 85% 62% 61% 60% 62% 58% 
Our 
algorithm 76.8% 71% 92% 79% 65% 85% 68% 69% 
then if utterance(y) precedes utterance(x), then x precedes y, 
if utterance(y) = utterance(x) and pos(x) < pos(y), then x precedes y. 
Since there is not a clear definition of what an utterance is, the following 
criteria are assumed: tensed clauses are defined as utterances on their 
own and untensed clauses are processed with the main clause in order to 
constitute only one utterance. 
Incorporating these adaptations, Strube (1998) then proposes the following algo- 
rithm: 
1. If a referring expression is encountered, 
(a) if it is a pronoun, test the elements of the S-list in order until the 
test succeeds; 
(b) update the S-list using information about this referring 
expression. 
2. If the analysis of utterance U is finished, remove all discourse ntities 
from the S-list that are not realized in U. 
The evaluation of this algorithm was performed in Strube (1998) and obtained a 
precision of 85.4% for English, improving upon the results of the centering algorithm 
by Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard (1987), which achieved only 72.9% precision when 
it was applied to the same corpus. 
Consequently, in adapting the centering model to Spanish anaphora resolution, we 
followed Strube's indications. The success rate of the algorithm was not satisfactory, 
as can be seen in Table 4. 
6. Conclus ions 
In this paper, we have presented an algorithm for identifying noun phrase antecedents 
of third person personal pronouns, demonstrative pronouns, reflexive pronouns, and 
564 
Palomar et al Anaphora Resolution in Spanish Texts 
omitted pronouns in Spanish. The algorithm is applied to the syntactic structure gen- 
erated by the slot unification parser--see Ferrdndez, Palomar, and Moreno (1998a, 
1998b, 1999)--and coordinates different kinds of knowledge (lexical, morphological, 
and syntactic) by distinguishing between constraints and preferences. 
The main contribution ofthis paper is the introduction ofan algorithm for anaphora 
resolution for Spanish. In our work, we have undertaken an exhaustive study of the 
importance of each kind of knowledge in anaphora resolution for Spanish. Moreover, 
we have developed a definition of syntactic onditions of NP-pronoun noncorefer- 
ence in Spanish with partial parsing. We have also adapted our anaphora resolution 
algorithm to the problem of partial syntactic knowledge, that is to say, when partial 
parsing of the text is accomplished. 
For unrestricted texts, our approach is somewhat less accurate, since semantic 
information is not taken into account. For such texts, we are dealing with the output 
of a POS tagger, which does not provide this sort of knowledge. In order to test our 
approach with texts of different genres by different authors, we have worked with 
two different Spanish corpora, literary texts (the Lexesp corpus) and technical texts 
(the Blue Book), containing a total of 1,677 pronoun occurrences. 
The algorithm successfully identified the antecedent of the pronoun for 76.8% 
of these pronoun occurrences. Other algorithms usually work with different kinds 
of knowledge, different texts, and different languages. In order to make a more valid 
comparison of our algorithm with others, we adapted the other algorithms so that they 
would operate using only partial-parsing knowledge. In this evaluation, our algorithm 
has always obtained better esults. 
Moreover, based on the results on our study of the importance of each kind 
of knowledge, we can emphasize that constraints are very important for resolving 
anaphora successfully, since they considerably reduce the number of possible candi- 
dates. 
In future studies, we will attempt to evaluate the importance of semantic informa- 
tion in unrestricted texts for anaphora resolution in Spanish texts (Saiz-Noeda, Su~rez, 
and Peral 1999). This information will be obtained from a lexical tool (e.g., Spanish 
WordNet), which can be automatically consulted (since the tagger does not provide 
this information). 
Acknowledgments 
The authors wish to thank Ferran Pla, 
Natividad Prieto, and Antonio Molina for 
contributing their tagger (Pla 2000); and 
Richard Evans, Mikel Forcada, and Rafael 
Carrasco for their helpful revisions of the 
ideas presented in this paper. We are also 
grateful to several anonymous reviewers of 
Computational Linguistics for helpful 
comments on earlier drafts of this paper. 
Our work has been supported by the 
Spanish government (CICYT) with Grant 
TIC97-0671-C02-01/02. 
References 
Azzam, Saliha, Kevin Humphreys, and 
Robert Gaizauskas. 1998. Evaluating a
focus-based approach to anaphora 
resolution. In Proceedings ofthe 36th Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics and 17th International Conference 
on Computational Linguistics 
(COLING-ACL'98), pages 74-78, Montreal 
(Canada). 
Baldwin, Breck. 1997. CogNIAC: High 
precision coreference with limited 
knowledge and linguistic resources. In
Proceedings of the ACL/EACL Workshop on 
Operational Factors in Practical, Robust 
Anaphora Resolution for Unrestricted Texts, 
pages 38--45, Madrid (Spain). 
Brennan, Susan E., Marilyn W. Friedman, 
and Carl J. Pollard. 1987. A centering 
approach to pronouns. In Proceedings ofthe 
25th Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics (ACL'87), pages 
155-162, Stanford, CA (USA). 
Carbonell, Jaime G. and Ralf D. Brown. 
1988. Anaphora resolution: A
multi-strategy approach. In Proceedings of
the 12th International Conference on 
565 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 4 
Computational Linguistics (COLING'88), 
pages 96-101, Budapest (Hungary). 
Carletta, Jean, Amy Isard, Stephen Isard, 
Jacqueline C. Kowtko, Gwyneth 
Doherty-Sneddon, and Anne H. 
Anderson. 1997. The reliability of a 
dialogue structure coding scheme. 
Computational Linguistics, 23(1):13-32. 
Connolly, Dennis, John D. Burger, and 
David S. Day. 1994. A machine learning 
approach to anaphoric reference. In
Proceedings ofthe International Conference on 
New Methods in Language Processing 
(NEMLAP'94), pages 255-261, Manchester 
(UK). 
Dagan, Ido and Alon Itai. 1990. Automatic 
processing of large corpora for the 
resolution of anaphora references. In
Proceedings ofthe 13th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics 
(COLING'90), pages 330-332, Helsinki 
(Finland). 
Dagan, Ido and Alon Itai. 1991. A statistical 
filter for resolving pronoun references. In
Yishai A. Feldman and Alfred Bruckstein, 
editors, Artificial Intelligence and Computer 
Vision. Elsevier Science Publishers B. V. 
(North-Holland), Amsterdam, pages 
125-135. 
Ferrlindez, Antonio, Manuel Palomar, and 
Lidia Moreno. 1998a. A computational 
approach to pronominal anaphora, 
one-anaphora and surface count 
anaphora. In Proceedings ofthe Second 
Colloquium on Discourse Anaphora nd 
Anaphora Resolution (DAARC'98), pages 
117-128, Lancaster (UK). 
Ferr~ndez, Antonio, Manuel Palomar, and 
Lidia Moreno. 1998b. Anaphora 
resolution in unrestricted texts with 
partial parsing. In Proceedings ofthe 36th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics and 17th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING-ACL'98), pages 
385-391, Montreal (Canada). 
Ferr~fndez, Antonio, Manuel Palomar, and 
Lidia Moreno. 1999. An empirical 
approach to Spanish anaphora resolution. 
Machine Translation, 14(3/4):191-216. 
Ferr~indez, Antonio and Jestis Peral. 2000. A 
computational pproach to zero-pronouns 
in Spanish. In Proceedings ofthe 38th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics (ACL'O0), pages 
166-172, Hong Kong (China). 
Ge, Niyu, John Hale, and Eugene Charniak. 
1998. A statistical approach to anaphora 
resolution. In Proceedings ofthe Sixth 
Workshop on Ven d Large Corpora, pages 
161-170, Montreal (Canada). 
Grosz, Barbara, Aravind Joshi, and Scott 
Weinstein. 1983. Providing a unified 
account of definite noun phrases in 
discourse. In Proceedings ofthe 21st Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics (ACL'83), pages 44-50, 
Cambridge, MA (USA). 
Grosz, Barbara, Aravind Joshi, and Scott 
Weinstein. 1995. Centering: A framework 
for modeling the local coherence of 
discourse. Computational Linguistics, 
21(2):203-225. 
Hobbs, Jerry R. 1978. Resolving pronoun 
references. Lingua, 44:311-338. 
Kennedy, Christopher and Branimir 
Boguraev. 1996. Anaphora for everyone: 
Pronominal anaphora resolution without 
a parser. In Proceedings ofthe 16th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING'96), pages 113-118, 
Copenhagen (Denmark). 
Lappin, Shalom and Herbert Leass. 1994. 
An algorithm for pronominal anaphora 
resolution. Computational Linguistics, 
20(4):535-561. 
Mathews, Peter H. 1997. The Concise Oxford 
Dictionary of Linguistics. Oxford University 
Press, Oxford (UK). 
Mitkov, Ruslan. 1995. An uncertainty 
reasoning approach to anaphora 
resolution. In Proceedings ofthe Natural 
Language Pacific Rim Symposium (NLPRS 
"95), pages 149-154, Seoul (Korea). 
Mitkov, Ruslan. 1998. Robust pronoun 
resolution with limited knowledge. In 
Proceedings ofthe 36th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics and 
17 th International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics 
(COLING-ACL'98), pages 869-875, 
Montreal (Canada). 
Mitkov, Ruslan and Malgorzata Stys. 1997. 
Robust reference resolution with limited 
knowledge: High precision genre-specific 
approach for English and Polish. In 
Proceedings ofthe International Conference on 
Recent Advances in Natural Language 
Processing (RANLP'97), pages 74-81, 
Tzigov Chark (Bulgaria). 
Nakaiwa, Hiromi and Satoshi Shirai. 1996. 
Anaphora resolution of Japanese zero 
pronouns with deictic reference. In
Proceedings ofthe 16th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics 
(COLING'96), pages 812-817, Copenhagen 
(Denmark). 
Okumura, Manabu and Kouji Tamura. 1996. 
Zero pronoun resolution in Japanese 
discourse based on centering theory. In 
Proceedings ofthe 16th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics 
566 
Palomar et al Anaphora Resolution in Spanish Texts 
(COLING'96), pages 871-876, Copenhagen 
(Denmark). 
Palomar, Manuel, Antonio Ferra'ndez, Lidia 
Moreno, Maximiliano Saiz-Noeda, Rafael 
Mu~oz, Patricio Martfnez-Barco, Jestis 
Peral, and Borja Navarro. 1999. A robust 
partial parsing strategy based on the slot 
unification grammars. In Proceedings ofthe 
6th Conference on Natural Language 
Processing (TALN'99), pages 263-272, 
Corsica (France). 
Paul, Michael, Kazuhide Yamamoto, and 
Eiichiro Sumita. 1999. Corpus-based 
anaphora resolution towards antecedent 
preference. In Proceedings ofthe ACL 
Workshop on Coreference and Its Applications, 
pages 47-52, College Park, MD (USA). 
Pla, Ferran. 2000. Etiquetado Ldxico y Andlisis 
Sintdctico Super~'cial Basado en Modelos 
Estadfsticos. Ph.D. thesis, Valencia 
University of Technology, Valencia 
(Spain). 
Proyecto CRATER. 1994-1995. Corpus 
Resources And Terminology ExtRaction. 
MLAP-93/20. http: //www.lllf.uam.es / 
proyectos/crater.html (page visited on 
04/17/01). 
Reinhart, Tanya. 1983. Anaphora nd Semantic 
Interpretation. Croom Hehn Linguistics 
series. Croom Helm Ltd., Beckenham, 
Kent (UK). 
Saiz-Noeda, Maximiliano, Armando Sudrez, 
and Jestis Peral. 1999. Propuesta de 
incorporacidn de informaci6n sem~ntica 
desde Wordnet alandlisis sintdctico 
parcial orientado a la resoluci6n de la 
an~ffora. Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural, 
25:167-173. 
Siegel, Sidney and John N. Castellan. 1988. 
Nonparametric Statistics for the Behavioral 
Sciences. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY 
(USA), 2nd edition. 
Strube, Michael. 1998. Never look back: An 
alternative to centering. In Proceedings of
the 36th Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics and 17th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING-ACL'98), pages 
1251-1257, Montreal (Canada). 
Strube, Michael and Udo Hahn. 1999. 
Functional centering: Grounding 
referential coherence in information 
structure. Computational Linguistics, 
25(3):309-344. 
Vieira, Renata. 1998. Processing of Definite 
Descriptions in Unrestricted Texts. Ph.D. 
thesis, University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh (UK). 
Yamamoto, Kazuhide and Eiichiro Sumita. 
1998. Feasibility study for ellipsis 
resolution in dialogues by 
machine-learning technique. In 
Proceedings ofthe 36th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics and 
17th International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics 
(COLING-ACL'98), pages 385-391, 
Montreal (Canada). 
567 

Semantic Pattern Learning Through Maximum Entropy-based WSD
technique  
Maximiliano Saiz-Noeda
Depto. de Lenguajes y
Sistemas Informa?ticos
Universidad de Alicante
Alicante, Spain
max@dlsi.ua.es
Armando Sua?rez
Depto. de Lenguajes y
Sistemas Informa?ticos
Universidad de Alicante
Alicante, Spain
armando@dlsi.ua.es
Manuel Palomar
Depto. de Lenguajes y
Sistemas Informa?ticos
Universidad de Alicante
Alicante, Spain
mpalomar@dlsi.ua.es
Abstract
This paper describes a Natural Lan-
guage Learning method that extracts
knowledge in the form of semantic pat-
terns with ontology elements associated
to syntactic components in the text. The
method combines the use of EuroWord-
Net?s ontological concepts and the cor-
rect sense of each word assigned by
a Word Sense Disambiguation(WSD)
module to extract three sets of pat-
terns: subject-verb, verb-direct object
and verb-indirect object. These sets de-
fine the semantic behaviour of the main
textual elements based on their syntac-
tic role. On the one hand, it is shown
that Maximum Entropy models applied
to WSD tasks provide good results. The
evaluation of the WSD module has re-
vealed a accuracy rate of 64% in a pre-
liminary test. On the other hand, we ex-
plain how an adequate set of semantic
or ontological patterns can improve the
success rate of NLP tasks such us pro-
noun resolution. We have implemented
both modules in C++ and although the
evaluation has been performed for En-
glish, their general features allow the
treatment of other languages like Span-
ish.

This paper has been partially supported by the Spanish
Government (CICYT) project number TIC2000-0664-C02-
02.
1 Introduction
Semantic patterns, as defined in this method, con-
figure a system to add a new information source
to Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks. To
obtain these semantic patterns, it is necessary to
count on different tools. On the one hand, a full
parser must make a syntactic analysis of the text.
This parsing will allow the selection of the differ-
ent syntactic functional elements such as subject,
direct object (DObj) and indirect object (IObj).
On the other hand, a WSD tool must provide the
correct sense in order to ensure the appropriate
selection of the ontological concept associated to
each word. Finally, with the parsing and the cor-
rect sense of each word, the pattern extraction
method will form and store ontological pairs that
define the semantic behaviour of each sentence.
2 Full parsing
The analyzer used for this work is the Conexor?s
FDG Parser (Pasi Tapanainen and Timo Ja?rvinen,
1997). This parser tries to provide a build depen-
dency tree from the sentence. When this is not
possible, the parser tries to build partial trees that
often result from unresolved ambiguity. One vi-
sual example of this dependency trees is shown in
Figure 1 where the parsing tree of sentence (1) is
illustrated.
(1) The minister gave explanations to
the Government.
As seen in Figure 2, the analyzer assigns
to each word a text token (second column), a
base form (third column) and functional link
0
1 The the det:>2 @DN> DET SG/PL
2 minister minister subj:>3 @SUBJ N NOM SG
3 gave give main:>0 @+FMAINV V PAST
4 explanations explanation obj:>3 @OBJ N NOM PL
5 to to dat:>3 @ADVL PREP
6 the the det:>7 @DN> DET SG/PL
7 Government government pcomp:>5 @<P N NOM SG/PL
. .
Figure 2: FDG Analyser?s output example
Figure 1: Parsing tree
names, lexico-syntactic function labels and parts
of speech (fourth column). Figure 1 shows the
parsing tree related to this output. These elements
are enough for the pattern extraction method to be
applied to NLP tasks.
Regarding to the evaluation of the parser, the
authors report an average precision and recall of
95% and 88% respectively in the detection of the
correct head. Furthermore, they report a precision
rate between 89% and 95% and a recall rate be-
tween 83% and 96% in the selection of the func-
tional dependencies.
3 WSD based on Maximum Entropy
A WSD module is applied to this parser?s output,
in order to select the correct sense of each entry.
Maximum Entropy(ME) modeling is a frame-
work for integrating information from many het-
erogeneous information sources for classification
(Manning and Schu?tze, 1999). This WSD sys-
tem is based on conditional ME probability mod-
els. The system implements a supervised learn-
ing method consisting of the building of word
sense classifiers through training on a semanti-
cally tagged corpus. A classifier obtained by
means of a ME technique consist of a set of
parameters or coefficients estimated by an opti-
mization procedure. Each coefficient associates
a weight to one feature observed in the training
data. A feature is a function that gives infor-
mation about some characteristic in a context as-
sociated to a class. The basic idea is to obtain
the probability distribution that maximizes the en-
tropy, that is, maximum ignorance is assumed and
nothing apart of training data is considered. As
advantages of ME framework, knowledge-poor
features applying and accuracy can be mentioned;
ME framework allows a virtually unrestricted
ability to represent problem-specific knowledge
in the form of features (Ratnaparkhi, 1998).
Let us assume a set of contexts

and a
set of classes  . The function 
 	
 that performs the classification in a condi-
tional probability model 
 chooses the class with
the highest conditional probability: 
Exploiting semantic information for manual anaphoric annotation in
Cast3LB corpus
Borja Navarro, Rube?n Izquierdo, Maximiliano Saiz-Noeda
Departmento de Lenguajes y Sistemas Informa?ticos
Universidad de Alicante
Ap. Correo 99, E-03080
Alicante, Spain
{borja,ruben,max}@dlsi.ua.es
Abstract
This paper presents the discourse annotation fol-
lowed in Cast3LB, a Spanish corpus annotated with
several information sources (morphological, syntac-
tic, semantic and coreferential) at syntactic, seman-
tic and discourse level. 3LB annotation scheme has
been developed for three languages (Spanish, Cata-
lan and Basque). Human annotators have used a
set of tagging techniques and protocols. Several
tools have provided them with a friendly annotation
scheme. At discourse level, anaphoric and coref-
erence expressions are annotated. One of the most
interesting contributions to this annotation scenario
is the enriched anaphora resolution module that is
based on the previously defined semantic annotation
phase to expand the discourse information and use
it to suggest the correct antecedent of an anaphora
to the annotator. This paper describes the relevance
of the semantic tags in the discourse annotation in
Spanish corpus Cast3LB and shows both levels and
tools in the mentioned discourse annotation scheme.
1 Introduction
Cast3LB corpus is annotated (Navarro et al, 2003)
at three linguistic levels: sentence level (syntac-
tic), lexical level (semantic) and discourse level. At
discourse level, it is annotated with anaphoric and
coreferential information. In order to improve the
time-consuming and tedious task of the manually
annotation, a semiautomatic and interactive process
is followed: first, an anaphora resolution system se-
lects each anaphora and its antecedent from a list
of candidates; then, the human annotator decides
wether or not accept the suggestion.
With this approach, the correctness of the
anaphora resolution system is a key factor in the
quest of an efficient annotation process. For this
reason, we use the linguistic information of the
previous annotation tasks (morphological, syntac-
tic and, mainly, semantic information) to improve
the anaphora resolution system. In this paper we
will focus on the use of semantic information in the
anaphora and coreferential manual annotation task.
Next section presents the project overview and
the three annotation levels. Following sections
present the semantic annotation and the way it
serves to the discourse annotations. Last section
presents annotation tools used to annotate the cor-
pus at semantic and coreferential level.
2 Cast3LB corpus: annotation project
overview
Cast3Lb project is part of the general project 3LB1.
The main objective of this general project is to
develop three corpora annotated with syntactic,
semantic and pragmatic/coreferential information:
one for Catalan (Cat3LB), one for Basque (Eus3LB)
and one for Spanish (Cast3LB).
The Spanish corpus Cast3LB is a part of the
CLIC-TALP corpus, which is made up of 100.000
words from the LexEsp corpus (Sebastia?n et al,
2000) plus 25.000 words coming from the EFE
Spanish Corpus, given by the Agencia EFE (the of-
ficial news agency) for research purposes. The EFE
corpus fragments are comparable among the lan-
guages of the general project (Catalan, Basque and
Spanish).
We have selected this corpus because it contains
a large variety of Spanish texts (newspapers, novels,
scientific papers. . . ), both from Spain and South-
America, so it is a good representation of the cur-
rent state of the Spanish language. Moreover, the
automatic morphological annotation of this corpus
has been manually checked (Civit, 2003).
The spirit of the annotation scheme is to build a
flexible system portable to different romance lan-
guages and to potential new cases that might appear,
but consistent with all annotation levels and annota-
tion data.
At the syntactic level we follow the constituency
annotation scheme. Main principles of syntactic an-
notation are the following (Civit et al, 2003): a)
1Project partially funded by Spanish Government FIT-150-
500-2002-244.
only the explicit elements are annotated (except for
elliptical subjects); b) we do not alter the surface
word order of the elements; c) we do not follow any
specific theoretical framework; d) we do not take
into account the verbal phrase, rather, the main con-
stituents of the sentence become the daughters of
the root node; e) this syntactic information is en-
riched by the functional information of the main
phrases, but we have not taken into account the pos-
sibility of double functions.
At the semantic level, we annotate the sense of
the nouns, verbs and some adjectives, following an
all words approach. The specific sense (or senses)
of each one is assigned by means of the EuroWord-
Net offset number (Vossen, 1998). Also, due to
some words are not available in EuroWordNet or
do not have the suitable sense, we have created two
new tags to mark this circumstance.
At the discourse level, we mark the coreference of
nominal phrases and some elliptical elements. The
coreference expressions taken into account are per-
sonal pronouns, clitics, elliptical subjects and some
elliptical adjectives. The definite descriptions are
not marked. The possible antecedents considered
are the nominal phrases or other coreferential ex-
pressions.
3 Semantic annotation
As we said before, main objective of Cast3LB
project at semantic level is to develop an ?all words?
corpus with the specific sense (or senses) of nouns,
verbs and adjectives.
Our proposal is based on the SemCor corpus
(Miller, 1990). This corpus is formed by a por-
tion of the Brown corpus and the novel The Red
Badge of Courage. Altogether, it is formed by ap-
proximately 250.000 words, where nouns, verbs,
adjectives and adverbs have been manually anno-
tated with WordNet senses (Miller, 1990). Another
corpus with WordNet-based semantic annotation is
the DSO corpus (Ng and Lee, 1996). In this cor-
pus, the most frequent English ambiguous nouns
and verbs had been annotated with the correct sense
(121 nouns and 70 verbs). The corpus is formed by
192.800 sentences from the Brown Corpus and the
Wall Street Journal, and it has also been manually
annotated. Finally, the SENSEVAL forum has de-
veloped a few sense annotated corpora for the eval-
uation of Word Sense Disambiguation systems (Kil-
garriff and Palmer, 2000), some of which also use
WordNet as a lexical resource.
We have decided to use Spanish WordNet for sev-
eral reasons. First of all, Spanish WordNet is, up to
now, the more commonly used lexical resource in
Word Sense Disambiguation tasks. Secondly, it is
one of the most complete lexical resources currently
available for Spanish. Finally, as part of EuroWord-
Net, the lexical structure of Spanish and the lexical
structure of Catalan and Basque are related. There-
fore, the annotated senses of the three corpora of
3LB project can also be related.
The tag used to mark a word sense is its off-
set number, that is, its identification number in Eu-
roWordNet?s InterLingua Index. The corpus has
42291 lexical words, where 20461 are nouns, 13471
are verbs and 8543 are adjectives.
On other hand, not all nouns, verbs, adjectives
and adverbs are annotated, due to EuroWordNet
does not contain them. Possible lacks in this sense
are (i) the synset, (ii) the word, (iii) the synset and
the word, and (iv) the link between the synset and
the word.
In order to deal with these cases we have defined
two more tags in EuroWordNet:
? C1S: the word is found, but not its correct
sense (due to a sense lack, or because there is
no link between the word and the synset).
? C2S: the word is not found (because it is not
there, or because both the word and the synset
are missing).
It is possible to distinguish two methods for se-
mantically annotate a corpus. The first one is linear
(or ?textual?) method (Kilgarriff, 1998), where the
human annotator marks the sentences token by to-
ken up to the end of the corpus. In this strategy the
annotator must read and analyze the sense of each
word every time it appears in the corpus. The sec-
ond annotation method is transversal (or ?lexical?)
(Kilgarriff, 1998), where he/she annotates word-
type by word-type, all the occurrences of each word
in the corpus one by one. With this method, the
annotator must read and analyze all the senses of a
word only once.
We have followed in Cast3LB the transversal pro-
cess. The main advantage of this method is that
we can focus our attention on the sense structure of
one word and deal with its specific semantic prob-
lems: its main sense or senses, its specific senses. . . .
Then we check the context of the single word each
time it appears and select the corresponding sense.
Through this approach, semantic features of each
word is taken into consideration only once, and the
whole corpus achieves greater consistency. Through
the linear process, however, the annotator must re-
member the sense structure of each word and their
specific problems each time the word appears in
the corpus, making the annotation process much
more complex, and increasing the possibilities of
low consistency and disagreement between the an-
notators.
Nevertheless, the transversal method finds its dis-
advantage in the annotation of large corpus, be-
cause no fragment of the corpus is available until
the whole corpus is completed. To avoid this, we
have selected a fragment of the whole corpus and
annotated it by means of the linear process.
Everybody agrees that semantic annotation is a
tedious and difficult task. From a general point of
view, the main problem in the semantic annotation
is the subjectivity of the human annotator when it
comes to the selection of the correct sense, because
there are usually more than one sense for a word,
and, due to the WorNet?s granularity, more than one
could be correct for a given word. Another impor-
tant problem in the semantic annotation is the poor
agreement between different annotators, due to the
ambiguity and/or vagueness of many words.
In order to overcome these problems, the annota-
tion process has been carried out in two steps. In the
first step, a subset of ambiguous words have been
annotated twice by two annotators. With this dou-
ble annotation we have developed a disagreement
typology and an annotation handbook, where all the
possible causes of ambiguity have been described
and common solutions have been adopted for the
rest of cases. In the second step the remaining cor-
pus is annotated following the criteria adopted in the
annotation handbook.
Our final aim is to obtain useful resources for
Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) systems in
Spanish. This semantically annotated corpus will
be used as a training corpus for the development of
unsupervised systems and as a reference in general
evaluation tasks. At the end of the project, we will
have a large amount of words with an unambiguous
sense tag in a real context.
As well as this final application, we exploit this
semantic information in the anaphoric annotation
task. In (Saiz-Noeda, 2002), how to apply seman-
tic information in anaphora resolution systems is
showed and evaluated. We take this proposal, but
applied to manual anaphora annotation.
Due to the corpus has been annotated with syn-
tactic information, and the sense of each word is
marked with the offset number of EuroWordNet,
it is possible to extract semantic features of each
verb and noun through the ontological concepts of
the EuroWordNet?s Top Ontology. Furthermore, the
corpus has been annotated with syntactic roles, so
it is possible to extract syntactic patterns formed by
the verb and its main complements: subject-verb,
verb-direct objects, verb-indirect objects.
As we will show bellow, these patterns are use-
ful in order to select the specific antecedent of an
anaphora, according to semantic compatibility cri-
teria between the antecedent and the verb of the sen-
tence where the anaphora appears.
4 Discourse annotation: anaphora and
coreference
At discourse level, our objective is to annotate the
anaphora and the coreference, in order to develop
useful resources for anaphora resolution systems.
We agreed to annotate the anaphoric elements
and their antecedents. These anaphoric elements are
the anaphoric ellipsis, the pronominal anaphora and
the coreferential chains.
Specifically, in each one, we mark:
? Anaphoric ellipsis:
? The elliptical subject, made explicit in the
syntactic annotation step. Being a noun
phrase, it could also be an antecedent too.
Unlike English, where it is possible an
expletive pronoun as subject, in Spanish
it is very common an elliptical nominal
phrase as subject of the sentence. This is
why we have decide to include this kind
of anaphora in the annotation process.
? Elliptical head of nominal phrases with
an adjective complement. In English,
this construction is the ?one anaphora?.
In Spanish, however, the anaphoric con-
struction is made up by an elliptical head
noun and an adjective complement.
? Anaphora: Two kinds of pronouns:
? The tonic personal pronouns in the third
person. They can appear in subject func-
tion or in object function.
? The atonic pronouns, specifically the
clitic pronouns that appear in the subcate-
gorization frame of the main verb.
? Finally, there are sets of anaphoric and ellipti-
cal units that corefer to the same entity. These
units form coreferential chains. They must be
marked in order to show the cohesion and co-
herence of the text. They are annotated by
means of the identification of the same an-
tecedent.
We do not annotate the definite descriptions.
They consist of nominal phrases that can refer (or
not) to an antecedent. We do not mark them because
they outline specific problems that make this task
very difficult: firstly, there are not clear criteria that
allow us to distinguish between coreferential and
not coreferential nominal phrases; secondly, there
are not a clear typology for definite descriptions;
and finally, there are not a clear typology of rela-
tionships between the definite description and their
antecedents. These problems could further increase
the time-consuming in the annotation process and
widen the gap of disagreement between the human
annotators.
This proposal of annotation scheme is based on
the one used in the MUC (Message Understanding
Conference) (Hirschman, 1997) as well as in the
works of Gaizauskas (Gaizauskas and Humphreys,
1996) and Mitkov (Mitkov et al, 2002): this is
the mostly used scheme in coreferential annotation
(Mitkov, 2002).
In the anaphoric annotation, two linguistic ele-
ments must be marked: the anaphoric expression
and its antecedent. In the antecedent we annotate
the following information:
? A reference tag that shows the presence of an
antecedent (?REF?),
? An identification number (?ID?),
? The minimum continuous substring that could
be considerer correct (?MIN?).
In the coreferential expression, we annotate:
? The presence of a coreferential expression
(?COREF?),
? An identification number (?ID?),
? The type of anaphoric expression: elliptical
subject, elliptical head of noun phrase, tonic
pronoun or atonic pronoun (?TYPE?),
? The antecedent, through its identification num-
ber (?REF?),
? Finally, a status tag where the annotators shows
their confidence in the annotation (?STA-
TUS?).
As previously mentioned in this paper, the main
problem in the anaphoric annotation is the low
agreement between human annotators. There is usu-
ally less agreement in anaphoric annotation than in
syntactic annotation ((Mitkov, 2002), 141). In order
to reduce this low agreement, we annotate only the
clearest type of anaphoric units (pronouns, ellipti-
cal subjects and elliptical nominal heads), and we
introduce the lowest necessary information. More-
over, with the tag ?STATUS?, the human annotator
can show his confidence in the anaphoric unit and
the antecedent marked. However, at the moment, as
occurs in the semantic annotation, we do not have
enough data on the agreement between annotators.
4.1 Manual annotation with an Enriched
Anaphora Resolution System
As we said before, we follow a manual anaphora an-
notation with the help of a Enriched Anaphora Res-
olution System: our idea is to check the automatic
annotation of the anaphora resolution system and to
correct mistakes in the annotation process.
In manual anaphora and coreferential annota-
tion, the human annotator first locates a possible
anaphora, and then must read back the text until
the antecedent appears. With an anaphora resolu-
tion system it is possible to automatize this pro-
cess: the system selects possible anaphoric ele-
ments, their possible antecedents, and decides the
main candidate. The human annotator must only
check the suggestion. The process is more useful
because the most tedious task (to select a possible
anaphora, to read back looking for the antecedent,
etc.) is made up by the system. When the human
annotator checks the solution, he does not read back
for antecedents, he goes directly to the possible an-
tecedents.
However, the anaphora resolution system must be
very accurate. In order to automatically specify the
antecedent of an anaphora and ensure the correct-
ness of the system, we use all the linguistic infor-
mation previously annotated in the corpus: morpho-
logical, syntactic and semantic. In this knowledge-
based anaphora resolution system, the linguistic in-
formation is used through a set of restrictions and
preferences. Following this strategy, the system re-
jects possible antecedents until only one is selected.
The key point is the linguistic information used in
restrictions and preferences.
We have developed a semantically enriched
anaphora resolution system in order to aid the dis-
course annotation level. EuroWordNet synsets are
the base of the semantic information added to the
resolution process. The fact of counting with a se-
mantically annotated corpus such as Cast3Lb facil-
itates the use of the anaphora resolution method,
based on a natural way of understanding the human
process for anaphora resolution.
The specific use of semantic information is re-
lated to the sematic compatibility between the possi-
ble antecedent (a noun) and the verb of the sentence
in which the anaphoric pronoun appears. Due to the
pronoun replaces a lexical word (the antecedent),
the semantic information of the antecedent must
be compatible with the semantic restrictions of the
verb. In other words, the anaphoric expression takes
the semantic features of the antecedent, so they must
be compatible with the semantic restrictions of the
verb.
In this way, verbs like ?eat? or ?drink? will be
specially compatible with animal subjects and eat-
able and drinkable objects than others.
In our case, the semantic features of the lexi-
cal words have been extracted form the ontologi-
cal concepts of EuroWorNet, that is, the Top On-
tology. All the synsets in EuroWordnet are seman-
tically described through a set of base concepts (the
more general concepts). In the EuroWorNet?s Top
Ontology, these base concepts are classified in the
three orders of Lyons (Lyons, 1977), according to
basic semantic distinctions. So through the top on-
tology, all the synsets of EuroWordNet are seman-
tically described with concepts like ?human?, ?an-
imal?, ?artifact?, etc. With this, we have extracted
subject-verb, verb-direct object and/or verb-indirect
object semantic patterns.
From this semantic patters, rules about the se-
mantic compatibility between nouns and verbs have
been extracted. These rules are applied to the
anaphora resolution as preferences. Based on the
patterns, the system calculates the compatibility
between the verb of the sentence in which the
anaphora appears and the antecedent. So the possi-
ble antecedents with low compatibility are rejected,
and the antecedents with high compatibility are se-
lected. These semantic preferences, plus the syn-
tactic and morphological restrictions and prefer-
ences, are used to select the correct antecedent of
the anaphora.
Furthermore, semantic information is also used in
some rules. There are two kind of rules:
? ?NO? rules: NO(v#sense,c,r) defines the in-
compatibility between the verb v (and it sense)
and any name which contains ?c? in its ontolog-
ical concept list, being ?r? the syntactic func-
tion that relates them.
? ?MUST? rules: MUST(v#sense,c,r) defines
the incompatibility between the verb v (and its
sense) and all the names that don?t contain ?c?
in their ontological concept list, being ?r? the
syntactic function that relates them.
At the final annotation step, the annotator checks
if the antecedent selected is the correct one or not,
and, in each case, confirms the annotation or cor-
rects it.
5 Tools
5.1 3LB-SAT
3LB-SAT (Semantic Annotation Tool) is a tool for
the semantic tagging of multilingual corpora. Main
features of this tool are:
? it is word-oriented,
? it allows different format for input corpus; ba-
sically, the main formats used in corpus anno-
tation: treebank format (TBF) and XML for-
mat;
? it uses EuroWordNet as a lexical resource.
For the XML format a DTD has been defined, that
allows to describe the information structure in each
file of the corpus.
In the annotation process, monosemic words are
automatically annotated. So, 3LB-SAT is used to
annotated only the polysemic words. When a file
is loaded, all lemmas of the file are shown (Fig-
ure 1). The tool uses different colors to indicate the
state of the annotation process: (i) no occurrence of
the lemma in the file has been annotated, (ii) some
occurrences of the lemma in the file have been an-
notated, or (iii) all the occurrences have been an-
notated. When the annotator selects a lemma, all
its occurrences are shown. The selection of one of
them shows all possible senses, and the annotator
chooses the correct one for this specific context.
Figure 1: 3LB-SAT semantic annotation tool.
5.2 3LB-RAT
3LB-RAT (Reference Annotation Tool) is a tool de-
veloped in 3LB project for the annotation and su-
pervision of anaphora and coreferences at discourse
level.
The tool provides the annotator with two working
ways: manual and semiautomatic. In the first one,
the tool locates and shows all possible anaphoric
and coreference elements and their possible an-
tecedents. The annotator chooses one of these pos-
sible antecedents and indicates the certainty degree
on this selection (standby, certain or uncertain).
There are some exceptional cases that the tool al-
ways offers:
? cases of cataphora,
? possible syntactic mistakes (that will be used to
review and to correct the syntactic annotation),
? the possibility of a non-located antecedent,
? the possibility that an antecedent doesn?t ap-
pear explicitly in the text,
? the possibility of non-anaphora, that is, the sys-
tem has not correctly located an anaphoric ex-
pression.
In the semiautomatic way, the tool solves each
coreference by means of the enriched resolution
anaphora method previously explained. So the sys-
tem proposes and shows the most suitable candidate
to the annotator. The annotator can choose the solu-
tion that the resolution method offers in all cases, or
choose another solution (manually).
3LB-RAT has been developed in Python lan-
guage, which guarantees the portability to any Win-
dows or Unix platform. It deals with XML files:
it is designed to work and to understand the format
used by the 3LB-SAT tool, but it is able to accept
any other XML specification.
As we said before, the tool uses syntactic, mor-
phologic and semantic information for the specifi-
cation of an anaphora and its antecedent. The se-
mantic information used by the tool is limited to
ontology concepts and synonymous. From the se-
mantically annotated text, three tables are created,
one for each syntactic function: subject, direct ob-
ject and indirect object. In these tables the appear-
ance frequency of nouns with verbs (with their cor-
rect senses) is stored. These tables are the base to
construct the semantic compatibility patterns, which
indicate the compatibility between the ontological
concept related with the possible antecedent and the
verb of the sentence where the anaphoric expression
appears. In order to calculate this information, the
occurrence frequency and the conceptual generality
degree in the ontology are considered. In this case,
a higher punctuation is given to the most concrete
concepts. For example, ?Human? concept gives us
further information than ?Natural? concept. These
patterns are used in the semantic preferences appli-
cation. For a specific candidate, its semantic com-
patibility is calculated from the compatible ontolog-
ical concepts on the patterns. The candidates with
greater compatibility are preferred.
When the annotator selects a XML file to open,
the possible anaphoric elements of the text and their
candidates are located, and each anaphora is solved.
The system shows two lists (Figure 2): the lower
list shows each anaphora located and its solution.
When the annotator selects one of these elements,
in the upper box appears the possible candidates list
besides the solution suggested by the system. At the
same time, in the plain text, the anaphora and the
selected candidates are shown with different colors.
The annotator can choose any suggested option and
the certainty degree of this election, or accept the
solution given by the system.
Figure 2: 3LB-RAT anaphoric annotation tool.
6 Conclusions
The main contribution of this paper is the applica-
tion of semantic information to a manual anaphora
annotation process, based on the semantic relation
between the anaphoric element and its antecedent at
discourse level.
The semantic and anaphoric annotation scheme
of the Spanish corpus Cast3LB has been presented,
and how anaphoric annotation has been improved
with the semantic information annotated in previous
steps. The annotation process is based on the help
of an anaphora resolution system: first, the system
detects the anaphora and its antecedent, and then the
human annotator checks the correctness of the auto-
matic annotation process and solves possible mis-
takes. The system uses all the linguistic informa-
tion previously annotated in the corpus, including
the semantic information, in order to evaluate the
semantic compatibility between the antecedent and
the verb of the sentence in which the anaphora ap-
pears.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Bele?n and Raquel
for their work in the manual annotation process.
References
M. Civit, Ma. A. Mart??, B. Navarro, N. Buf??,
B. Ferna?ndez, and R. Marcos. 2003. Issues in the
Syntactic Annotation of Cast3LB. In 4th Inter-
national Workshop on Linguistically Interpreted
Corpora (LINC03), EACL03, Budapest.
M. Civit. 2003. Criterios de etiquetacio?n y desam-
biguacio?n morfosinta?ctica de corpus en Espan?ol.
Sociedad Espaola para el Procesamiento del
Lenguaje Natural, Alicante.
R. Gaizauskas and K. Humphreys. 1996. Quantita-
tive evaluation of coreference algorithms in an in-
formation extraction system. In S. P. Botley and
A. M. McEnery, editors, Corpus-based and Com-
putational Approaches to Discourse Anaphora,
pages 143?167. John Benjamins, Amsterdam.
L. Hirschman. 1997. MUC-7 coreference task def-
inition Message Understanding Conference Pro-
ceedings.
A. Kilgarriff and M. Palmer. 2000. Computer and
the Humanities. Special Issue on SENSEVAL,
volume 34.
A. Kilgarriff. 1998. Gold standard datasets for
evaluating word sense disambiguation programs.
Computer Speech and Language. Special Use on
Evaluation, 12(4):453?472.
J. Lyons. 1977. Semantics. Cambridge University
Press, London.
G. A. Miller. 1990. Wordnet: An on-line lexical
database. Intenational Journal of Lexicography,
3(4):235?312.
R. Mitkov, R. Evans, C. Orasan, C. Barbu,
L. Jones, and V.Sotirova. 2002. Coreference
and anaphora: developing annotating tools, an-
notated resources and annotation strategies. In
Proceedings of the Discourse, Anaphora and Ref-
erence Resolution Conference (DAARC 2000),
Lancaster, UK.
R. Mitkov. 2002. Anaphora resolution. Pearson,
London.
B. Navarro, M. Civit, Ma. A. Mart??, B. Ferna?ndez,
and R. Marcos. 2003. Syntactic, semantic and
pragmatic annotation in Cast3LB. In Proceed-
ings of the Shallow Processing of Large Corpora.
A Corpus Linguistics WorkShop, Lancaster, UK.
H. T. Ng and H. B. Lee. 1996. Integrating Mul-
tiple Knowledge Sources to Disambiguate Word
Sense: An Exemplar-Based Approach. In Pro-
ceedings of the 34th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Santa
Cruz, California.
M. Saiz-Noeda. 2002. Influencia y aplicacio?n de
papeles sinta?cticos e informacio?n sema?ntica en la
resolucio?n de la ana?fora pronominal en espan?ol.
Ph.D. thesis, Universidad de Alicante, Alicante.
N. Sebastia?n, Ma. A. Mart??, M. F. Carreiras, and
F. Cuetos. 2000. 2000 LEXESP: Le?xico Informa-
tizado del Espan?ol. Edicions de la Universitat de
Barcelona, Barcelona.
P. Vossen. 1998. A Multilingual Database with Lex-
ical Networks. Kluwer Academic Publisher.
