Book Review
Discourse on the Move: Using Corpus Analysis to Describe
Discourse Structure
Douglas Biber, Ulla Connor, and Thomas A. Upton
(Northern Arizona University and Indiana University?Indianapolis)
John Benjamins Publishing (Studies in corpus linguistics, edited by Elena
Tognini-Bonelli, volume 28), 2007, xii+289 pp; hardbound, ISBN 978-90-272-2302-9,
$142.00, ?105.00
Reviewed by
Marina Santini
University of Glasgow
The study of discourse can be undertaken from different perspectives (e.g., linguistic,
cognitive, or computational) with differing purposes in mind (e.g., to study language
use or to analyze social practices). The aim of Discourse on the Move is to show that
it is possible and profitable to join quantitative and qualitative analyses to study dis-
course structures. Whereas corpus-based quantitative discourse analysis focuses on
the distributional discourse patterns of a corpus as a whole with no indication of
how patterns are distributed in individual texts, manual qualitative analysis is always
carried out on a small number of texts and does not support large generalizations of the
findings. The book proposes two methodological approaches?top-down and bottom-
up?that combine the quantitative and qualitative views into a corpus-based description
of discourse organization. Such a description provides detailed analyses of individual
texts and the generalization of these analyses across all the texts of a genre-specific
corpus.
Top-down is the more traditional (not necessarily corpus-based) approach in which
researchers establish functional?qualitative methods to develop an analytical frame-
work capable of describing the types of discourse units in a target corpus. In this
approach, linguistic?quantitative analyses come as a later step to facilitate the interpre-
tation of discourse types. In contrast, the bottom-up approach begins with a linguistic?
quantitative analysis based on the automatic segmentation of texts into discourse units
on the basis of vocabulary distributional patterns. In this approach, the functional?
qualitative analysis that provides an interpretation of the discourse types is performed
as a later step.
Both top-down and bottom-up analyses can be broken down into seven procedural
steps, but the order of the steps in the two approaches is not the same. The steps to be
followed in top-down methods are these:
1. Determination of communicative/functional categories.
2. Segmentation.
3. Classification.
4. Linguistic analysis of each unit.
5. Linguistic description of discourse categories.
6. Text structure analysis.
7. Description of discourse organizational tendencies.
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 1
In the top-down studies presented in this book, the communicative/functional cate-
gories used to segment texts into meaningful units of discourse are identified through
move analysis and appeals analysis. Moves segment texts according to the commu-
nicative functions of texts (Swales 1981, 1990), whereas the primary role of appeals?
derived from the Aristotelian theory of persuasion and employed by Perelman (1982)
to develop his theory of ?new rhetoric??is to make the reader ?act?. For this reason,
appeals analysis is often applied to persuasive texts.
The steps to be followed in bottom-up methods are these:
1. Automatic segmentation.
2. Linguistic analysis of each unit.
3. Classification.
4. Linguistic description of discourse categories.
5. Determination of communicative/functional categories.
6. Text structure analysis.
7. Description of discourse organizational tendencies.
In the bottom-up studies presented in this book, the computational methods used to
automatically identify vocabulary-based discourse units (VBDUs) are based on Hearst?s
(1994, 1997) TextTiling procedure. TextTiling is a quantitative procedure that compares
the words used in contiguous segments of text. If the vocabulary in two segments is
very similar, the two segments are analyzed as belonging to the same discourse unit;
otherwise they are analyzed as two distinct units.
Therefore, one major difference between the two approaches is the unit of analy-
sis. In the top-down case, the units of analysis (i.e., moves and appeals) are directly
interpretable by discourse analysts, whereas bottom-up VBDUs are more complex to
describe. However, the bottom-up method can be easily applied to large corpora and
is replicable, whereas the top-down approach is more subjective. In both approaches,
the linguistic analysis of discourse units relies on multidimensional analysis, the well-
known statistical method developed by Biber to study linguistic variation.
Instructively, the book ends with a comparison of two independent analyses?one
top-down and one bottom-up, described in Chapters 4 and 7, respectively?carried
out on two different corpora, one containing biochemistry research articles, the other
including articles about themore general discipline of biology. Although the expectation
that both methods would reveal and underpin a similar inherent structure in the articles
of both corpora is met to some extent, there are still several aspects that are problematic
and have no ready explanation. The authors acknowledge that additional research is
needed to shed more light on these aspects.
The book is easy to read andwell structured. It consists of a preface, nine chapters?
divided into two parts?and two appendices. Top-down methods (based on move
analysis and appeals analysis) and their application to direct-mail letters, biochem-
istry research articles, and fund-raising letters are described in Chapters 2?5. Bottom-
up methods (based on VBDUs) and their application to biology research articles and
spoken university lectures are presented in Chapters 6?8. The introductory Chapter 1
contains a synthetic overview of the several perspectives and purposes guiding dis-
course analysis, a useful distinction between register and genre, the motivation for the
book, and its research questions. The final Chapter 9 presents a critical comparison
between the two approaches and outlines the many questions to be addressed in fur-
ther studies and the directions to be explored in future research. The two appendices
document the steps included in multidimensional analysis (Appendix I) and list the
106
Book Reviews
lexico-grammatical features identified by the Biber tagger (Appendix II) and used in
multidimensional analyses.
Overall, Discourse on the Move is interesting and inspiring. It is a valuable work of
synthesis, where several previous approaches are combined to produce more extensive
and comprehensive findings. The title suggests that discourse analysis is moving for-
ward. This is indeed the impression that we have when reading the last pages of the
final chapter. The authors list studies, publication of which is forthcoming, that were
carried out using top-down and bottom-up approaches, and possible future directions
that range from the investigation of multimodal texts to the integration of ?contextual
analysis? through, for example, surveys or interviews with informants.
In the list of desiderata, I would personally prioritize systematic comparisons be-
tween the findings returned by the top-down and bottom-up analyses on the same
genre-specific corpus. This would allow us to assess whether the two methods are
basically overlapping and can be used interchangeably, or whether they are comple-
mentary, so that it is worth applying them both on the same corpus. Such comparisons
would also reveal important details?for example, whether multidimensional analyses
are more effective and more easily interpretable on top-down units of analysis (i.e.,
moves and appeals) or on bottom-up VBDUs, or whether there is a way of marshaling
the descriptive labels assigned to factor interpretations. As it is now, if we have a look
at the functional labels shown in Table 9.1 (pages 246?247), it is unclear to what extent
they are comparable.
The book is aimed at corpus linguists, but it can be informative also for those
computational linguists, NLP researchers, and language engineers who are keen on
incorporating language variation and genre specificities into computational models. For
instance, the identification of regular variational discourse patterns could be helpful to
fine-tune parsers and automatic summarizers.
As stated by the authors themselves, this book has only been able to ?scratch the
surface? of the corpus-based description of discourse organization. We look forward to
a rapid growth of this research area.
References
Hearst, Marti. 1994. Multi-paragraph
segmentation of expository texts. Technical
Report 94/790, Computer Science Division
(EECS), University of California, Berkeley.
Hearst, Marti. 1997. TextTiling: segmenting
text into multi-paragraph subtopic
passages. Computational Linguistics,
23(1):33?64.
Perelman, Chaim. 1982. The Realm of Rhetoric
(William Kluback, translator). University
of Notre Dame Press, South Bend, IN.
Swales, John. 1981. Aspects of Article
Introductions. University of Aston,
Birmingham, UK.
Swales, John. 1990. Genre Analysis: English in
Academic and Research Settings. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Marina Santini is an Honorary Research Fellow in the Humanities Advanced Technology and
Information Institute (HATII), University of Glasgow. She is a computational linguist interested in
genres, sentiment, and other discourse categories (also known as non-topical descriptors), as well
as in Web documents, corpus building, feature extraction, and classification algorithms. Santini?s
address is: Varvsgatan 25, 117 29 Stockholm, Sweden; e-mail: MarinaSantini.MS@gmail.com.
107

Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions, pages 699?706,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Implementing a Characterization of Genre for                              
Automatic Genre Identification of Web Pages 
 
Marina Santini 
NLTG 
University of Brighton 
UK 
M.Santini@brighton.ac.uk 
Richard Power 
Computing Department 
Open University 
UK 
r.power@open.ac.uk  
Roger Evans 
NLTG 
University of Brighton 
UK 
R.P.Evans@brighton.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract 
In this paper, we propose an 
implementable characterization of genre 
suitable for automatic genre 
identification of web pages. This 
characterization is implemented as an 
inferential model based on a modified 
version of Bayes? theorem. Such a model 
can deal with genre hybridism and 
individualization, two important forces 
behind genre evolution. Results show 
that this approach is effective and is 
worth further research. 
1 Introduction 
The term ?genre? is employed in virtually all 
cultural fields: literature, music, art, architecture, 
dance, pedagogy, hypermedia studies, computer-
mediated communication, and so forth. As has 
often been pointed out, it is hard to pin down the 
concept of genre from a unified perspective (cf. 
Kwasnik and Crowston, 2004). This lack is also 
experienced in the more restricted world of non-
literary or non-fictional document genres, such 
as professional or instrumental genres, where 
variation due to personal style is less pronounced 
than in literary genres. In particular, scholars 
working with practical genres focus upon a 
specific environment. For instance Swales (1990) 
develops his notion of genre in academic and 
research settings, Bathia (1993) in professional 
settings, and so on. In automatic genre 
classification studies, genres have often been 
seen as non-topical categories that could help 
reduce information overload (e.g. Mayer zu 
Eissen and Stein, 2004; Lim et al, 2005).  
Despite the lack of an agreed theoretical 
notion, genre is a well-established term, 
intuitively understood in its vagueness. What 
humans intuitively perceive is that there are 
categories created within a culture, a society or a 
community which are used to group documents 
that share some conventions. Each of these 
groups is a genre, i.e. a cultural object or artefact, 
purposely made to meet and streamline 
communicative needs. Genres show sets of 
standardized or conventional characteristics that 
make them recognizable, and this identity raises 
specific expectations.   
Together with conventions and expectations, 
genres have many other traits. We would like to 
focus on three traits, namely hybridism, 
individualization and evolution. Genres are not 
mutually exclusive and different genres can be 
merged into a single document, generating 
hybrid forms. Also, genres allow a certain 
freedom of variation and consequently can be 
individualized. Finally, genre repertoires are 
dynamic, i.e. they change over time, thus 
triggering genre change and evolution. It is also 
important to notice that before genre conventions 
become fully standardized, a genre does not have 
an official name. A genre name becomes 
acknowledged when the genre itself has an active 
role and a communicative function in a 
community or society (Swales, 1990). Before 
this acknowledgement, a genre shows hybrid or 
individualized forms, and indistinct functions. 
Putting all these traits together, we suggest the 
following broad theoretical characterization of 
genre of written texts: genres are named 
communication artefacts characterized by 
conventions, raising expectations, showing 
hybridism and individualization, and undergoing 
evolution. 
This characterization is flexible enough to 
encompass not only paper genres (both literary 
and practical genres), but also digital genres, and 
more specifically web genres. Web genres or 
cybergenres (Shepherd and Watters 1998) are 
those genres created by the combination of the 
use of the computer and the Internet.   
699
Genre hybridism and individualization are very 
evident on the web. In fact, web pages are often 
very hybrid because of the wider intra-genre 
variation and the smaller inter-genre 
differentiation. They can also be highly 
individualized because of the creative freedom 
provided by HTML tags (the building blocks of 
web pages) or programming languages such as 
Javascript. We suggest that genre hybridism and 
individualization can be seen as forces acting 
behind genre evolution. They allow the upgrade 
of existing genres and the creation of novel 
genres.  
The change of genre repertoire and the 
creation of new genres were well illustrated by 
Crowston and Williams (2000) and Shepherd and 
Watters (1998). Both these studies describe a 
similar process. Web genres can start either as 
reproductions or as unprecedented types of 
documents. In the first case, existing genres are 
gradually upgraded and modified to adapt to 
potentials offered by the web. These variants 
might become very different from the original 
genres with time passing by. In the second case, 
novel genres can be generated from specific 
needs and requirements of the web. Crowston 
and Williams (2000) have traced this evolution 
through a manual qualitative survey of 1000 web 
pages. Shepherd and Watters (1998) have 
proposed a fuzzy taxonomy for web genres. 
We would like to add a new force in this 
scenario, namely emerging genres. Emerging 
genre are those genres still in formation, not fully 
standardized and without any name or fixed 
function. For example, before 1998 web logs (or 
blogs) were already present on the web, but they 
were not yet identified as a genre. They were just 
?web pages?, with similar characteristics and 
functions. In 1999, suddenly a community sprang 
up using this new genre (Blood, 2000). Only at 
this point, the genre ?web log? or ?blog? started 
being spread and being recognized. 
Emerging genres may account for all those 
web pages, which remain unclassified or 
unclassifiable (cf. Crowston and Williams, 2000) 
because they show genre mixture or no genre at 
all. Authors often point out that assigning a genre 
to a web page might be difficult and 
controversial (e.g. Roussinov et al, 2001; Meyer 
zu Eissen and Stein, 2004; Shepherd et al, 2004) 
because web pages can appear hybrid or peculiar. 
Genre-mixed web pages or web pages without 
any evident genre can represent the antecedent of 
a future genre, but currently they might be 
considered as belonging to a genre still in 
formation. It is also important to highlight, 
however, that since the acknowledgement of 
genre relies on social acceptance, it is impossible 
to define the exact point at which a new genre 
emerges (Crowston and Williams 2000). The 
multi-facetted model capable of hosting new 
genres wished for by Kwasnik and Crowston 
(2004), and the adaptive learning system that can 
identify genre as they emerge announced by 
Shepherd et al (2004) are hard to implement.  
For this reason, the focus of the method proposed 
below is not to detect emerging genres, but to 
show a flexible approach capable of giving 
account of genre hybridism and 
individualization.  
Flexible genre classification systems are 
uncommon in automatic genre classification 
studies. Apart from two notable exceptions, 
namely Kessler et al (1997) and Rehm (2006) 
whose implementations require extensive manual 
annotation (Kessler et al, 1997) or analysis 
(Rehm, 2006), genres are usually classified as 
single-label discrete entities, relying on the 
simplified assumption that a document can be 
assigned to only one genre. 
In this paper, we propose a tuple 
representation that maps onto the theoretical 
characterization of genre suggested above and 
that can be implemented without much overhead. 
The implementable tuple includes the following 
attributes: 
(genre(s)) of web pages=<linguistic features, HTML, text types, [...]> 
This tuple means that web pages can have zero, 
one or more genres ((genre(s)) of web pages) 
and that this situation can be captured by a 
number of attributes. For the time being these 
attributes are limited to linguistic features, 
HTML tags, text types, but in future other 
attributes can be added ([...]). The attributes of 
the tuple can capture the presence of textual 
conventions or their absence. The presence of 
conventions brings about expectations, and can 
be used to identify acknowledged genres. The 
absence of conventions brings about hybridism 
and individualisation and can be interpreted in 
terms of emerging genres and genre evolution.  
In this paper we present a simple model that 
implement the tuple and can deal with this 
complex situation. This model is based on 
statistical inference, performs automatic text 
analysis and has a classification scheme that 
includes zero labels, one label or multiple labels. 
More specifically, in addition to the traditional 
single-label classification, a zero-label 
700
classification is useful when, for example, a web 
page is so peculiar from a textual point of view 
that it does not show any similarity with the 
genres included in the model. Conversely, a 
multi-label classification is useful when web 
pages show several genres at the same time. As 
there is no standard evaluation metrics for a 
comprehensive evaluation of such a model, we 
defer to further research the assessment of the 
model as a whole. In this paper, we report a 
partial evaluation based on single-label 
classification accuracy and predictions.  
From a theoretical point of view, the 
inferential model makes a clear-cut separation 
between the concepts of ?text types? and 
?genres?. Text types are rhetorical/discourse 
patterns dictated by the purposes of a text. For 
example, when the purpose of a text producer is 
to narrate, the narration text type is used. On the 
contrary, genres are cultural objects created by a 
society or a community, characterized by a set of 
linguistic and non-linguistic conventions, which 
can be fulfilled, personalized, transgressed, 
colonized, etc., but that are nonetheless 
recognized by the members of the society and 
community that have created them, raising 
predictable expectations. For example, what we 
expect from a personal blog is diary-form 
narration of the self, where opinions and 
comments are freely expressed.  
The model presented here is capable of 
inferring text types from web pages using a 
modified form of Bayes? theorem, and derive 
genres through if-then rules.  
With this model, emerging genres can be 
hypothesized through the analysis of unexpected 
combinations of text types and/or other traits in a 
large number of web pages. However, this 
potential will be investigated in future work. The 
results presented here are just a first step towards 
a more dynamic view of a genre classification 
system. 
Automatic identification of text types and 
genres represents a great advantage in many 
fields because manual annotation is expensive 
and time-consuming. Apart from the benefits that 
it could bring to information retrieval, 
information extraction, digital libraries and so 
forth, automatic identification of text types and 
genres could be particularly useful for problems 
that natural language processing (NLP) is 
concerned with. For example, parsing accuracy 
could be increased if parsers were tested on 
different text types or genres, as certain 
constructions may occur only in certain types of 
texts. The same is true for Part-of-Speech (POS) 
tagging and word sense disambiguation. More 
accurate NLP tools could in turn be beneficial for 
automatic genre identification, because many 
features used for this task are extracted from the 
output of taggers and parsers, such as POS 
frequencies and syntactic constructions. 
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 
reports previous characterization that have been 
implemented as statistical or computational 
models; Section 3 illustrates the attributes of the 
tuple; Section 4 describes the inferential model 
and reports evaluation; finally in Section 5 we 
draw some conclusions and outline points for 
future work. 
2 Background 
Although both Crowston and Williams (2000) 
and Shepherd and Watters (1998) have well 
described the evolution of genres on the web, 
when it comes to the actual genre identification 
of web pages (Roussinov et al, 2001; and 
Shepherd et al, 2004, respectively), they set 
aside the evolutionary aspect and consider genre 
from a static point of view. For Crowston and 
Williams (2000) and the follow-up Roussinov et 
al. (2001) most genres imply a combination of 
<purpose/function, form, content>, and, as they 
are complex entities, a multi-facetted 
classification seems appropriate (Kwasnik and 
Crowston, 2004). For Shepherd and Watters 
(1998) and the practical implementation 
Shepherd et al (2004), cybergenres or web 
genres are characterized by the triple <content, 
form, functionality>, where functionality is a key 
evolutionary aspect afforded by the web. 
Crowston and co-workers have not yet 
implemented the combination of 
<purpose/function, form, content> together with 
the facetted classification in any automatic 
classification model, but the tuple <content, 
form, function> has been employed by Rehm 
(2006) for an original approach to single-web 
genre analysis, the personal home pages in the 
domain of academia. Rehm (2006) describes the 
relationship between HTML and web genres and 
depicts the evolutionary processes that shape and 
form web genres. In the practical 
implementation, however, he focuses only on a 
single web genre, the academic?s personal home 
page, that is seen from a static point of view. As 
far as we know, Boese and Howe (2005) is the 
only study that tries to implement a diachronic 
view on genre of web pages using the triple 
701
<style, form, content>. This study has the 
practical aim of finding out whether feature sets 
for genre identification need to be changed or 
updated because of genre evolution. They tried to 
detect the change through the use of a classifier 
on two parallel corpora separated by a six-year 
gap. Although this study does not focus on how 
to detect newly created web genres or how to 
deal with difficult web pages, it is an interesting 
starting point for traditional diachronic analysis 
applied to automatic genre classification.  
In contrast, the model described in this paper 
aims at pointing out genre hybridism and 
individualisation in web pages. These two 
phenomena can be interpreted in terms of genre 
evolution in future investigations. 
3 Attributes of the Tuple 
The attributes <linguistic features, HTML tags, 
text types> of the tuple represent the 
computationally tractable version of the 
combination <purpose, form> often used to 
define the concept of genre (e.g. cf. Roussinov et 
al. 2001).  
In our view, the purpose corresponds to text 
types, i.e. the rhetorical patterns that indicate 
what a text has been written for. For example, a 
text can be produced to narrate, instruct, argue, 
etc. Narration, instruction, and argumentation are 
examples of text types. As stressed earlier, text 
types are usually considered separate entities 
from genres (cf. Biber, 1988; Lee, 2001). 
Form is a more heterogeneous attribute. Form 
can refer to linguistic form and to the shape 
(layout etc.). From an automatic point of view, 
linguistic form is represented by linguistic 
features, while shape is represented by HTML 
tags. Also the functionality attribute introduced 
by Shepherd and Watters (1998) can be seen in 
terms of HTML tags (e.g. tags for links and 
scripts). While content words or terms show 
some drawbacks for automatic genre 
identification (cf. Boese and Howe, 2005), there 
are several types of linguistic features that return 
good results, for instance, Biberian features 
(Biber, 1988). In the model presented here we 
use a mixture of Biberian features and additional 
syntactic traits. The total number of features used 
in this implementation of the model is 100. 
These features are available online at: 
http://www.nltg.brighton.ac.uk/home/Marina.Santini/ 
4 Inferential Model 
The inferential model presented here (partially 
discussed in Santini (2006a) combines the 
advantages of deductive and inductive 
approaches. It is deductive because the co-
occurrence and the combination of features in 
text types is decided a priori by the linguist on 
the basis on previous studies, and not derived by 
a statistical procedure, which is too biased 
towards high frequencies (some linguistic 
phenomena can be rare, but they are nonetheless 
discriminating). It is also inductive because the 
inference process is corpus-based, which means 
that it is based on a pool of data used to predict 
some text types. A few handcrafted if-then rules 
combine the inferred text types with other traits 
(mainly layout and functionality tags) in order to 
suggest genres. These rules are worked out either 
on the basis of previous genre studies or of a 
cursory qualitative analysis. For example, rules 
for personal home pages are based on the 
observations by Roberts (1998), Dillon and 
Gushrowski (2000). When previous studies were 
not available, as in the cases of eshops or search 
pages, the author of this paper has briefly 
analysed these genres to extract generalizations 
useful to write few rules.  
It is important to stress that there is no hand-
coding in the model. Web pages were randomly 
downloaded from genre-specific portals or 
archives without any further annotation. Web 
pages were parsed, linguistic features were 
automatically extracted and counted from the 
parsed outputs, while frequencies of HTML tags 
were automatically counted from the raw web 
pages. All feature frequencies were normalized 
by the length of web pages (in tokens) and then 
submitted to the model. 
As stated earlier, the inferential model makes 
a clear-cut separation between text types and 
genres. The four text types included in this 
implementation are: descriptive_narrative, 
expository_informational, argumentative_persuasive, 
and instructional. The linguistic features for these 
text types come from previous (corpus-)linguistic 
studies (Werlich 1976; Biber, 1988; etc.), and are 
not extracted from the corpus using statistical 
methods. For each web page the model returns 
the probability of belonging to the four text 
types. For example, a web page can have 0.9 
probabilities of being argumentative_persuasive, 
0.7 of being instructional and so on. Probabilities 
are interpreted in terms of degree or gradation. 
For example, a web page with 0.9 probabilities 
702
of being argumentative_persuasive shows a high 
gradation of argumentation. Gradations/ 
probabilities are ranked for each web page.  
The computation of text types as intermediate 
step between linguistic and non-linguistic 
features and genres is useful if we see genres as 
conventionalised and standardized cultural 
objects raising expectations. For example, what 
we expect from an editorial is an ?opinion? or a 
?comment? by the editor, which represents, 
broadly speaking, the view of the newspaper or 
magazine. Opinions are a form of 
?argumentation?. Argumentation is a rhetorical 
pattern, or text type, expressed by a combination 
of linguistic features. If a document shows a high 
probability of being argumentative, i.e. it has a 
high gradation of argumentation, this document 
has a good chance of belonging to argumentative 
genres, such as editorials, sermons, pleadings, 
academic papers, etc. It has less chances of being 
a story, a biography, etc. We suggest that the 
exploitation of this knowledge about the 
textuality of a web page can add flexibility to the 
model and this flexibility can capture hybridism 
and individualization, the key forces behind 
genre evolution. 
4.1 The Web Corpus  
The inferential model is based on a corpus 
representative of the web. In this implementation 
of the model we approximated one of the 
possible compositions of a random slice of the 
web, statistically supported by reliable standard 
error measures. We built a web corpus with four 
BBC web genres (editorial, Do-It-Yourself 
(DIY) mini-guide, short biography, and feature), 
seven novel web genres (blog, eshop, FAQs, 
front page, listing, personal home page, search 
page), and 1,000 unclassified web pages from 
SPIRIT collection (Joho and Sanderson, 2004). 
The total number of web pages is 2,480. The four 
BBC genres represent traditional genres adapted 
to the functionalities of the web, while the seven 
genres are novel web genres, either 
unprecedented or showing a loose kinship with 
paper genres. Proportions are purely arbitrary 
and based on the assumption that at least half of 
web users tend to use recognized genre patterns 
in order to achieve felicitous communication. We 
consider the sampling distribution of the sample 
mean as approximately normal, following the 
Central Limit Theorem. This allows us to make 
inferences even if the population distribution is 
irregular or if variables are very skewed or 
highly discrete. The web corpus is available at: 
http://www.nltg.brighton.ac.uk/home/Marina.Santini/ 
4.2 Bayesian Inference: Inferring with 
Odds-Likelihood 
The inferential model is based on a modified 
version of Bayes? theorem. This modified 
version uses a form of Bayes? theorem called 
odds-likelihood or subjective Bayesian method 
(Duda and Reboh, 1984) and is capable of 
solving more complex reasoning problems than 
the basic version.  Odds is a number that tells us 
how much more likely one hypothesis is than the 
other. Odds and probabilities contain exactly the 
same information and are interconvertible. The 
main difference with original Bayes? theorem is 
that in the modified version much of the effort is 
devoted to weighing the contributions of 
different pieces of evidence in establishing the 
match with a hypothesis. These weights are 
confidence measures: Logical Sufficiency (LS) 
and Logical Necessity (LN). LS is used when the 
evidence is known to exist (larger value means 
greater sufficiency), while LN is used when 
evidence is known NOT to exist (a smaller value 
means greater necessity). LS is typically a 
number > 1, and LN is typically a number < 1. 
Usually LS*LN=1. In this implementation of the 
model, LS and LN were set to 1.25 and 0.8 
respectively, on the basis of previous studies and 
empirical adjustments. Future work will include 
more investigation on the tuning of these two 
parameters.  
The steps included in the model are the 
following: 
1) Representation of the web in a corpus that is 
approximately normal. 
2) Extraction, count and normalization of genre-
revealing features. 
3) Conversion of normalized counts into z-scores, 
which represent the deviation from the ?norm? 
coming out from the web corpus. The concept of 
?gradation? is based on these deviations from the 
norm. 
4) Conversion of z-scores into probabilities, which 
means that feature frequencies are seen in terms 
of probabilities distribution. 
5) Calculation of prior odds from prior probabilities 
of a text type. The prior probability for each of 
the four text types was set to 0.25 (all text types 
were given an equal chance to appear in a web 
page). Prior odds are calculated with the formula:   
 
prOdds(H)=prProb(H)/1-prProb(H)  
 
6) Calculation of weighted features, or multipliers 
(Mn). If a feature or piece of evidence (E) has a 
703
probability >=0.5, LS is applied, otherwise LN is 
applied. Multipliers are calculated with the 
following formulae: 
 
if  Prob (E)>=0.5 then  
M(E)=1+(LS-1)(Prob(E)-0.5)/0.25 
if Prob (E)<0.5 then 
M(E)=1-(1-LN)(0.5-Prob(E))/0.25 
 
7) Multiplication of weighted probabilities together, 
according to the co-occurrence decided by the 
analyst on the basis of previous studies in order to 
infer text types. In this implementation the 
feature co-occurrence was decided following 
Werlich (1976) and Biber (1988). 
8) Posterior odds for the text type is then calculated 
by multiplying prior odds (step 5) with co-
occurrence of weighted features (step 7).  
9) Finally, posterior odds is re-converted into a 
probability value with the following formula: 
 
Prob(H)=Odds(H)/1+Odds(H) 
 
Although odds contains exactly the same 
information as probability values, they are not 
constrained in 0-1 range, like probabilities.  
Once text types have been inferred, if-then 
rules are applied for determining genres. In 
particular, for each of the seven web genre 
included in this implementation, few hand-
crafted rules combine the two predominant text 
types per web genre with additional traits. For 
example, the actual rules for deriving a blog are 
as simple as the following ones: 
 
if (text_type_1=descr_narrat_1|argum_pers_1) 
if (text_type_2=descr_narrat_2|argum_pers_2) 
if (page_length=LONG) 
if (blog_words >= 0.5 probabilities) 
then good blog candidate. 
 
That is, if a web page has description_narration 
and argumentation_persuasion as the two 
predominant text types, and the page length is > 
500 words (LONG), and the probability value for 
blog words is >=0.5 (blog words are terms such 
as web log, weblog, blog, journal, diary, posted 
by, comments, archive plus names of the days 
and months), then this web page is a good blog 
candidate.  
For other web genres, the number of rules is 
higher, but it is worth saying that in the current 
implementation, rules are useful to understand 
how features interact and correlate.  
One important thing to highlight is that each 
genre is computed independently for each web 
page. Therefore a web page can be assigned to 
different genres (Table 1) or to none (Table 2).  
Multi-label and no-label classification cannot be 
evaluated with standard metrics and their 
evaluation requires further research. In the next 
subsection we present the evaluation of the 
single label classification returned by the 
inferential model.  
4.3 Evaluation of the Results 
Single-label classification. For the seven web 
genres we compared the classification accuracy 
of the inferential model with the accuracy of 
classifiers. Two standard classifiers ? SVM and 
Naive Bayes from Weka Machine Learning 
Workbench (Witten, Frank, 2005) ? were run on 
the seven web genres. The stratified cross-
validated accuracy returned by these classifiers 
for one seed is ca. 89% for SVM and ca. 67% for 
Na?ve Bayes. The accuracy achieved by the 
inferential model is ca. 86%. 
An accuracy of 86% is a good achievement for 
a first implementation, especially if we consider 
that the standard Na?ve Bayes classifier returns 
an accuracy of about 67%.  Although slightly 
lower than SVM, an accuracy of 86% looks 
promising because this evaluation is only on a 
single label. Ideally the inferential model could 
be more accurate than SVM if more labels could 
be taken into account. For example, the actual 
classification returned by the inferential model is 
shown in Table 1. The web pages in Table 1 are 
blogs but they also contain either sequences of 
questions and answers or are organized like a 
how-to document, like in the snippet in Figure 1 
 
blog 
augustine 
0000024 
GOOD 
blog 
BAD 
eshop 
GOOD 
faq 
BAD 
frontpage 
BAD 
listing 
BAD 
php 
BAD 
spage 
blog 
britblog 
00000107 
GOOD 
blog 
BAD 
eshop 
GOOD 
faq 
BAD 
frontpage 
BAD 
listing 
BAD 
php 
BAD 
spage 
Table 1. Examples of multi-label classification 
 
Figure 1. Snippet blog_augustine_0000024 
 
704
The snippet shows an example of genre 
colonization, where the vocabulary and text 
forms of one genre (FAQs/How to in this case) 
are inserted in another (cf. Beghtol, 2001). These 
strategies are frequent on the web and might give 
rise to new web genres. The model also captures 
a situation where the genre labels available in the 
system are not suitable for the web page under 
analysis, like in the example in Table 2. 
 
SPRT_010_049 
_112_0055685 
BAD 
blog 
BAD 
eshop 
BAD 
faq 
BAD 
frontpage 
BAD 
listing 
BAD 
php 
BAD 
spage 
Table 2. Example of zero label classification 
This web page (shown in Figure 2) from the 
unannotated SPIRIT collection (see Section 4.1) 
does not receive any of the genre labels currently 
available in the system. 
 
Figure 2. SPRT_010_049_112_0055685 
If the pattern shown in Figure 2 keeps on 
recurring even when more web genres are added 
to the system, a possible interpretation could be 
that this pattern might develop into a stable web 
genre in future. If this happens, the system will 
be ready to host such a novelty. In the current 
implementation, only a few rules need to be 
added. In future implementations hand-crafted 
rules can be replaced by other methods. For 
example, an interesting adaptive solution has 
been explored by Segal and Kephart (2000). 
Predictions. Precision of predictions on one web 
genre is used as an additional evaluation metric. 
The predictions on the eshop genre issued by the 
inferential model are compared with the 
predictions returned by two SVM models built 
with two different web page collections, Meyer-
zu-Eissen collection and the 7-web-genre 
collection (Santini, 2006).  Only the predictions 
on eshops are evaluated, because eshop is the 
only web genre shared by the three models. The 
number of predictions is shown in Table 3. 
 
Models Total 
Predictions 
Correct 
Predictions 
Incorrect 
Predictions and 
Uncertain 
Meyer-zu-Eissen 
and SVM 
6 3 3 
7-web-genre and 
SVM 
11 3 8 
Web corpus and 
inferential model 
17 6 11 
Table 3. Predictions on eshops 
The number of retrieved web pages (Total 
Predictions) is higher when the inferential model 
is used. Also the value of precision (Correct 
Predictions) is higher. The manual evaluation of 
the predictions is available online at: 
http://www.nltg.brighton.ac.uk/home/Marina.Santini/ 
5 Conclusions and Future Work 
From a technical point of view, the inferential 
model presented in this paper is a simple starting 
point for reflection on a number of issues in 
automatic identification of genres in web pages. 
Although parameters need a better tuning and 
text type and genre palettes need to be enlarged, 
it seems that the inferential approach is effective, 
as shown by the preliminary evaluation reported 
in Section 4.3.  
More importantly, this model instantiates a 
theoretical characterization of genre that includes 
hybridism and individualization, and interprets 
these two elements as the forces behind genre 
evolution. It is also worth noticing that the 
inclusion of the attribute ?text types? in the tuple 
gives flexibility to the model. In fact, the model 
can assign not only a single genre label, as in 
previous approaches to genre, but also multiple 
labels or no label at all. Ideally other 
computationally tractable attributes can be added 
to the tuple to increase flexibility and provide a 
multi-facetted classification, for example register 
or layout analysis. 
However, other issues remain open. First, the 
possibility of a comprehensive evaluation of the 
model is to be explored. So far, only tentative 
evaluation schemes exist for multi-label 
classification (e.g. McCallum, 1999). Further 
research is still needed.  
Second, in this model the detection of emerging 
genres can be done indirectly through the 
analysis of an unexpected combination of text 
types and/or genres. Other possibilities can be 
explored in future. Also the objective evaluation 
705
of emerging genres requires further research and 
discussion. 
More feasible in the short term is an 
investigation of the scalability of the model, 
when additional web pages, classified or not 
classified by genre, are added to the web corpus.  
Also the possibility of replacing hand-crafted 
rules with some learning methodology can be 
explored in the near future. Apart from the 
approach suggested by Segal and Kephart (2000) 
mentioned above, many other pieces of 
experience are now available on adaptive 
learning (for example those reported in the 
EACL 2006 on Workshop on Adaptive Text 
Extraction and Mining).  
References 
Bathia V. 1993. Analysing Genre. Language Use in 
Professional Settings. Longman, London-NY. 
Beghtol C. 2001. The Concept of Genre and Its 
Characteristics. Bulletin of The American Society 
for Inform. Science and Technology, Vol. 27 (2). 
Biber D. 1988. Variations across speech and writing. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Blood, R. 2000. Weblogs: A History and Perspective, 
Rebecca's Pocket.  
Boese E. and Howe A. 2005. Effects of Web 
Document Evolution on Genre Classification. 
CIKM 2005, Germany. 
Crowston K. and Williams M. 2000. Reproduced and 
Emergent Genres of Communication on the World-
Wide Web, The Information Society, 16(3), 201-
216. 
Dillon, A. and Gushrowski, B. 2000. Genres and the 
Web: is the personal home page the first uniquely 
digital genre?, JASIS, 51(2). 
Duda R. and Reboh R. 1984. AI and decision making: 
The PROSPECTOR experience. In Reitman, W. 
(Ed.), Artificial Intelligence Applications for 
Business, Norwood, NJ. 
Joho H. and Sanderson M. 2004. The SPIRIT 
collection: an overview of a large web collection, 
SIGIR Forum, December 2004, Vol. 38(2). 
Kessler B., Numberg G. and Sh?tze H. (1997), 
Automatic Detection of Text Genre, Proc. 35 ACL 
and 8  EACL. 
Kwasnik B and Crowston K. 2004. A Framework for 
Creating a Facetted Classification for Genres: 
Addressing Issues of Multidimensionality. Proc. 
37 Hawaii Intern. Conference on System Science. 
Lee D. 2001. Genres, Registers, Text types, Domains, 
and Styles: Clarifying the concepts and navigating 
a path through the BNC Jungle. Language 
Learning and Technology, 5, 37-72. 
Lim, C., Lee, K. and Kim G. 2005. Automatic Genre 
Detection of Web Documents, in Su K., Tsujii J., 
Lee J., Kwong O. Y. (eds.) Natural Language 
Processing, Springer, Berlin. 
Meyer zu Eissen S. and Stein B. 2004. Genre 
Classification of Web Pages: User Study and 
Feasibility Analysis, in Biundo S., Fruhwirth T., 
Palm G. (eds.), Advances in Artificial Intelligence, 
Springer, Berlin, 256-269. 
McCallum A. 1999. Multi-Label Text Classification 
with a Mixture Model Trained by EM, AAAI'99 
Workshop on Text Learning. 
Rehm G. 2006. Hypertext Types and Markup 
Languages. In Metzing D. and Witt A. (eds.), 
Linguistic Modelling of Information and Markup 
Languages. Springer, 2006 (in preparation). 
Roberts, G. 1998. The Home Page as Genre: A 
Narrative Approach, Proc. 31 Hawaii Intern. 
Conference on System Sciences. 
Roussinov D., Crowston K., Nilan M., Kwasnik B., 
Cai J., Liu X. 2001. Genre Based Navigation on 
the Web, Proc. 34 Hawaii Intern. Conference on 
System Sciences. 
Santini M. 2006a. Identifying Genres of Web Pages, 
TALN 06 - Actes de la 13 Conference sur le 
Traitement Automatique des Langues Naturelles, 
Vol. 1, 307-316. 
Santini M. 2006b. Some issues in Automatic Genre 
Classification of Web Pages,  JADT 06 ? Actes des 
8 Journ?es internationales d?analyse statistiques 
des donn?s textuelles, Vol 2, 865-876. 
Segal R. and Kephart J. 2000. Incremental Learning 
in SwiftFile. Proc.  17 Intern. Conf. on Machine 
Learning. 
Shepherd M. and Watters C. 1998. The Evolution of 
Cybergenre,  Proc. 31 Hawaii Intern. Conference 
on System Sciences. 
Shepherd M.,  Watters C., Kennedy A. 2004. 
Cybergenre: Automatic Identification of Home 
Pages on the Web. Journal of Web Engineering, 
Vol. 3(3-4), 236-251. 
Swales, J. Genre Analysis. English in academic and 
research settings, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, 1990. 
Werlich E. (1976). A Text Grammar of English. 
Quelle & Meyer, Heidelberg. 
706
Interpreting Genre Evolution on the Web:                             
Preliminary Results 
 
 
 Marina Santini 
University of Brighton 
Lewes Rd, Moulsecoomb Campus, 
Brighton, BN2 4GJ (UK) 
Marina.Santini@itri.brighton.ac.uk 
 
 
  
 
Abstract 
The study presented in this paper 
explores the current state of genre 
evolution on the web through web users? 
perception. More precisely, it explores 
the perception of genres when users are 
faced not only with prototypical genre 
exemplars but also with hybrid or 
individualized web pages, and interpret 
the subjects? perception in term of genre 
evolution Although this exploration is 
partial (23 labels to be assigned to 25 
web pages), it offers an interesting 
section of the genre repertoire on the 
web. This study can be also seen as a 
confirmatory study, because it confirms 
that a number of recent web genres, 
unprecedented in the paper world (such 
as home page, FAQs, and blog) can be 
recognized by the subjects; others have 
not fully emerged and many web users 
are not familiar with their new genre 
labels; finally some web pages show a 
high level of ambiguity and web users 
largely disagree on assigning labels to 
them. 
1 Introduction 
The study presented in this paper has been 
designed to explore the current state of genre 
evolution on the web through web users? 
perception. The web can be interpreted, among 
other things, as a genre repertoire in evolution 
because there are still many genre labels which 
have not been consolidated and many web pages 
that cannot be sorted into a recognized and 
acknowledged genre. The interpretation  of the 
web as a genre repertoire in evolution has been 
developed within a research project on automatic 
identification of genre in web pages (Santini, 
2006b). This interpretation is an attempt to 
explain the high level of hybridism and 
individualization of many web pages, which 
result in classification intractability. The study 
reported in this paper shows that humans have 
the same problems as classification algorithms 
when it comes to less standardized and 
conventionalized web pages.  
As it has often been pointed out (for example, 
cf. Kwasnik and Crowston, 2005), it is hard to 
pin down the concept of genre from a single 
perspective or to find an agreed definition of 
what genre is. This lack is also experienced in 
the more restricted world of non-literary or non-
fictional genres, such as professional or 
instrumental genres, where the variation due to 
personal style is less pronounced than in literary 
genres. In particular, scholars working with 
practical genres focus upon a specific 
environment. For instance Swales (1990) 
develops his notion of genre in academic and 
research settings, Bathia (1993) and Trosborg 
(2000) in professional settings, Yates and 
Orlikowsky (1992) within organizational 
communication. Despite the lack of an agreed 
theoretical notion, genre is a well-established 
term (cf. Karlgren, 2004), intuitively understood 
in its vagueness. Classifying documents by genre 
is a common operation that humans perform with 
more or less effort.  
Genres can be seen as ?artifacts?, i.e. cultural 
objects created to meet and streamline 
communicative needs. These cultural objects 
represent the role that a certain type of 
documents plays in an environment. Each genre 
shows a set of standardized or conventional 
characteristics that makes it recognizable among 
32
others, and this kind of identity raises specific 
expectations in the recipients, despite the 
fuzziness of genre labels (cf. Santini, 2005). 
Being cultural objects, showing common 
conventions and raising similar expectations are 
unifying traits. Together with these, there is a 
number of separating traits, such as hybridism, 
individualization, and evolution. In fact, genres 
are not mutually exclusive and different genres 
can be merged in a single document, generating 
hybrid forms. Genres are based on conventions, 
but allow a certain freedom of  variation and 
consequently can be individualized.  
Being artifacts, sharing conventions and 
expectations, showing hybridism and 
individualization, and undergoing evolution are 
important traits characterizing all sorts of genres. 
More precisely, genres can be defined as cultural 
artifacts, i.e. objects linked to a culture, a society 
or a community, bearing standardized features 
(conventions) but leaving space for creativity 
(individualization). On the one hand, 
standardized and recurrent features induce 
predictable expectations in the receivers. On the 
other hand, the freedom allowed by creativity 
allow genres to change, evolve, and be created to 
meet new needs (genre evolution), especially 
under the impulse of a new communication 
medium. While the change is still ongoing, i.e. 
before a modified genre is redefined, or a new 
genre is identified with a new name, documents 
show mixed forms and functions (genre 
hybridism). 
This view of genre is flexible enough to 
encompass not only paper genres (both literary 
and practical genres), but also digital genres and, 
more specifically, web genres, such as the 
personal home page. The personal home page 
has no evident antecedent in the paper world (cf. 
Dillon and Gushrowski, 2000). It sprang up on 
the web as a new cultural object servicing the 
community of web users. When browsing a 
personal home page, web users expect a blend of 
standardized information (self-narration, 
personal interests, contact details, and often 
pictures related to one?s life) and personal touch.  
Another important thing to notice is that 
before genre conventions become fully 
standardized, genres do not have an official 
name. A genre name becomes acknowledged 
when the genre itself has a role and a 
communicative function in a community or 
society (G?rlach, 2004: 9). Before this 
acknowledgement, a genre shows hybrid or 
individualized forms, and undefined functions. 
For example, before 1998 web logs (or blogs) 
were already present on the Web, but they were 
not identified as a genre. They were just ?web 
pages?, with similar characteristics and 
functions. In 1999, suddenly a community sprang 
up using this new genre (Blood, 2000). Only at 
this point, the genre label ?web log? or ?blog? 
started spreading and being recognized. 
Genre hybridism and individualization are 
evident on the web, and play an important role in 
the change and the creation of new genres. In 
fact, web pages ? which can be considered as a 
new kind of document, much more unpredictable 
and customized than paper documents (Santini, 
2006a) ? are often hybrid because of intra-genre 
and inter-genre variations. They are also highly 
individualized because of the creative freedom 
provided by HTML or XML tags (the building 
blocks of web pages) or programming languages 
such as Javascript. On the web, new genres are 
constantly added (blogs, clogs, eshops, wikis, 
etc.)  and traditional genres are adapted or 
updated in order to include more or different 
functionalities (online front pages, ezines, net 
ads, etc.). Genres such as emails, newsletters, 
search pages, eshops, etc. were a futuristic 
prophecy only 10 or 15 years ago, while today 
they belong to the normal life of a web user. 
Presumably, other genres will soon be added to 
meet new communicative needs brought about 
by new technologies. 
As any other evolutions, also genre evolution 
proceeds along the axis of time. It is a diachronic 
process. There must be a ?before? and an ?after?. 
What often hallmarks a ?before? and an ?after? is 
the introduction of a new communication 
medium within a culture, a society, a community. 
The added value of studying genres on the web 
(a new medium) is represented by the possibility 
of following the development of genres and 
genres repertoires live, i.e. while it is taking 
place, and not a posteriori. That is, on the web 
we can capture synchronically a diachronic 
process. From a synchronic point of view, the 
genre repertoire is a continuum, where there are 
three forces interacting: what we bring from the 
past (reproduced genres), what is new or adapted 
to the new environment (novel genres and 
adapted genres), what is going to emerge and is 
not fully formed yet (emerging genres).  
This view of genre evolution complements 
previous studies on the same subject (cf. 
Crowston and Williams, 1997; Shepherd and 
Watters, 1998; Kwasnik and Crowston, 2005). 
The main contribution of the synchronic 
33
continuum is that an additional force has been 
acknowledged to take part in the evolution 
process, i.e. emerging genres. Emerging genres 
are those that are not fully standardized, that are 
still in formation and for which a genre label has 
not been created or have a label which is still 
opaque to the majority of users. Currently many 
web pages are in this phase of evolution, 
showing a high level of hybridism or 
individualization. We suggest that the subjects? 
perception of these web pages can be interpreted 
in term of genre evolution.  
The study reported in this paper provides a 
snapshot of the current state of the genre 
repertoire of web pages seen through the 
perception of web users. Although this view is 
partial (23 labels to be assigned to 25 web 
pages), it offers an interesting section of the 
genre repertoire on the web. This study can be 
also seen as a confirmatory study, because it 
confirms that a number of recent web genres, 
unprecedented in the paper world (such as home 
page, FAQs, blog) can be recognized by the 
subjects; others have not fully emerged and 
many web users are not familiar with their new 
genre labels; finally some web pages show a high 
level of ambiguity and web users largerly 
disagree on assigning labels to them. 
The article is organized as follows: Section 2 
presents a short overview of previous work; 
Section 3 describes the web study and presents 
preliminary results; in Section 4 some 
conclusions are drawn.  
2 Previous Work 
No studies have been carried out so far on users? 
perception of a genre repertoire in transition.  
Crowston and Williams (1997) were the first 
who reported on the genre repertoire on the web. 
They identified 48 reproduced and emergent 
genres in a sample of about 1,000 web pages. 
A few user studies were carried out with the 
more pragmatic approach of exploring the 
usefulness of genre to improve web searches and 
defining a genre palette appropriate for this 
purpose. The most comprehensive study related 
to genre effectiveness for web searching is 
recent. Rosso (2005) carried out a series of four 
linked experiments, all based on human subjects. 
Quite surprisingly, the conclusion drawn by the 
author was that genre-annotated search results 
produced no significant improvement in 
participants? ability to make more consistent or 
faster assessment on the relevance of search 
results (Rosso, 2005: 133-179). In fact, only 17 
of 32 participants reported noticing the genre 
label (Rosso, 2005: 176). Most probably, as 
pointed out by the author, this outcome was 
influenced by the difficulty and complexity of 
the task, together with the limitations of the 
setting (Rosso, 2005: 170-172). 
Rosso?s attempt to assess the relevance of 
search results including genre labels was almost 
unique. All other studies with web users, in 
contrast, did not provide any assessment of how 
well genres improved a web search. These 
studies are more like surveys on users? 
preferences in terms of useful non-topical 
categories that can help restrict web searches. 
Along this line, Meyer zu Eissen and Stein 
(2004) built a genre palette for the web using two 
criteria: usability and feasibility. Their user study 
was based on a questionnaire where they asked 
about search engine use, usefulness of genre 
classification, and usefulness of genre classes. 
Interestingly, the authors note that one of the 
inherent problems of genre classification is that 
?even humans are not able to consistently specify 
the genre of a given page? because web pages 
have different functions, i.e. they might be 
hybrid forms, as in the case of product 
information sites that are combined with a 
shopping interface.  
Roussinov et al (2001) carried out a 
exploratory study of web users in order to 
identify what genres they most/least frequently 
come in contact with, and what genres most/least 
address their information needs. In their study, 
carried out in 2000, 116 different genres were 
identified, but not all web pages could be 
classified.  
Karlgren (2000: 99 ff.), a pioneer in building a 
genre palette, tried to collect genres that were 
both consistent with what users expect as well as 
conveniently computable. He sent around a 
questionnaire where the core question was: 
?What genres do you feel you find on the 
WWW??. He ended up with a palette of 11 
genres. One frequent comment by the 
respondents was that the genres in the palette 
were not mutually exclusive, in other words they 
showed some level of hybridism. 
 Very informative in many respects, these 
studies have in common the practical aim of 
improving web searches. This might explain why 
they overlook difficult issues such as the 
hybridism or the individualization of many web 
pages, which are nonetheless perceived by the 
subjects. The authors must necessarily focus on 
34
unambiguous exemplars, showing clear-cut 
conventions and expectations.  
The present study, on the other hand, explores 
the perception of genres when users are faced not 
only with prototypical genre exemplars but also 
with hybrid or individualized web pages, and 
interpret the subjects? perception in term of genre 
evolution.  
3 Web Study  
The study described in this section was web-
based. It was uploaded on to one of the servers at 
University of Brighton at the end of February 
2005, and kept online for one month.  
The study is based on participants who 
volunteered within the University of Brighton 
(UK), University of Sussex (UK), Dalhousie 
University (Canada), Syracuse University 
(USA), plus other academics (interested in 
genre-related issues) in other universities and 
research institutes in Europe. Potential 
participants were sent an email containing the 
URL of the study on the web.  
3.1 Population and Sample: Academic 
Environment 
Genre recognition and acknowledgement is 
based on elements like education, culture, 
community, and society. The academic 
population on which the study is built upon has 
three elements in common: 
? it is a medium-high educated population 
(from administrative people to students 
and professors);  
? it is very used to computer-meditated 
communication; 
? it is familiar with the Web. 
3.2 Web Pages and Web Genres  
Web pages were chosen by the author of this 
paper from the live Web and from the SPIRIT 
collection of web pages (Joho and Sanderson, 
2004). Three typologies of web genres and web 
pages were hypothesized for the selection and for 
the study (the web pages included in the study 
are available, together with their URLs, at 
http://www.nltg.brighton.ac.uk/home/Marina.Santini/: 
  
1) Easy web genres:  
1. eshop (web_page_01) 
2. personal home page (web_page_02) 
3. front page (web_page_04) 
4. search page (web_page_05) 
5. corporate home page (web_page_11) 
6. FAQs (web_page_12, the word ?FAQs? 
was deleted from the heading) 
7. splash screen (web_page_24) 
8. net ad (web_page_2) 
 
2) Ambiguous web genres:  
9. email (web_page_03, because of the 
format and the granularity: email vs. 
mailing list)  
10. sitemap (web_page_06, the words 
?sitemap? and ?hotlist? were deleted 
from the heading) 
11. hotlist (web_page_15,the word 
?hotlist? was deleted from the 
heading),  
12. academic personal home page 
(web_page_08)  
13. about page (web_page_10) 
14. organizational home page 
(web_page_14) 
15. blog (web_page_07) 
16. clog (web_page_16,blog and clog could 
be swapped in their interpretation)  
17. search by multiple fields 
(web_page_17)  
18. online form (web_page_10, online 
forms and search by multiple field 
can appear very similar) 
19. newsletter (web_page_19, which was 
presented truncated),  
20. howto page (web_page_20) 
21. online tutorial (web_page_22, online 
tutorial is a super-genre of howto 
pages) 
 
3) Difficult web pages:  
22. ezine cover (web_page_13) 
23. ?Adirondack Orienteering Klub? 
(web_page_18, the author could not 
find a genre for it) 
24. CitiDex (web_page_21, the author 
could not find a genre for it) 
25. Collimating Lens Holder (web_page_23, 
the author could not find a genre for 
it) 
 
The expectation was that easy web genres would 
collect the highest rate of agreement, ambiguous 
web genres would receive a lower agreement 
rate, while difficult web pages were expected to 
be the most controversial in users? perception. 
The term ?genre? was never mentioned in the 
whole study in order not to influence or confuse 
the participants. The goal of the study was not 
declared either because the idea was to ask for a 
genre classification of web pages implicitly and 
study the reactions. Participants were simply told 
to assign ?labels? to web page ?types?. 
3.3 Participants? Task and Sample Size 
The task of participants was straightforward. 
They had to go through 25 screenshots of web 
pages and assign one of the 23 labels to each of 
them.  
The total number of users who started the 
experiment was 198. 135 participants went 
35
through the whole study and provided valid 
responses for the experiment.  
3.4 Results 
Currently, there is no standard test largely agreed 
upon that can be used for experiments where 
subjects can make choices from a large number 
of categories (23 labels) for a large number of 
objects (25 web pages). In the following 
paragraphs some views and interpretations of the 
data are presented, namely raw counts and 
percentages, Fisher?s exact test, and adjusted 
residuals. 
Raw Counts and Percentages. A view on the 
data is offered in Table 2, which shows the 
number of subjects assigning a particular label to 
a particular web page and the percentage of the 
most voted label. For example,  the label eshop 
(8th row) was assigned to WP11 (first column) by 
119 subjects (highlighted cell), which 
corresponds to 88.15% (bottom row). Four 
subjects thought that WP1 was a corporate home 
pages (around 2.9%), seven selected net ad 
(around 5%), one subject chose front page 
(around 0.7%), one hotlist, one did not know, two 
added a new label for it (around 1.4%).  
Three  ranges of agreement can be identified 
out of this table. The top range includes web 
pages with a percentage of agreement above 
80%; the middle range groups web pages with an 
agreement between 79% and 50%; finally the 
bottom range contains web pages with an 
agreement between 49 % and 20%. Table 1 lists 
the web pages by percentage of agreement.  
From these ranges a first conclusion can be 
drawn. According to the ranges shown in Table 
1, participants show the highest agreement on 
what we selected as ?easy web genres?, except in 
three cases: front pages, net ad and splash screen, 
which seem among the least agreed upon (see 
bottom range). The middle range includes most 
of the ambiguous web genres together with 
ezine, which was deemed to be difficult by the 
author. The bottom range includes the rest of the 
ambiguous genres, together with other difficult 
web pages  and three web pages from the top 
range, webpage_type_04 (front page), 
webpage_type_24 (splash screen) and 
webpage_type_25 (net ad).  
We have now a first picture of users? 
perception of some web pages in relation to some 
web genre labels. The hypothesized genre 
                                                 
1 WP1, WP2, WP3, etc. are short form of 
webpage_01, webpage_02, webpage_03, etc.  
recognition pattern was mostly confirmed in the 
top range, but slightly reshuffled in the middle 
and bottom ranges. Figure 1 shows the charted 
percentages.  
Fisher?s Exact Test. The percentages at the 
bottom row in Table 2 can be interpreted in 
terms of conditional distribution on the most 
voted label (response variable) per web page 
type (explanatory variable). In other words, they 
refer to the sample distribution of most voted 
labels, conditional to the web page type. In terms 
of association, this means that the distribution of 
the response variable (the label) changes with the 
value of the explanatory variable (the web page 
type) if the two variables are related. Table 2 
suggests the existence of an association or 
correlation between the label and  the web page 
to which this label was assigned. But as Table 2 
refers to the sample rather than the population, it 
provides evidence but not the final answer to 
whether labels and web page types are associated 
in the way suggested by the percentages. In order 
to see if it is plausible that labels and web page 
types are associated in the population, Fisher?s 
exact test can be calculated. The value returned 
for this test by SPSS is 9292.275, which is large 
enough to reject the hypothesis that labels and 
web page are independent2. This statistically 
significant association shows that the web pages 
chosen by the author to represent some web 
genres mostly map the subjects? perception of 
these web pages. It also shows that many genre 
labels are acknowledged by the users and are 
consistently associated to web pages. 
Adjusted Residuals: A test statistic, such as 
Fisher?s exact test, and  statistical significance 
summarize the strength of evidence against the 
null hypothesis of independence, but does not 
indicate how many and which cells deviate 
greatly from this hypothesis. Residuals, i.e. the 
differences between expected and observed cell 
frequencies can help in this task. In particular, 
adjusted residuals can indicate if the cell counts 
are significantly different from what 
independence predicts. A large adjusted residual 
provides evidence against independence of a cell. 
As Table 3 mostly maps Table 2, a significant 
association between genre labels and web page 
types on the cells containing the most voted 
labels is then confirmed. 
                                                 
2 The larger the value, the greater the evidence against 
the null hypothesis of independence. 
36
3.5 Discussion 
The original impression that there were different 
degree of perception of genres of web pages was 
confirmed by these preliminary results. Also the 
rough distinction into three levels of genre 
awareness (easy, ambiguous and difficult) was 
confirmed. Three ranges of perception came out 
clearly from percentages, but the distribution of 
the web pages into these three ranges is slightly 
different from what was expected.  
The general view of the results (Fisher?s test) 
reveals that there is a significant association 
between the 25 web pages and the 23 labels. The 
analysis of adjusted residuals support this 
interpretation.  
The agreement among subjects on the label to 
assign to a particular web pages can be divided 
into three levels.  
At the first level, which can be interpreted as 
the highest perception of web genres, there are 
web pages labelled as personal home page 
(webpage_type_02), eshop (webpage_type_01), 
corporate home page (webpage_type_11), FAQs 
(webpage_type_12), and search pages 
(webpage_type_05). We can define these labels 
as stable web genres.  
At a middle level of perception, there are web 
genres still emerging. Most of the labels are 
fairly novel (ezine, clog, blog, about, how to), 
sometimes not entirely transparent, and some of 
them are specialized (academic home page, 
organizational home page, online tutorial). 
Probably the textual conventions of these genres 
are not entirely standardized yet and can cause 
oscillation in users? perception. This level offers 
the most interesting view on a genre repertoire 
which is moving and evolving and it is not 
consolidated yet. 
The bottom range shows a blurred level of 
perception for different reasons. For some genres 
such as email and newsletter, the presentation in 
form of screenshots was not ideal. Subjects could 
not navigate through the web page and they 
could not resolve the level of granularity. For 
instance, for webpage_type_03 (the web page 
selected by the author to represent an email), 66 
subjects chose email, but 34 subjects preferred to 
add a new label for it and 20 thought it was an 
about page. Surprisingly, labels such as splash 
screen and front page for webpage_type_04 and 
webpage_type_24 were not favoured by the 
respondents who preferred to add their own 
labels in many cases. For webpage_type_06, 
subjects preferred the label search page instead 
of sitemap. Another interesting case is net ad 
(webpage_type_25), which was often assessed as 
eshop, probably because the concept of 
advertising and selling are closely related. The 
most opaque label seems to be hotlist 
(webpage_type_15) because most subject 
preferred to add their own label. Three of the 
four web pages that were classified by the author 
as ?I don?t know? belong to this level of 
perception. While webpage_type_21 fell into the 
middle range because most of the subjects 
perceive it as a search page, the genre perception 
or interpretation of webpage_type_17, 
webpage_type_18, and webpage_type_23 is not 
so straightforward. For instance, 
webpage_type_17 was assessed as online form 
(57 subjects), search page (26 subjects), an eshop 
(26 subjects) and probably it is has all these 
functions at the same. 
4 Conclusions and Future Work 
The study shows a composite picture of the 
perception of the genre repertoire on the Web. 
This picture focuses on recent genres only, 
overlooking those more based on paper genres 
because, in our opinion, this hot area can reveal 
more about the dynamics behind genre evolution.  
Preliminary findings coming out from this 
study confirm the initial hypothesis and show 
that users? perception can be divided into three 
ranges. These three ranges can be interpreted in 
terms of genre evolution: high perception for the 
most stable and acknowledge genres; medium 
perception for emerging genres, not fully 
acknowledged by the majority or still unstable, 
and finally low perception for the highly 
ambiguous genres (for different reasons). Some 
of the new web genres can be unambiguously 
perceived (for example, personal home page, 
eshop, corporate home page, FAQs and search 
page).  
Web users can also handle a certain degree of 
granularity, for example by distinguishing a 
personal home page from a corporate home page, 
but the boundary between academic home pages 
and organizational home pages is still too fuzzy 
for them.  
The approach to the web as a genre repertoire 
in evolution and these preliminary findings can 
turn out to be useful when building web genre 
palettes or when designing new genre 
identification experiments.  
Future work includes the computation of 
agreement coefficients. K statistic is largely used 
37
but still controversial and mostly used for 
measuring the agreement of two or three raters. 
Two new interesting measures to assess users? 
recognition of web page genres were used by 
Rosso (2005: 109 ff.), but their full interpretation 
is still under study. The challenging follow up of 
these preliminary results is to find an objective 
coefficient of agreement applicable for 135 raters 
that can choose among 23 categories to classify 
25 objects. 
References  
Bathia Vijay (1993), Analysing Genre. Language Use 
in Professional Settings, Longman, London-NY. 
Blood R. (2000),Weblogs: A History and Perspective, 
http://www.rebeccablood.net/essays/weblog_history.htm 
Crowston K. and Williams M. (1997), Reproduced 
and Emergent Genres of Communication on the 
World-Wide Web, Proc. 30th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences. 
Dillon A. and Gushrowski B. (2000), Genres and the 
Web: is the personal home page the first uniquely 
digital genre?, Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science, 51, 2. 
G?rlach M. (2004), Text Types and the History of 
English, Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin-NY. 
Joho H. and Sanderson M. (2004), The SPIRIT 
collection: an overview of a large web collection, 
SIGIR Forum, December 2004 (Vol. 38, N. 2) 
Karlgren J. (2000), Stylistic Experiments for 
Information Retrieval, Thesis submitted for the 
degree of PhD,  Stockholm University, Sweden. 
Karlgren J. (2004), The Wheres and Whyfores for 
Studying Textual Genre Computationally, Papers 
from the AAAI Fall Symposium. 
 
Kwasnik, B. and Crowston, K. (2005), Genres of 
digital documents: Introduction to the special issue, 
Information, Technology & People, 18(2), 76?88. 
Meyer zu Eissen S. and Stein B. (2004), Genre 
Classification of Web Pages: User Study and 
Feasibility Analysis, in Biundo S., Fruhwirth T. 
and Palm G. (eds.), KI 2004: Advances in Artificial 
Intelligence, Springer, Berlin-Hedelberg-NY, p. 
256-269. 
Rosso M. (2005), Using Genre to Improve Web 
Search, Thesis submitted for the degree of PhD, 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA. 
Roussinov D., Crowston K., Nilan M., Kwasnik B., 
Cai J., Liu X. (2001), Genre Based Navigation on 
the Web, Proc. 34th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences. 
Santini M. (2005), Genres In Formation? An 
Exploratory Study of Web Pages using Cluster 
Analysis, Proc. CLUK 05. 
Santini M. (2006a), Web pages, text types, and 
linguistic features: Some issues, ICAME Journal, 
Vol. 30. 
Santini M. (2006b), Automatic Identification of 
Genres in Web Pages, forthcoming. 
Shepherd M. and Watters C. (1998), The Evolution of 
Cybergenre, Proc. 31st Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences. 
Swales J. (1990), Genre Analysis. English in 
academic and research settings, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
Trosborg Ann (ed.) (2000), Analysing Professional 
Genres, John Benjamins Publishing Company, 
Amsterdam-Philadelphia. 
Yates J., and Orlikowski W. (1992), Genres of 
organizational communication: A structural 
approach to studying communications and media, 
Academy of Management Review, Vol. 17, 2, 229-
326. 
Appendix 
 
z 
Table 1. Ranges of percentages 
38
 
Table 2. Users? assignment and percentages  
 
Figure 1. Charted percentages 
 
Table 3. Adjusted residuals 
39
