Context-based Speech Recognition Error Detection and Correction
Arup Sarma and David D. Palmer
Virage Advanced Technology Group
300 Unicorn Park
Woburn, MA 01801
dpalmer@virage.com
Abstract
In this paper we present preliminary results
of a novel unsupervised approach for high-
precision detection and correction of errors in
the output of automatic speech recognition sys-
tems. We model the likely contexts of all words
in an ASR system vocabulary by performing
a lexical co-occurrence analysis using a large
corpus of output from the speech system. We
then identify regions in the data that contain
likely contexts for a given query word. Finally,
we detect words or sequences of words in the
contextual regions that are unlikely to appear
in the context and that are phonetically similar
to the query word. Initial experiments indicate
that this technique can produce high-precision
targeted detection and correction of misrecog-
nized query words.
1 Introduction
Spoken language sources, such as news broadcasts, meet-
ings, and telephone conversations, are becoming a very
common data source for user-centered tasks such as infor-
mation retrieval, question answering, and summarization.
Automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems, which can
rapidly produce a transcript of spoken audio, are con-
sequently becoming an essential part of the information
flow. However, ASR systems often generate transcripts
with many word errors, which can adversely affect the
performance of systems designed to assist users in man-
aging large quantities of natural language data. Retriev-
ing documents or passages relevant to a user query is sig-
nificantly easier when the words in the query are con-
tained in the document; when a query word is misrec-
ognized by the ASR system, retrieval accuracy declines.
For example, if a user is searching for spoken documents
related to ?Iraq,? and the spoken word ?Iraq? is consis-
tently misrecognized, the user will not be able to locate
many of the desired documents.
In this work we introduce a novel unsupervised ap-
proach to detecting and correcting misrecognized query
words in a document collection. Our approach takes ad-
vantage of two important patterns in the appearance of
ASR errors. First, specific words in a large corpus tend
to co-occur frequently with certain other context words,
and misrecognitions of those specific words will also tend
to co-occur with the same context words. Second, many
ASR errors are phonetically similar to the actual spoken
words. Our approach takes advantage of these patterns of
ASR errors and seeks to find output words that are both
phonetically similar to a query word and that occur in a
context that is more likely to indicate the query word. For
example, ?Iraq? and ?a rock? are phonetically very simi-
lar but generally occur in different contexts.
Our ASR error detection and correction is carried out
in three steps that are separate from the speech recogni-
tion itself. We first analyze a large corpus of output from
a given ASR system to compile co-occurrence statistics
for each word in the system?s vocabulary. This analy-
sis results in a set of context words likely to occur with
each vocabulary word. Next, given a target word, such
as a query word entered into an information retrieval sys-
tem, we identify regions in the search corpus containing a
large number of the expected context words for the query
word. Finally, we detect words in the regions that are un-
likely to occur with the context words and that are pho-
netically similar to the query.
2 Our Approach
There are several key components to our approach to de-
tecting and correcting in-vocabulary speech recognition
errors. First, we calculate co-occurrence statistics for all
words in a large corpus of ASR output data; this is an of-
fline processing step that we describe in Section 2.1. This
co-occurrence information is used in an online error de-
tection process based on word context analysis. The error
detection process first requires the input of a query word
that is to be sought in the test corpus of ASR output from
the same engine; the goal of this step is to detect places
in the corpus where the query word was spoken but mis-
recognized. We describe the contextual analysis in Sec-
tion 2.2. From the set of candidate error regions, ASR
errors are detected using phonetic comparison between
the query word and words in the window; this phonetic
analysis is described in Section 2.3.
Our approach to ASR error detection and correction
builds on recent work in statistical lexical and contextual
modeling using co-occurrence analysis, such as (Roark
and Charniak, 1998). We apply the contextual modeling
to a speech retrieval task, as in (Kupiec et al, 1994). In
the earlier work, general mathematical models were de-
veloped to measure lexical similarity between words in
context. We seek to develop a simple contextual model
based on word co-occurrences in order to facilitate the
retrieval of spoken documents containing critical word er-
rors.
Our approach has a similar goal to that of Logan
(2002); however, their work focuses primarily on out-
of-vocabulary words while we focus on in-vocabulary
words. Our work also builds on recent directions in
language modeling for speech recognition, in which a
broader context beyond n-grams is considered. For exam-
ple, the dimensionality reduction modeling of Bellegarda
(1998) seeks to model long-range contextual similarity
among words in a training corpus. Rosenfeld (2000) has
developed another language modeling approach that can
model word occurrences beyond the common trigram ap-
proaches. While language modeling techniques seek to
improve the ASR engine itself, we present an ASR post-
processing correction model, in which we process and
improve the output of an ASR system.
The data used for our experiments consisted of a large
corpus of English broadcast news transcripts produced by
the broadcast news speech system described in (Makhoul
et al, 2000). This real-time ASR system has a vocabu-
lary size of about 64k words and a reported performance
that normally ranges from WER=20% to 30% for En-
glish news broadcasts. Our training corpus consisted of
360 half-hour broadcast transcripts containing roughly
1.6 million words. The broadcasts were from three differ-
ent English sources (CNN Headline News, BBC Amer-
ica, and News World International) from July 2003. We
divided the data into a training set, from which all model
parameters were trained, and a separate test set consist-
ing of files that were randomly selected from the corpus.
The evaluation corpus consisted of 39 half-hour broad-
cast transcripts containing about 180,000 words.
2.1 Word Co-occurrence Analysis
The goal of the first step in our approach, co-occurrence
analysis, is to determine, for any given word in the ASR
vocabulary, the other words that are very likely to occur
near the given word and are not likely to occur elsewhere.
We compile co-occurrence frequencies for a target word
by counting all other words that co-occur in a document
with the target word within a certain window size w (w/2
words to the left and w/2 words to the right). In our
case, we investigated windows sizes ranging from w=2 to
w=40; as with all our system parameters, optimal value
for a given source empirically through training.
We calculate several maximum likelihood prior proba-
bilities for use in the co-occurrence analysis. For a target
word x and each context word y, we calculate p(x) =
c(x)/n and p(y) = c(y)/n, where c(x) and c(y) are the
total corpus counts for x and y and where n is the total
number of words in the training corpus (1,638,224). We
also calculate the joint probability p(x, y) = c(x, y)/n,
the probability of co-occurrence for x and y in the train-
ing data. In addition, we calculate the pointwise mutual
information I(x, y) for two words x and y, I(x, y) =
log
p(x,y)
p(x)p(y)
. The value I(x, y) is highest for target words
x and context words y that occur frequently together
within a window w but rarely outside the window. The
context words are ranked by mutual information, and this
ranked list of co-occurring context words for each target
word is used in the context analysis step described in Sec-
tion 2.2.
The resulting ranked context lists demonstrate the dif-
ferent contexts in which words like ?Iraq? and ?rock?
appear in the data. The top 5 context words for a win-
dow size of 20 for ?Iraq? are inge, chirac?s, refusal, re-
construction, and waging. The top 5 context words for
?rock? are uplifting, kt, folk, lejeune, and assertion. Most
of the top words in the first list are, for the most part, rel-
evant to the word ?Iraq,? and the words in the second list
are clearly not relevant to ?Iraq.? The corresponding top
5 list for ?Abbas? is mahmoud, ariel, prime, minister, and
committed; the list for ?bus? is michelle, blew, moscow,
jerusalem, and responsible.
These lists also demonstrate the value of modeling the
patterns in the ASR output directly, rather than compiling
co-occurrence frequencies from a clean data source with-
out word errors: the output word inge occurs exclusively
in the data as an ASR error for in going in the context ?in
going to war with Iraq.? Similarly, kt occurs frequently
in the data as part of the call letters for a television sta-
tion in Little Rock, Arkansas. Systematic and recurring
errors such as this provide a great deal of information in
the co-occurrence statistics. However, the use of ASR
output without ?clean? transcripts in training also intro-
duces the possibility of modeling false positives in the
output, such as ?Iraq? being output as an error when ?a
rock? was spoken; this type of error can adversely affect
the co-occurrence statistics we calculate.
2.2 Context Analysis
The context analysis component seeks to identify contex-
tual regions in the test data that are likely to contain a
given query word, and thus also likely to contain a mis-
recognition of the query word. This analysis uses the
probabilities and mutual information output from the co-
occurrence analysis described in Section 2.1.
We slide a window of w words across a document in
the test data, where w is the same window size used to
train the word co-occurrence statistics. We also define a
minimum number of context words c that must be con-
tained with the window in order to mark the center word
of the window as a possible ASR error. As an exam-
ple of this context matching, consider the word sequence
?... the reconstruction of a rock proceeds despite Chirac?s
refusal...? The word ?rock? is at the center of an 8-word
context window (4 on either side) containing 3 of the top-
ranked context words for ?Iraq? from the previous sec-
tion. This instance of the word ?rock? would thus be a
candidate misrecognition of ?Iraq? for w ? 8 and c ? 3.
Table 1 shows the number of candidate words detected
for ?Iraq? in the evaluation data for different window
sizes w and minimum context words c. As might be ex-
pected, the number of candidate words increases as the
window size increases and decreases as the minimum
number of context words increases.
Window Size w
c 2 6 10 14 20
1 10412 27643 42142 54507 70212
2 346 3941 8820 14409 23133
3 x 597 2152 4314 8418
4 x 84 505 1411 3437
5 x 9 123 438 1387
Table 1: Candidate errors for ?Iraq? detected within a
range of window sizes w for minimum numbers of con-
text words c.
Most combinations result in a large number of candi-
dates, so we also apply candidate pruning based on prob-
abilistic metrics. Given a candidate error and c context
words contained in a window, we then compare the prob-
ability of observing both the query word and the actual
word in the data. This comparison is carried out us-
ing the Kullback-Leibler divergence for observation dis-
tributions containing the c context words, D(p ? q) =
?
x?X p(x) log
p(x)
q(x)
, where p(x) is the conditional prob-
ability of the co-occurrence of the query word with a con-
text word x in the set of c context words X and q(x) is the
probability of the candidate error with the context word.
A larger Kullback-Leibler divergence value indicates a
higher probability that the candidate word is actually a
misrecognition of the query word.
2.3 Phonetic Comparison
Given the set of candidate errors for a query word, as
detected using the context matching technique described
in Section 2.2, we next apply a phonetic distance cri-
terion to determine the similarity between each candi-
date error and the query word being sought, based on
the pronunciations in the ASR system lexicon. We used
the common minimum-distance weighted phonetic align-
ment technique described in detail in (Kondrak, 2003);
in our experiments we used phonetic weights available
through the alignment package altdistsm originally de-
scribed in (Fisher and Fiscus, 1993).
The final decision whether to correct the ASR error is
made based on the phonetic distance between the candi-
date word and the query word. Since the candidate word
is already known to have occurred in a lexical context that
is likely to contain the query, a strong phonetic similarity
between the words provides very strong evidence that the
candidate word is, in fact, a misrecognition of the query
word.
3 Results and Discussion
We carried out an initial evaluation of our system using
three specific query words that were featured in a large
number of news stories in the training corpus: ?Iraq,?
?Abbas,? and ?Lynch? (from Jessica Lynch, an Ameri-
can soldier during the war in Iraq). The 39 files in the
test corpus were annotated to indicate all the locations
of recognition errors involving these three spoken words.
In addition, the location of errors that are morphological
variants of the query word, such as ?Iraqi? and ?Iraq?s?
were annotated and were not included in the evaluation
results; in the context of information retrieval these mor-
phological variants can easily be addressed using com-
mon techniques such as stemming.
The query word ?Lynch? turned out to be an uninter-
esting case for our approach: it was misrecognized only
4 times in the test corpus, each time as the morphologi-
cal variant ?lynched.? Nevertheless, the context matching
test worked well, as three of the top-ranked context words
were the very relevant ?Jessica,? ?private,? and ?rescue.?
The detection and correction results for the word ?Abbas?
were also very encouraging, although the small sample
size makes it difficult to draw significant conclusions. In
our test corpus, there were n=10 examples in which ?Ab-
bas? was misrecognized. Our method detected 8 candi-
dates, 7 of which were actually misrecognitions of ?Ab-
bas,? for a recall of 70% and a precision of 88% (window
size w=10, minimum context c=2). Corrections included
?a bus,? ?a bass,? and ?a boss,? and the false positive was
the word ?about,? which is phonetically very similar.
The query term ?Iraq? proved to be the most fruitful
query term, due to its prevalence throughout the corpus.
There was a total of 142 cases in which ?Iraq? was mis-
recognized. Examples of common errors were ?rock,?
?a rock,? ?your rocks,? ?warren rock? (war in Iraq), ?her
rock,? ?any rocket? (in Iraq), and ?a rack.? Table 2 shows
the final results for the query term ?Iraq? for the 39 ASR
output test files, for a range of minimum required context
words c and the most-successful window size (14 ).
c Detect Correct False Pos R P
1 138 120 18 85 87
2 92 87 5 61 95
3 51 51 0 36 100
4 27 27 0 19 100
5 9 9 0 6 100
Table 2: Results for query word ?Iraq? for window size
w=14 and a range of minimum context words c: hypothe-
sized errors detected and corrected, false positives, recall,
and precision (n=142).
Although we can not draw conclusions about the gen-
eral applicability of this approach until we carry out fur-
ther experiments with more test cases, the preliminary de-
tection and correction results indicate that it is possible to
achieve very high precision with a reasonable recall for
certain window sizes and numbers of context words. Ta-
ble 3 shows recall and precision values for some of the
most effective combinations of window sizes w and min-
imum context words c which return few false positives
and many accurate corrections.
w c R P
8 1 69 88
8 2 38 100
10 1 77 87
10 2 44 98
14 2 61 95
14 3 36 100
Table 3: Recall and precision values for selected window
and minimum context values.
The work we describe in this paper is complementary
to ASR algorithmic improvements, in that we treat er-
ror detection and correction as a post-processing step that
can be applied to the output of any ASR system and can
be adapted to incremental improvements in the systems.
This form of post-processing also allows us to take advan-
tage of long-range contextual features that are not avail-
able during the ASR decoding itself. Post-processing also
enables large-scale data analysis that models the types of
systematic errors that ASR systems make. All the steps in
our approach, co-occurrence analysis, context matching,
and phonetic distance pruning, are unsupervised methods
that can be automatically run for large quantities of data.
The results in this paper are promising but are obvi-
ously very preliminary. We are in the process of evalu-
ating the work on a much larger set of query words. We
should emphasize that the goal of this work is not to pro-
duce a significant improvement in the overall word error
rate of a particular corpus of ASR output, although we be-
lieve that such an improvement is possible using similar
contextual analysis. Instead, the focus of the work is to
improve the specific aspects of the ASR output that may
adversely affect a user-centered task like information re-
trieval. While we have not formally evaluated the impact
of our error detection and correction on retrieval perfor-
mance, there is an obvious benefit to correcting misrecog-
nitions of the specific query term that a user is seeking.
References
Jerome R. Bellegarda, ?A multi-span language modeling
framework for large vocabulary speech recognition,?
IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Processing,
6:456?467, 1998.
W. M. Fisher and J.G. Fiscus, ?Better Alignment Proce-
dures for Speech Recognition Evaluation,? Proc. Inter-
national Conference on Acoustic, Speech and Signal
Processing, pp. II-59 - II-62, 1993.
G. Kondrak, ?Phonetic Alignment and Similarity,? Com-
puters and the Humanities 37(3), August 2003, pp.
273?291.
J. Kupiec, D. Kimber, and V. Balasubramanian, ?Speech-
Based Retrieval Using Semantic Co-Occurrence Filter-
ing,? In Proc. Human Language Technologies, pp. 373-
377, 1994.
B. Logan and J.M. Van Thong, ?Confusion-based Query
Expansion for OOV Words in Spoken Document Re-
trieval,? In Proc. ICSLP 2002,, Denver, Colorado, pp.
1997-2000, 2002.
J. Makhoul, F. Kubala, T. Leek, D. Liu, L. Nguyen, R.
Schwartz, and A. Srivastava, ?Speech and Language
Technologies for Audio Indexing and retrieval,? In
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 88, no. 8, pp. 1338-1353,
2000.
B. Roark and E. Charniak, ?Noun-Phrase Co-Occurrence
Statistics for Semi-Automatic Semantic Lexicon Con-
struction,? In Proceedings of the 36th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.
1110-1116, 1998.
R. Rosenfeld, ?Two decades of Statistical Language
Modeling: Where Do We Go From Here?? Proceed-
ings of the IEEE, 88(8), 2000.
