Automatic Interpretation System Integrating
Free-style Sentence Translation and Parallel Text Based Translation
Takahiro Ikeda Shinichi Ando Kenji Satoh Akitoshi Okumura Takao Watanabe
Multimedia Res. Labs. NEC Labs.
4-1-1 Miyazaki, Miyamae-ku, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 216
t-ikeda@di.jp.nec.com, s-ando@cw.jp.nec.com, k-satoh@da.jp.nec.com,
a-okumura@bx.jp.nec.com, t-watanabe@ay.jp.nec.com
Abstract
This paper proposes an automatic in-
terpretation system that integrates free-
style sentence translation and parallel text
based translation. Free-style sentence
translation accepts natural language sen-
tences and translates them by machine
translation. Parallel text based translation
provides a proper translation for a sen-
tence in the parallel text by referring to a
corresponding translation of the sentence
and supplements free-style sentence trans-
lation. We developed a prototype of an au-
tomatic interpretation system for Japanese
overseas travelers with parallel text based
translation using 9206 parallel bilingual
sentences prepared in task-oriented man-
ner. Evaluation results show that the par-
allel text based translation covers 72% of
typical utterances for overseas travel and
the user can easily find an appropriate sen-
tence from a natural utterance for 64% of
typical traveler?s tasks. This indicates that
the user can benefit from reliable transla-
tion based on parallel text for fundamental
utterances necessary for overseas travel.
1 Introduction
A speech-to-speech translation system must inte-
grate at least three components ? speech recogni-
tion, machine translation, and speech synthesis. In
practice, each component does not always output
the correct result for various inputs, and an error
in one component often leads to an incorrect result
being produced by the total system even for a lim-
ited domain. Clearly, we need ways to complement
speech-to-speech translation systems that cannot re-
liably produce a correct result.
Although some robust methods that make the er-
roneous results of other components acceptable have
been proposed (Yumi et al, 1997; Furuse et al,
1998), there is no guarantee that the final output
from a system will be appropriate even with these
methods. To deal with this problem, we have taken a
more practical approach to developing an automatic
interpretation system where the user can obtain a
correct result instead of having to apply additional
operations and judgment.
In actual use of a speech-to-speech translation
system, an error in the speech-recognition or speech-
synthesis components is not a large problem if the
system has a screen that displays each result. The
user of the system can correct errors in the recogni-
tion result on the screen, and can communicate by
showing the other person the translated sentence on
the screen.
On the other hand, an error in the machine-
translation component is critical because a user who
is not familiar with the target language is unlikely
to notice the error in some cases. When a nonsensi-
cal sentence is generated by machine translation, the
user may realize that the listener does not understand
the translated sentence. However, when a plausible
sentence that means something different from the in-
tended meaning is generated by the machine trans-
lation, the user may incorrectly assume that the ut-
terance was properly communicated. Consequently,
the user can seldom be sure that the listener cor-
rectly understood the intended meaning when using
a speech-to-speech translation system. A conversa-
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                           Algorithms and Systems, Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 85-92.
                          Proceedings of the Workshop on Speech-to-Speech Translation:
tion could continue for some time before it became
apparent that the two sides misunderstood what the
other was saying.
Moreover, if the user realizes that there is an er-
ror in the machine translation, correcting it will be
difficult. Without knowing the source of the error,
the user cannot modify the input to obtain a correct
result.
These error problems severely limit the usability
of speech-to-speech translation.
In this paper, we propose an automatic interpreta-
tion system that integrates free-style sentence trans-
lation and parallel text based translation. In this sys-
tem, free-style sentence translation accepts natural
language sentences and translates them by machine
translation without guaranteeing the quality of the
translation. On the other hand, parallel text based
translation uses parallel bilingual sentences regis-
tered in the system and translates a registered sen-
tence by referring to the corresponding translation.
Although this translation process limits the input to
registered sentences, it is a robust means of han-
dling input with recognition errors and consistently
provides a correct translation. We integrated these
two types of translation to realize a robust transla-
tion system where the two types of translation com-
pensate for the shortcomings of each other.
For appropriate integration of free-style sentence
translation and parallel text based translation, we
had to consider three main points.
1. User interface: how best to present the two
functions to the user?
2. Content of registered sentences: How many ut-
terances should be covered by registered sen-
tences?
3. Retrieval system: What methods of searching
among the registered sentences should be pro-
vided to the user?
In this paper, we discuss these three points with
respect to a translation system for Japanese travelers
in the overseas travel domain. We construct a model
of the integration of free-style sentence translation
and parallel text based translation in Section 2. We
describe a prototype system based on the model in
Section 3 and evaluate it in Section 4. Related work
on translation systems utilizing parallel text are dis-
cussed in Section 5, and we conclude in Section 6.
2 The Integration Model
2.1 User Interface
Although parallel text based translation provides a
correct result, the registered parallel bilingual sen-
tences cannot cover all possible utterances by the
user in the target domain. Free-style sentence trans-
lation, on the contrary, accepts free-style input sen-
tences but provides no guarantee as to the quality of
results.
For many routine situations, users will clearly
benefit from using parallel text based translation.
In such cases, the system will probably include a
sentence that totally or partially fits what they want
to say. To ensure high translation reliability, users
should use free-style sentence translation only for
utterances not covered by the registered sentences.
However, users usually will not know what sen-
tences are registered in the system and will have to
search for an appropriate sentence before they can
use parallel text based translation. In some cases, the
user will be forced to use free-style sentence trans-
lation if unable to find an appropriate sentence.
A seamless user interface that allows the user to
easily switch between free-style sentence transla-
tion and parallel text based translation is therefore
needed in a system integrating these two forms of
translation. Two conditions in particular had to be
met to make the system easy to use.
1. The user should be able to use an input sen-
tence seamlessly as both a source sentence for
free-style sentence translation and a key sen-
tence for registered sentence retrieval.
2. The user should be able to use each sentence in-
cluded in the results of the registered sentence
retrieval and the input sentence as a source
sentence for translation. (The former would
be used for parallel text based translation, and
the latter would be used for free-style sentence
translation.)
2.2 Content of Registered Sentences
Registered sentences must cover the utterances nec-
essary for accomplishing typical tasks in the target
domain to provide correct translation for minimal
communication. In a translation system for overseas
travelers, some typical tasks are changing money,
checking in at a hotel, and ordering at a restaurant.
We adopted a three-tier model that consists of
scenes, tasks, and subtasks to prepare a sufficient set
Table 1: Examples of scenes, tasks, subtasks, and templates of sentences
Scene Task Subtask Template of sentence
Hotel Check-in Checking in I?d like to check in, please.
Hotel Check-in Requesting a type of room I?d like a room with the ocean view.
Restaurant Order Requesting cooking time for your steak Medium, please.
Restaurant Order Asking what they recommend What do you recommend for appetizers?
of necessary sentences to be registered in the sys-
tem. A scene comprised a place or situation that
corresponds to where a traveler is likely to be (e.g., a
hotel) and a problem that could arise. We made a list
of typical travelers? tasks that would be necessary in
various travel scenes, divided each task into smaller
primitive tasks (subtasks), and assigned a sentence
template to each subtask based on the model.
In general, more than one round of conversation
is necessary to accomplish each task. We assumed
that a task would consist of smaller subtasks, each
of which would correspond to one round of conver-
sation that consisted simply of an utterance from a
traveler to a respondent and a response from the re-
spondent to the traveler. For example, the task of
checking in to a hotel consists of subtasks such as
giving your name, confirming your departure date,
and so on. Each subtask should be the smallest unit
of a task because users cannot use a registered sen-
tence effectively if it includes more than what they
want to say.
In this way, only one sentence template is needed
for each subtask with regard to an utterance from a
traveler to a respondent. For example, we can assign
a sentence template of ?I?d like to have ....? to the
subtask of ordering a dish in a restaurant. We can
provide a sufficient number of sentences by enabling
the user to fill in the part denoted as ?...? (referred to
as a slot) with words applicable to the situation.
Table 1 shows examples of scenes, tasks, sub-
tasks, and sentence templates. An underlined part
represents a slot. We define a list of words individu-
ally for each slot.
For each task, both the utterances from a traveler
to a respondent and the responses from a respon-
dent to a traveler are significant. Responses should
also be supported by parallel text based translation to
ensure reliable communication. However, inputting
the response and retrieving a registered sentence that
matches it will be difficult and time consuming for
the respondent who is unlikely to be familiar with
the translation system.
We use a system that presents a menu of responses
for the respondent to choose from. The system keeps
typical responses in parallel bilingual form for each
registered sentence that the traveler can use and dis-
plays these as candidate responses when the traveler
uses the sentence. The system then shows the trav-
eler the translation of the response selected by the
respondent.
This approach enables travelers to obtain a reli-
able response and also enables respondents to easily
select an appropriate response.
2.3 Retrieval System
The retrieval system to search for a registered sen-
tence that we use is based on a combination of three
conditions ? the natural language sentence, scene,
and action.
Registered sentence retrieval based on a natural
language sentence is essential for seamless integra-
tion of free-style sentence translation and parallel
text based translation. We used a simple keyword-
based retrieval system for registered sentence re-
trieval. This system extracts keywords from an in-
putted natural language sentence, searches for sen-
tences including the keywords, and presents the re-
sults ranked mainly by the number of keywords in-
cluded in each sentence.
The system retrieves all sentences including more
than one keyword to reduce the chance of an appro-
priate sentence not being retrieved. We overcame
the increased retrieval noise in the result by applying
an additional retrieval system to search for registered
sentences in terms of the scene and action.
Each registered sentence to be retrieved for trans-
lation corresponds to a set of a scene, a task, and
a subtask as described in the previous section. A
scene represents a place or a situation where the user
wishes to accomplish the task and the subtask. A
task and a subtask represent a user?s actions. This
means that the user?s utterance is related to the user?s
intention regarding where (scene) the user wants to
do something (action).
We use the additional retrieval system in situa-
tions where the user has to search for sentences from
	
		


	

	

	


	
	
	


		




		
	
	

		


	
	


	
 
	 ff