Representing Verbal Semantics with Diagrams
An Adaptation of the UML for Lexical Semantics
Andrea C. SCHALLEY
School of Languages, Cultures and Linguistics
University of New England
Armidale, NSW 2351, Australia
andrea.schalley@une.edu.au
Abstract
The paper presents a new way of accounting for
the meaning of verbs in natural languages, using
a diagrammatic notation based on the Unified
Modeling Language (UML). We will introduce
the new framework by outlining some model-
ing elements and indicating major differences
to the UML. An extended example will be dis-
cussed in more detail. We will then focus on
the cognitive background of the framework, and
in particular address the question why the usage
of graphical elements within a linguistic model-
ing language proves to be very fruitful. Finally,
we will briefly indicate the potential of the new
framework and its applicability.
1 Introduction
Today, the Unified Modeling Language (UML) is
accepted as lingua franca for the design of object-
oriented systems, being widely used for software
development processes. Although the UML has also
been employed in other fields such as business mod-
eling (cf. the example profile in the UML specifi-
cation, Object Management Group 2003), research
in theoretical and computational linguistics has not
yet tried to apply a graphical language as rich as the
UML. Such an approach will be advocated in this
paper, focussing on the question how verbal mean-
ing is to be represented adequately. Our answer is a
new framework adapted from the UML to model the
meaning of verbs, as developed in extenso in Schal-
ley (2004). This framework for linguistic semantics
is called Unied Eventity Representation (UER),
because it is a true extension of the UML and not
just a profile. Living up to its name, the UER tries
to unify both intuitivity and formality. It employs
intuitive semantic primes as building blocks and in-
cludes these within a framework of specified mod-
eling elements. Semantics and syntax of the mod-
eling elements are explicated in the specification of
the UER, which was done in the style of the UML
specification. Being an adaption from the UML, the
UER introduces a third formal paradigm of com-
puter science into linguistic semantics, one that is
neither functional nor logical but object-oriented in
nature. This is one of the factors contributing to the
cognitive adequacy of the UER. Since the UER is
based on the UML, it can be easily put to use in
computational linguistics.
In Section 2, the UER as adapted from the UML
will be sketched. The cognitive relevance of the
UER is outlined in Section 3 ? graphical model-
ing elements in general represent prominent kinds
of concepts, or, respectively, structural or meta-
concepts. In particular, we will discuss the impor-
tance of these graphical modeling elements for the
cognitive adequacy of representational frameworks
such as the UER. Section 4 finally comprises an out-
look, listing some potential areas of application of
the UER.
2 A Diagrammatic Modeling Language
for Linguistic Semantics
The UER exhibits a novel use of a diagrammatic no-
tation. But even though it adapts a well-known and
well-elaborated framework used in computer sci-
ence, it constitutes not only a new use of the UML?s
diagrammatic notation but is a redesign in order to
achieve better cognitive and in particular linguistic
adequacy. In order to get a grasp of the character
of the UER we will indicate some major differences
between the UER and the UML and then discuss
an extended example, modeling two particular con-
crete readings of a verb in more detail.
The UER?s focus does not rest on computational
adequacy to the same extent as the UML?s does. It
is not designed to develop software systems, but to
represent meaning. This objective entails, for exam-
ple, that pure software specific modeling elements
are not part of the UER. Instead, it aims to be close
to conceptualization as revealed in natural language.
Nevertheless, the UML has been a perfect starting
point for the endeavour of developing an adequate
modeling language for verbal semantics, because
on a coarse level of granularity the UML itself sup-
ports cognitive modeling in the sense that it allows
to model software requirements, without going too
deep into implementational issues in the beginning.
But why has a new framework been developed ?
why has it not been sensible or feasible to establish
a UML profile? We believe that for the purpose of
a linguistic modeling language which is designed to
represent verbal semantics, new modeling elements
are required and therefore new metamodel elements
are inevitable.
Roughly, verbs encode events or similar entities,
entities that are called eventities within the UER.1
That is, the semantics of a verb or, as in most cases,
one of its readings, corresponds to the eventity that
is encoded by the verb.2 Then, to represent the
meaning is to model the eventity.
We believe that eventities are conceptual units in
human cognition and comprise particular compo-
nents that are combined in a particular way. In order
to model this appropriately, the UER has a graphical
container for eventity concepts: octagons represent
eventities as such and contain their components in a
structured way. As modeling elements of the UER,
they are called eventity frames and model eventi-
ties, the specificities of which are graphically con-
tained within these diagrammatic elements. Simi-
larly, the components are again diagrammatic ele-
ments as long as they represent structural or meta-
concepts that hold content. Here the notions of state
and transition (which are part of the UML), or the
new notion of participant class, which is a modeling
element reminiscent of the UML?s classifier role,
could be mentioned. New modeling elements not
being part of the UML, such as the eventity frame
or participant class, clearly establish an extension of
the UML. Therefore, the UER is not a profile of the
UML, but a close relative.
In addition to defining new modeling elements
for the UER (and adapting UML ones), the UML?s
division into different modeling views resulting in
separate diagrams (such as class, statechart, activ-
ity, or collaboration diagrams, cf. Object Manage-
ment Group 2003: I?2)3 is given up in the UER.
Since both dynamic as well as static aspects are part
1 The term ?eventity? has been adopted from Zaefferer
(2002).
2 We use the term eventity as a term for a kind or type, not an
instantiation or token. Hence, ?to wake up? is an eventity,
termed WAKE UP 1 in the following (eventities are usually
notated with capital letters), whereas ?John wakes up? is an
instantiation of this eventity.
3 Not all parts of the UML are relevant to our endeavour. Ac-
cordingly, non-relevant parts such as use case and imple-
mentation diagrams are not included into the specificiation
of the UER at all in order not to overload it and to adjust it
to our purposes.
of an eventity concept (in modeling an eventity one
has to answer the questions what is happening and
to whom it is happening), both aspects are modeled
within one eventity frame and not in several sepa-
rate diagrams. Nevertheless, we take care to distin-
guish the aspects within the eventity frame, with the
dynamic aspects being graphically contained by the
so-called dynamic core, thereby forcing users of the
UER to go for clear distinctions. The integration of
dynamic and static aspects seems to be feasible in
the UER, because ? differently from software sys-
tems ? we expect eventity concepts not to exceed
a particular level of complexity due to an assumed
maximum of complexity applying to any cognitive
unit. Accordingly, we expect eventity frames to
only come up with straightforward models which
are in general easily manageable.
To get a better idea what a model of an eventity,
or, respectively, a model of a verb?s reading looks
like, we will discuss two readings of wake up in the
following. Consider the eventity frame representing
the semantics of its non-causative reading in Fig. 1
(as in He woke up or in Suddenly Eleni woke up).
?intrinsic? ani : Animacy = animate
[[y]] / Patient : Ineventity
wake_up_1
?do?
?undergo?
y
Awake
?spontaneous?
Figure 1: The non-causative reading of wake up
The octagon depicts the eventity that is encoded
by the verb and hence represents the conceptual unit
corresponding to the verb?s reading. Each even-
tity frame can have a name shown in the upper left
corner, in this case the name wake up 1 was se-
lected according to the first ?wake up? eventity, the
WAKE UP 1 eventity. The eventity?s components
are nested within the octagon. First of all, partic-
ipants of an eventity are rendered as solid-outline
rectangles similar to UML class symbols and are
attached to the dynamic core by a dashed line (as
in UML collaboration diagrams) that indicates their
status as participants, the participate association. In
the case of WAKE UP 1, there is only one partici-
pant, the undergoer that wakes up and thus endures
the course of events.4 The participant?s name ex-
pression, [[y]], means that y is a representative
name for entities that could potentially be partici-
pants in the eventity (therefore, a notation reminis-
cent of mathematical equivalence class notation has
been chosen).
The dynamic components of the eventity concept
are contained in the dynamic core itself which is dis-
played as a dashed-outlined rectangle with rounded
corners and generally comprises the state machines
of prominent participants.5 For the sake of clarity
(and because it is necessary when there is more than
just one participant), the representative?s name, in
this case y, is cited in the upper left corner of its
state machine. y experiences a transition from an
unknown source state to the known passive simple
state of being Awake. In order to undergo a tran-
sition into the state of being awake and thus to un-
dergo a change of state at all, the undergoer must
have been in a source state differing from the tar-
get state. This is the only information we do have,
we do not know whether the undergoer was asleep,
dozing or unconcious while in the source state. But
y must have been in a state which was not the one
of being awake, such that a transition could result
in the state of being awake. Accordingly, the target
state is specified, whereas the source state is dis-
played as an unspecified source state. Moreover,
there is no reason and thus trigger for the transition
conceptualized, therefore the transition is marked as
spontaneous and distinguished from completion
transitions or transitions triggered by signals.
y in the dynamic core is a reference to the partici-
pant class displayed outside of the dynamic core, in
the static periphery. The static periphery in general
depicts the participants, the roles they hold within
the eventity, and the relationships that hold between
them. In the example modeling in Fig. 1, the un-
dergoer y is in fact a patient, i.e., has the role of
undergoing some change of state or condition (and
not only a change of location as a theme, for in-
4 The term undergoer ? as well as its counterpart actor ?
are taken from Van Valin and LaPolla (1997: 141?147).
5 There are at most two prominent participants in each
eventity, the most active one (the actor, with the stereo-
type do attached to its participate association) and the
most passive one (the undergoer, with the stereotype un-
dergo attached to its participate association). Only promi-
nent participants are assigned their own state machine
within the dynamic core.
stance, would). This is indicated in the role speci-
fication Patientwithin y?s participant class. Ad-
ditionally, in order to be ?wakeable? (that is to say,
to be a potential undergoer of a WAKE UP 1 even-
tity), y has to be an animate Ineventity, a
non-eventity entity in the UER?s participant ontol-
ogy which has the intrinsic property of being ani-
mate. The specification of both an ontological cate-
gory as well as a property (technically captured in
the UER in form of a type-expression and an at-
tribute) rules out that SLEEP, as an eventity, or a
stone, as an inanimate ineventity, could be potential
undergoers of the WAKE UP 1 eventity. In other
words, the participant class specification works like
a filter on the set of all entities, ruling out those en-
tities which cannot be participants of the eventity in
question because they do not fulfil the required char-
acteristics. This is important in describing verbal
semantics because it is an essential part of a verb?s
semantics which selectional restrictions apply.
The first, non-causative reading of wake up
is simple in the sense that only one participant
is involved. Turning to the causative reading,
WAKE UP 2 (as in He woke me up or The storm
woke him up), the modeling in Fig. 2 becomes more
complex: there are two interacting participants,
both of which are prominent participants ? they
are both assigned their own state machine, each of
which is depicted in a swimlane in the dynamic core
(the two swimlanes are divided by a solid vertical
swimlane border).
?do? ?undergo?
yx
[[x]] / Instigator : Entity ?intrinsic? ani : Animacy = animate
[[y]] / Patient : Ineventity
wake_up_2
/ Agent / Effector
cause
cause
Awake
Figure 2: The causative reading of wake up
The undergoer y essentially endures the same
course of events, although this time the transition
has a trigger in that it is caused by the active insti-
gator, the actor. That is, the transition is triggered
by a cause signal, the receipt of which is rendered
in the concave pentagon in y?s swimlane. The sig-
nal is sent from the actor x, with the signal sending
being represented in x?s swimlane as convex pen-
tagon. The signal sending is the result of an un-
specified action state. In other words, the actor per-
forms some action (where action is broadly under-
stood and does not necessarily entail intention), the
nature of which is not conceptualized and irrelevant,
thus leaving the specifics of the action state irrele-
vant (which is indicated by the underscore). All that
is important is that there is some ?action? by x in-
volved so that x wakes y up.6
In the case of the actor?s specification in the static
periphery, there are not many restrictions. The actor
is primarily an entity that instigates the transition.
The italicized role description pays tribute to the
fact that natural languages distinguish between vo-
litional and involitional instigators. Instigator is an
abstract role description, meaning that it cannot be
directly instantiated but only by its children (we em-
ploy the object-orientational concept of inheritance
at this point), namely Agent (volitional instigator)
or Effector (involitional instigator). Although
in English users are not forced to decide whether
they are conceptualizing an agent or an effector, in
Hare, for example, an Athapascan language spo-
ken in Canada, users have to mark agents differ-
ently than effectors (cf. Frawley 1992: 207). Thus,
Hare forces its users to definitely make a decision
whether it is an agent or an effector they are talking
about. If the model was a modeling of Hare (and
not English as it is), we would add the constraint
{disjoint} to the inheritance relations in order
to indicate that the actor can be either an agent or
an effector, but not both at the same time. This way,
natural language specificities come into the models.
3 Cognitive Relevance of Diagrammatic
Modeling Elements
We trust that the above illustrations suffice to give
an impression what UER diagrams entail, although
there are details of the diagrams that have not been
explained. But in exactly what way does such a
graphical representation as in Fig. 2 differ from a
Wunderlich-style decomposition as in (1) (cf. also
Wunderlich 1996, 1997)?
(1) CAUSE (x, BECOME (AWAKE(y)))(s)
6 Action states are rendered with convex arcs on both
sides, whereas passive states are shown as rectangles with
rounded corners.
Essentially, the same information concerning dy-
namic structuring seems to be included in (1): there
is an xwhich causes that y becomes awake. But ob-
viously necessary information about the participants
is not included. Of course, one could add this infor-
mation as in (2) (in this case, the decomposition is
not within Wunderlich?s framework any more).
(2) (AGENT(x)?EFFECTOR(x))?
PATIENT(y)?ANIMATE(y)?
INEVENTITY(x)? INEVENTITY(y)?
CAUSE (x, BECOME (AWAKE(y)))(s)
Comparing (2) to Fig. 2, the diagrammatic represen-
tation is to be preferred for several reasons, one of
these being the intuitivity that is brought forward
in the graphical structure: those modeling elements
that are cognitively connected are graphically con-
nected via connectors, containment resp. nesting, or
visual attachments. That is, the cognitive structur-
ing is reflected in the diagrammatic representation
in a straightforward way, which is not the case in the
linearized representation in (2). Moreover, the ex-
plicit partition of static and dynamic aspects within
one eventity frame as well as the specified syntax of
the modeling elements facilitates not only the un-
derstanding of the representation, but at the same
time forces users of the UER to make sure they
produce sound diagrams. That entails reflecting on
what exactly causes, for instance, the undergoer?s
transition in WAKE UP 2. In (1) and (2) it is x as a
participant that directly causes the transition, while
in Fig. 2 it is some action of x that causes the tran-
sition. The latter is more appropriate and also sup-
ported by speakers? intuition and conceptualization
? something has, in a very broad sense, to ?happen?
(even if it was pure presence) in order to cause a
transition.7 To represent that ?something?, a feature
has been included into the UER that is not part of
the UML, namely unspecified elements (generally
rendered with underscores in the name slot). These
are elements where only the graphical ? and thus
cognitive ? structure is present (such as the action
state in the actor?s swimlane in Fig. 2), but no con-
tent of the structure is given. That is, the exact con-
cept is irrelevant and underspecified, the only thing
that matters is structure: in Fig. 2 it is merely con-
ceptualized that some kind of action takes place, but
7 This is also supported by the fact that (a) is fine, but (b) is
not:
(a) The ball broke the window.
(b) *The window broke as a result of the ball.
In other words, explication (b) would need some action of
the ball to be specified in order to be sound, such as in (c):
(c) The window broke as a result of the ball?s rolling into it.
the specifics of the action are not specified. Since
the UER aims at representing cognitive structures,
this is a sensible feature ? which it would not be
within the UML, of course, as the UML has to head
towards determinism, being a computational mod-
eling language.
The general layout of both the UML and the UER
as graphical languages supports cognitive adequacy.
In graphical languages such as the UML and the
UER, prominent structural concepts can be distin-
guished by non-textual symbols, namely their cor-
responding graphical modeling elements. Exam-
ples in the UER we have seen are the octagon for
eventities, the rectangle for participants, and the
rectangle with rounded corners for passive simple
states. In other words, the structure is passed on
into the graphical-visual domain, whereas the con-
tents are kept in linearized form. Representational
languages in linguistic semantics to date only rarely
distinguish in their formalizations between struc-
tural meta-concepts, such as the ones mentioned
above, e.g., or state and transition, and the con-
cepts themselves, such as the state of being Awake.
Meta-concepts exist at the most implicitly in the
arity of predicates, in particular predicate names
(where the reader has to know that BECOME, for
example, represents a transitional concept), or in
fixed combinations of predicates. Although meta-
concepts are extensively discussed in the literature
(cf. the discussions about Aktionsarten), it is not
taken care to explicate them in a distinct way and to
distinguish them from specified concepts, i.e. their
contents.
The UER is the first linguistic representa-
tional framework that explicitly accounts for meta-
concepts, rendering them graphically and thus fun-
damentally different from their contents, and dis-
playing different structural concepts with visually
different modeling elements. That way, an intuitive
line is drawn that divides these two levels of rep-
resentation, that divides the specified concepts em-
bedded in a structure from the structure itself. The
distinction between structural concepts and ?filled?
concepts is in our eyes a very vital one not only
in terms of modeling precision ? users have to
clearly distinguish these levels of representation ?
but also in terms of cognitive adequacy and univer-
sality. We believe that structural meta-concepts are
universal due to them being based on human expe-
riences, and that they are in principle stable. This
does most certainly not apply in this generality to
contents, although one might assume a very funda-
mental shared knowledge across cultures and thus
languages.
Hence, in fixing the meta-concepts but not their
contents, the UER is a modeling language that can
readily accommodate different linguistic facts and
allows for adequate recording of language speci-
ficity due to its flexibility concerning the ?filling? of
the meta-concept. Since it moreover includes the
UML?s extension mechanisms such as constraints
and stereotypes, it can even be more easily adapted
to modeling needs ? modeling elements and thus
cognitive components can, if necessary, be adjusted.
The degree of granularity of a representation and
thus the understanding of what is primitive within a
modeling can be aligned to the modeling purposes.
It is our hope that the UER is a modeling language
that can be universally applied to model verbal se-
mantics because of its general flexibility, no matter
what natural language?s verbal system is described
and what granularity is needed for the semantic de-
scriptions.
4 Applicability in Linguistic Research
This last section is devoted to an outlook on what
the UER should be able to do and where poten-
tial applications of this new modeling language can
possibly be found. Within linguistic semantics, the
UER is expected to facilitate and enhance research.
First of all, as has already been indicated, it forces
semanticists to reflect on their representations, in
particular on the structure they model and on what
they consider to be primitive components within
their endeavour. The syntax of the UER has been
specified with the aim to allow sensible linguistic
modeling; ensuring that diagrams are syntactically
correct (that is, conform to the specification) will be
of invaluable help in semantic work, and the design
of the UER allows, as has been argued, to achieve
cognitive adequacy more easily than other rigorous
linguistic frameworks do. Secondly, the UER sup-
plies mechanisms to capture any potential compo-
nent of verbal semantics, thus allowing for compre-
hensive modeling. Thirdly, case studies applying
the UER framework have shown a strong potential
of the UER in capturing structural relations between
different readings of one lexical item and also be-
tween different lexical items. In other words, the
UER is a practical tool for the study of semantic re-
lationships.
In the study of polysemy, that is, the study of lex-
ical items (elements of our lexicon) and their differ-
ent readings shared on systematic grounds, expli-
cating the different readings in the UER allows to
pin down the systematic changes from one reading
to another (cf., for instance, Chapter 9 in Schalley
2004). A comparison of UER diagrams and intu-
itions of native speakers in cases of polysemy has
shown a thrilling interconnection. The closer the
modeling of the different readings were structurally
to each other, the surer were native speakers intu-
itively that the readings in questions were instances
of polysemy. On the other hand, it seems as if at
least a major change affecting one of the graphi-
cal modeling elements has to occur ? such as the
gain of a participant (cf. the two readings of wake
up as modeled in Fig. 1 and 2) ? in order for na-
tive speakers to readily identify different readings
of a lexical item and not to consider instances of
both readings to be instantiations of only one read-
ing used in different contexts.
Taking the distinction between structure and con-
tent into account, the UER offers a new perspective
on decompositional semantics. In eliminating all
content within modeled readings and just keeping
the graphical structure, one can ask what changes
the remaining structures can undergo and whether
one finds instances of such changes in the seman-
tics of natural languages. This enables scholars to
systematically study not only polysemy, but also se-
mantic change and verb classification, and to deter-
mine where irregularities in meaning structures of
natural languages are to be found. Moreover, al-
ternations such as causativation or resultatives can
be systematically captured and studied within the
UER.
In addition, it might be interesting to ask what
degree of complexity eventity structures can maxi-
mally obtain while still being lexicalized in a single
verb. In other words: what are possible verbs? This
can be investigated within the UER framework, be-
cause the UER in principle allows for the modeling
of eventities which are too complex to be coded in a
single verb. For instance, one would expect that, if
there are two prominent participants involved (i.e.,
actor and undergoer), there has to be some inter-
action between the participants, some causation to
take place in order for the modeled eventity to be
lexicalized. A verb expressing that something be-
comes liquid and another something becomes full
at the same time is not likely to exist (also cf. Kauf-
mann 1995: 198f.). Systematic analysis applying
the UER can show which structures are most likely
ruled out because they do not constitute a cognitive
unit, with the missing unity showing up in uncon-
nected swimlanes within the dynamic core, for in-
stance.
There are, due to the proximity of the UER to
the UML, not only theoretical linguistic, but natu-
rally computational linguistic applications that sug-
gest themselves. For example, the usefulness of
UER structures for machine translation could be ex-
plored. Pattern matching could be applied to UER
diagrams. Having the semantics of a verb in the
source language captured in a diagram, one could
ask which verb and thus which representation dia-
gram in the target language would be most appro-
priate for the translation.8 This should be the verb
the representation of which comes ?closest? to the
modeled one in the source language. Evidently, cri-
teria for what is considered to be ?closest? would
have to be identified.
Apart from progress in scientific discovery, the
UER as a UML-based modeling language is a new
modeling language that allows for envisaging ap-
plications also in speech processing systems, for
example. The UER is a rigorous, but cognitively
oriented, non-iconic, but intuitive decompositional
modeling language both suitable for human and
computational usage. We hope that the UER will be
tested extensively and applied to different research
areas within theoretical and computational linguis-
tics. Since it is a rather new modeling language, its
testing is just about to begin, but we are confident
that the UER will prove very fruitful for many re-
search enterprises.
References
William Frawley 1992. Linguistic Semantics. Hills-
dale: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Ingrid Kaufmann 1995. Konzeptuelle Grundla-
gen semantischer Dekompositionsstrukturen. Die
Kombinatorik lokaler Verben und pr?adikativer
Komplemente. (Linguistische Arbeiten 335.)
Tu?bingen: Niemeyer.
Object Management Group 2003. OMG Unied
Modeling Language Specication. Version 1.5.
Andrea C. Schalley 2004. Cognitive Modeling and
Verbal Semantics. A Representational Frame-
work Based on UML. (Trends in Linguistics.
Studies and Monographs 154.) Berlin/New York:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Robert D. Van Valin and Randy J. LaPolla 1997.
Syntax: Structure, Meaning and Function. (Cam-
bridge Textbooks in Linguistics.) Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Dieter Wunderlich 1996. Models of lexical de-
composition. Lexical Structures and Language
Use. Proceedings of the International Confer-
ence on Lexicology and Lexical Semantics, ed.
8 This is of course a simplification of the translation prob-
lem, because idiomatic constructions and syntactic environ-
ments are, for instance, not taken into account ? or one
would have to model them within the UER as well.
Edda Weigand and Franz Hundsnurscher. Tu?bin-
gen: Niemeyer, 169?183.
Dieter Wunderlich 1997. Cause and the structure of
verbs. Linguistic Inquiry 28(1):27?68.
Dietmar Zaefferer 2002. Polysemy, polyvalency,
and linking mismatches. The concept of rain and
its codings in English, German, Spanish, and Ital-
ian. DELTA ? Documentac?
?
ao de Estudos em
Ling?u?stica T?eorica e Aplicada 18(spe.):27?56.
Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Teaching Natural Language Processing, pages 35?41,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Learning from OzCLO, the Australian Computational and Linguistics 
Olympiad 
 
Dominique Estival 
U. of Western Sydney 
d.estival@uws.edu.au 
John Henderson 
U. of Western Australia 
john.henderson@uwa.edu.au 
Mary Laughren 
U. of Queensland 
m.laughren@uq.edu.au 
 
Diego Moll? 
Macquarie U. 
diego.molla-
aliod@mq.edu.au 
Cathy Bow 
Charles Darwin U. 
cathy.bow@cdu.edu.au 
Rachel Nordlinger 
U. of Melbourne 
racheln@unimelb.edu.au 
Verna Rieschild 
Macquarie U. 
verna.rieschild@mq.edu.au 
Andrea C. Schalley 
Griffith U. 
a.schalley@griffith.edu.au 
 Alexander W. Stanley 
Macquarie U. 
alexander.stanley@students.mq.edu.au  
Colette Mrowa-Hopkins 
Flinders U.  
colette.mrowa-hopkins@flinders.edu.au 
 
 
Abstract 
The Australian Computational and Linguistics 
Olympiad (OzCLO) started in 2008 in only 
two locations and has since grown to a na-
tionwide competition with almost 1500 high 
school students participating in 2013. An Aus-
tralian team has participated in the Interna-
tional Linguistics Olympiad (ILO) every year 
since 2009. This paper describes how the 
competition is run (with a regional First 
Round and a final National Round) and the or-
ganisation of the competition (a National 
Steering Committee and Local Organising 
Committees for each region) and discusses the 
particular challenges faced by Australia (tim-
ing of the competition and distance between 
the major population centres). One major fac-
tor in the growth and success of OzCLO has 
been the introduction of the online competi-
tion, allowing participation of students from 
rural and remote country areas. The organisa-
tion relies on the good-will and volunteer 
work of university and school staff but the 
strong interest among students and teachers 
shows that OzCLO is responding to a demand 
for linguistic challenges. 
1 Introduction 
The Australian Computational and Linguistic 
Olympiad (OzCLO, www.ozclo.org.au) began as 
an idea in late 2007, largely prompted by a par-
ent in Ballarat, a small town in Victoria, who 
came across the North American competition 
(NACLO, Radev et al 2008) on the internet and 
thought it was something that her daughter 
would be interested in doing.  Her emails to the 
organisers of NACLO, asking about the likeli-
hood of such an event being run in Australia, led 
to initiating contact with the Australasian Lan-
guage Technology Association (ALTA) with the 
suggestion that a computational linguistic olym-
piad be established in Australia. Dominique Es-
tival (then at Appen Pty Ltd, and a member of 
the ALTA Steering Committee) took on the pro-
ject and, jointly with Jane Simpson (then from 
the University of Sydney), Rachel Nordlinger 
and Jean Mulder (from the University of Mel-
bourne), ran the first ever Australian Computa-
tional and Linguistic Olympiad in 2008, with 
financial support from HCSNet (the Human 
Communication Science Network), and help 
from ALTA (the Australasian Language Tech-
nology Association), ALS (the Australian Lin-
guistic Society) and CSIRO (the Commonwealth 
Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation).  
The first competition was held in two locations ? 
the University of Melbourne (Victoria) and the 
University of Sydney (New South Wales) ? with 
a total of 119 students participating from 22 
schools.  Given the success of this first competi-
tion, 2009 saw the addition of four new locations 
around Australia (Adelaide, South Australia; 
Brisbane, Queensland; Canberra, ACT; Perth, 
Western Australia) and the sending of the na-
tional winning team to the International Linguis-
tic Olympiad in Wroclaw, Poland. Since then 
OzCLO has run every year, with the recent addi-
tion of two regions (NSW-North in 2010 and 
Northern Territory in 2013) and the participation 
of an Australian team in every ILO.  
35
2 Philosophy, Aims and Principles 
The immediate aim of OzCLO (Simpson and 
Henderson, 2010) is to introduce high school 
students to language puzzles from which they 
can learn about the richness, diversity and sys-
tematic nature of language, and develop their 
reasoning skills. The general value of this type of 
knowledge and skills in high school education 
has not been specifically articulated to potential 
participants or their teachers, schools or parents, 
as it has in the UK (UKLO, 2011; Hudson and 
Sheldon, 2013). However, informal feedback and 
the participation rate both indicate a widespread 
perception in the school sector that this type of 
activity has educational value, albeit with differ-
ent focuses in different schools. For many of the 
schools that participate, OzCLO provides a 
means to meet their institutional responsibility to 
provide extra-curricular activities that are intel-
lectually stimulating and broadening for aca-
demically high-achieving students (under rubrics 
such as ?gifted and talented?). Some schools offer 
OzCLO to a wider range of students.  
The broader aim of OzCLO is to promote 
awareness of, and interest in linguistics and 
computational linguistics in high schools and in 
the wider community, and more specifically to 
increase enrolments in these disciplines at uni-
versity level. A further goal is that this will ulti-
mately attract people to careers in these areas. 
Linguistics has traditionally had little recognition 
at high school level in Australia, even within 
language education, although more recently there 
is linguistics content at upper high school level in 
the English Language course in Victoria and in 
the new national English curriculum. OzCLO has 
been running in most regions long enough to see 
participants reaching university, and although 
there has been no proper research on the impact 
of OzCLO on enrolments, there is anecdotal evi-
dence that some former participants have chosen 
to study at least some linguistics. 
Consistent with the key aim of promoting in-
terest, OzCLO operates on the principles that 
participation should be fun and should offer 
achievable if challenging tasks to a wide range of 
students across science and humanities interests, 
especially in the First Round. Schools are pro-
vided with a training package of problems which 
starts with a simple morphological analysis that 
is suitable to do as a whole-class exercise even if 
they do not proceed to the competition itself. In 
both rounds participation takes place in school-
based teams, rather than individual competition. 
This is partly to encourage students to learn to 
communicate their analytical ideas, to collabo-
rate effectively, and to provide mutual support 
and social interaction. It also offers some organ-
isational advantages in terms of registration and 
marking. Because team members may have dif-
ferent levels of ability, the competition process 
does not necessarily identify the highest achiev-
ing individuals, but this risk is out-weighed by 
the benefits of teams. The organisation of the 
First Round as separate competitions in each re-
gion provides each team with a smaller pool to 
compete in initially and a distinct level of local 
achievement. However, since there are consider-
able differences in the number of teams in each 
region, and the top teams from each region are 
invited into the National Round, the national 
competition does not necessarily consist of the 
highest achieving teams nationally and there is 
currently discussion of methods to minimise this 
effect. Finally, the results are structured to rec-
ognise participation as well as high achievement: 
in addition to recognising the top teams, all 
teams receive certificates in the categories Gold 
(top ?25%), Silver (next ?25%) and Bronze (re-
mainder). 
3 Organising the Annual Competition 
3.1 University level 
All Australian states and territories (with the ex-
ception of Tasmania) now participate in OzCLO 
and there is typically one Local Organising 
Committee (LOC) for each geographical region. 
There are currently eight LOCs (soon to be nine 
with the addition of a third New South Wales 
region).  Each LOC has the responsibility for 
student and school liaison, university space 
booking, recruiting volunteer academic and stu-
dent helpers, running the competitions, publicis-
ing the event locally, and finding cash or in-kind 
sponsorship (e.g. for rooms, venues, printing and 
prizes). 
The National Steering Committee (NSC) 
comprises the Chair of each LOC, the Problems 
Coordinator, the Treasurer, the OZCLO Web-
master and the Online Competition Coordinator.  
The NSC?s role is to coordinate between LOCs, 
make and implement OzCLO decisions, and co-
ordinate national sponsorships and publicity. A 
training package is developed by the NSC and 
provided online each year, on the OzCLO web-
site and within the online competition site. The 
NSC Chair has the responsibility of ensuring the 
coordination and execution of tasks for OzCLO, 
36
both nationally and internationally. The NSC 
Chair and the Problems Coordinator liaise with 
ELCLO (English Linguistics and Computational 
Linguistics Olympiads) with regard to develop-
ing annual problem sets, and with the Interna-
tional Linguistics Olympiad (ILO/IOL) with re-
gard to the international competition. NSC mem-
bers may have dual responsibilities. 
 Because of the distances between regional 
centres, the NSC meetings are all conducted via 
teleconferences, and committee members share 
documents and records using Airset, a cloud-
based collaboration site. 
3.2 School level 
OzCLO operates on a democratic basis, with the 
devolution of decision making passing from NSC 
to LOC to school teacher to students. Teacher 
and student feedback often contributes to NSC 
discussions. Information is disseminated to 
school teachers through the website as well as 
through emails from the region?s LOC. This in-
formation is also shared via Facebook and Twit-
ter accounts. Training sessions are provided 
online, at universities and, in some cases, within 
schools.  Teachers register teams of 4 members 
at the Junior (Years 9 and 10) or Senior level 
(Years 11-12) online. There is no limit to regis-
trations for the online competition, but registra-
tions for the offline competition (in which stu-
dents typically attend the organising University 
campus) may be constrained by University venue 
availability issues. Some schools have Linguis-
tics Clubs, and OzCLO is a strong focus for their 
activities.  In some regions, schools with over 80 
participating students request in-house training 
and invigilation for an offline First Round. 
3.3 The public face of OzCLO 
OzCLO has a website (www.ozclo.org.au) and a 
social media presence with Twitter and Facebook 
accounts for communications and promotion. 
Most LOCs have been successful in gaining pub-
licity for OzCLO through their University media 
departments. Many schools publish pictures and 
items about OzCLO achievements in their school 
newsletters. Some individual schools have fea-
tured in the local press after results of competi-
tions have been published. OzCLO has also fea-
tured in national radio segments. 
4 The OzCLO Competition  
4.1 Competitions Rounds  
The OzCLO competition consists of two rounds, 
a regional or state-wide First Round and a Na-
tional Round. In both, school-based teams of up 
to four students attempt to solve five or six lin-
guistic problems in two hours. The teams are 
divided into Senior and Junior sections, with the 
Senior teams drawn from the last two years of 
high school (Tears 11 and 12) while the Junior 
teams are drawn from the two preceding years 
(Years 9 and 10). The same problems sets and 
competition conditions hold for both Senior and 
Junior teams. The top three teams from each 
LOC are invited to go on to the National Round 
which is held under the same conditions. If the 
top Junior team is not in the overall top three 
teams, then it is also invited. The Senior team 
which wins the National Round is invited to rep-
resent Australia at the ILO. 
4.2 Problem sets 
In its first two years, OzCLO greatly benefited 
from NACLO, which allowed use of their prob-
lem sets. Some additional problems were com-
posed by linguists engaged in the running of the 
competition, or their colleagues. Since 2009, 
OzCLO has been part of ELCLO, the English 
Language Computational Linguistics Olympiad, 
in which participating countries (Australia, Ire-
land, North America and the United Kingdom) 
contribute to a shared set of problems. Because 
of the OzCLO rationale described above, an at-
tempt is made to try to have a mix of problems 
based on data from a wide range of languages, 
and also a wide range of data types. Different 
levels of difficulty are included so that students 
have the satisfaction of being able to solve most 
of the problems. The aim is to show students that 
analysing language phenomena can be fun as 
well as challenging, and also that linguistic skills 
can be applied to some very practical tasks. The 
problems include: deciphering non-Roman 
scripts; translation tasks involving typical mor-
phological and syntactic analysis; computational 
linguistic tasks; search for phonological rules, or 
linguistic reconstruction. 
4.3 Training for ILO 
Since 2009, an Australian team has participated 
in every ILO. While the main goal of OzCLO 
has always been the promotion of language stud-
ies, linguistic knowledge and analysis skills in 
37
Australian high schools, the appeal of potentially 
participating in an international competition has 
proved an additional incentive for many of the 
students and their teachers. However, because of 
the rationale for OzCLO discussed above, the 
problems used in the First Round and even the 
National Round are not nearly as difficult as the 
actual ILO problems. Therefore the Australian 
team needs to be given additional training before 
competing at the international level. This training 
was first provided by a coach accompanying the 
team at the ILO but we have found that this was 
insufficient and too late to be helpful. We now 
provide training sessions aimed at solving ILO-
level problems to the winning team prior to trav-
elling to the ILO. This has resulted in higher re-
sults, including an individual silver medal in 
2011 and honourable mentions in 2010 and 2012. 
5 Participation 2008-2013 
OzCLO has evolved from 22 schools and 119 
competing students in 2008 to 87 schools and 
1,451 competing students in 2013. Some schools 
have participated each year, and there has been a 
steady increase in new schools. Private and se-
lective government schools have so far been the 
majority in most regions, but the numbers of 
government schools participating are growing. 
All participating schools are highly enthusiastic 
about the OzCLO competitions. 
OzCLO naturally attracts schools keen on of-
fering a new kind of challenge to students in 
their GATS (gifted and talented students) pro-
grammes. However, teachers (not only language 
teachers, but also mathematics and computer sci-
ences teachers) also comment that OzCLO is a 
rare kind of competition because it provides fun, 
challenge, stimulation and team work for any 
student. 
A challenge for Australia compared with 
Europe or North America is the enormous dis-
tance between rural and metropolitan areas, mak-
ing it difficult for many schools in rural areas to 
participate in an offline University-based compe-
tition. The advent of the online option gives ur-
ban, rural and country remote students equity in 
access. Thanks to this plus a strong marketing 
drive in that state, numbers have increased dra-
matically in Queensland. In other regions, some 
schools prefer the university campus experience 
offered by the offline option. 
As Table 1 shows, numbers have increased 
steadily over the six years since inception. In 
2013, Australia?s population of 23 million has 
provided nearly as many Linguistics Olympiads 
competitors as has the United States and Canada 
combined, whose population figures are fifteen 
times more than Australia?s. The OzCLO par-
ticipation rate is 6.4 per 100,000 population. For 
UKLO it is 4.55, and for NACLO 0.49. 
6 Going on-line 
In the first four years of OzCLO?s existence, the 
competition was offered on campus by academic 
staff volunteers from a number of mainly metro-
politan Universities. Participating teams travelled 
from their schools to the respective Universities? 
campuses to take part in the Training Session and 
the First Round, except for NSW, where several 
OzCLO representatives also travelled to schools 
with a large participation base, in order to run the 
competition at the school. Teachers often re-
ported that these visits to the University campus 
were a highlight for the participating students 
who very much enjoyed the experience. 
Nonetheless, a number of drawbacks to this 
approach became apparent quite early. These 
included: 
? The difficulty of organising suitable venues 
on campus for running the competition due to 
the timing of the First Round (usually coin-
ciding with Universities? Orientation Week or 
their first weeks of teaching in the first semes-
ter). 
? The distance factor with the result that only 
schools within travel distance could partici-
pate in the competition (in the case of Queen-
sland, for instance, no school beyond a dis-
tance of about 100kms from campus partici-
pated in the offline competition). Given the 
size of Australia, most regional and rural 
schools were thus virtually excluded from 
competing. 
? Constraints on availability of venues and 
markers put a cap on the overall number of 
students who could compete in each region. 
Thus, the number of schools and the number 
of students per school had to be limited by the 
local committees from the outset (e.g. in 
Queensland, only two teams per school were 
able to compete, although some schools 
wished to enrol many more).  
 
 
38
LOC 
 
2008 
Schools/ 
students 
2009 
Schools/ 
Students 
2010 
Schools/ 
students 
2011 
Schools/ 
students 
2012 
Schools/ 
students 
2013 
Schools/ 
students 
Region  
population 
000s 
Participants 
per 100,000 
population 
NSW-S 10 
64 
14 
105 
[fn/a] 
92 
15 
279 
12 
289 
9 
312 
7,314 5.24 
NSW-N n/a  n/a  5 
40 
7 
58 
5 
60 
6 
71 
VIC 12 
55 
11 
90 
[fn/a] 
120 
9 
115 
16 
245 
18 
304 
5,649 5.38 
ACT n/a  7 
30 
5 
83 
5 
72 
9 
136 
9 
161 
377 42.76 
QLD n/a  11 
60 
15 
90 
15 
106 
20 
312 
25 
377 
4,585 8.22 
SA n/a  [fn/a]  
29 
5 
33 
3 
19 
4 
27 
3 
34 
1,658 2.05 
NT n/a  n/a  n/a  n/a  n/a  6 
80 
236 33.86 
WA n/a  10 
78 
11 
144 
16 
143 
14 
120 
12 
120 
2,451 4.90 
TAS n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 512 0 
Overall  119 
students 
392 
students 
602 
students 
792  
students 
1069  
students 
1459  
students 
22,786 6.40 
Table 1:  Participation schools/students 
(n/a = not applicable = LOC was not participating;  [fn/a] =figure not available 
 
In order to address these issues, it was de-
cided to offer an online option in 2012, using 
Griffith University?s Learning Management 
System. This lifted restrictions on numbers 
(both school and students per school), and 
schools were able to compete from anywhere 
in Australia if they so wished. As a result, 
schools located as far as 1,500 kms from the 
metropolitan areas have successfully partici-
pated in the competition, and some schools 
registered more than 20 teams in the latest 
competition. With the online option, the over-
all number of participants has increased dra-
matically (see Table 2). For instance, Victoria 
saw the number of their participants double 
from 2011 to 2012, while numbers in Queen-
sland nearly tripled. Even in those regions that 
shifted to exclusively offering the online op-
tion (such as Queensland in the last two years), 
most schools have remained in the competi-
tion. 
 
 
 2012 2013 
LOC Online students On campus students Online Students On-campus Students 
NSW-S 91 198 120 192 
NSW-N 60 [on/a] 8 63 
VIC 137 108 195 109 
ACT 64 72 115 46 
QLD 312 [on/a] 377 on/a 
SA 0 27 34 on/a 
WA 28 92 120 on/a 
NT n/a n/a 80 on/a 
Table 2: Participation numbers by mode (online/on-campus) 
 (n/a = not applicable (LOC was not participating);  [fn/a] =figure not available;  
[on/a] =option not available) 
39
In terms of students competing online vs. 
on-campus, except for the NSW-N region, 
there is a distinct shift towards participating 
online. Feedback from teachers has shown that 
in many cases it is easier for teams to stay 
within the school grounds for the competition 
rather than to travel to the University campus. 
For some schools, however, travelling to the 
University campus is still one of the major 
benefits they would not want to lose. For this 
reason most LOCs offer both on-campus and 
online options. Some regions choose to only 
offer the online option (with a training session 
at the University). 
Teams participating online have access to 
training materials and all the necessary infor-
mation, which is made available through the 
OzCLO website well before the competition 
day. This site also allows teams to familiarise 
themselves with the online testing system. On 
the day, all teams across Australia compete at 
the same time on the same day and within the 
same two hour period (to compensate for time 
zone differences, teams started at 12:00 in 
WA, 13:30 in the NT, 14:00 in QLD, 14:30pm 
in SA and 15:00 in the ACT, NSW and VIC in 
the 2013 competition). 
In terms of process and technical require-
ments, each participating team needs access to 
an Internet-enabled computer on the day of the 
competition. No special software is required on 
the school?s computers. The problem set is 
made available to teachers shortly before the 
competition commences, in order to allow 
them to print and copy the problems for the 
students. Students usually work on the paper 
copy, and then access the computer to enter 
their responses.  There is also a virtual class-
room set up for live communication during the 
competition, in order to allow students and 
teachers to ask questions but also to show stu-
dents that there are hundreds of competitors 
participating from around the country at the 
same time.  
Overall, the addition of the online alterna-
tive has been a very beneficial development for 
OzCLO. The strong growth in overall partici-
pant numbers over recent years is not simply 
due to the online option, but this has certainly 
played a major role. It remains to be seen if 
there is even more potential for growth ? espe-
cially in areas outside of the major cities. 
7 Challenges 
One of the main challenges OzCLO faces is 
the timing of the competition in relation to the 
schedule of the international linguistics compe-
titions. The Australian school year begins in 
February and ends in December, and the uni-
versity year is roughly March to November, in 
contrast to the September-June academic cal-
endars of the northern hemisphere. In order for 
an Australian team to be selected with enough 
time to prepare for participation in the ILO, the 
National Round needs to be held before the 
Easter break (March/April). For Universities 
and schools, this creates a very rushed timeline 
at the busiest time of the school/academic year. 
As mentioned earlier, another challenge for 
Australia is the vast distances between metro-
politan areas, where most of the universities 
are located. In spite of the success of the online 
competition, so far OzCLO has had mostly a 
metropolitan base and has not yet fully en-
gaged in marketing to regional and rural areas 
across the whole country. Targeting appropri-
ate teachers within schools can also be a chal-
lenge, as experience has shown that often the 
information does not filter through to the rele-
vant teachers (these are usually the coordina-
tors of Languages, Gifted Education, Mathe-
matics, or Computing programmes). Contact-
ing the professional associations for the differ-
ent teaching specialties could ensure that in-
formation is disseminated more efficiently. 
Funding is not guaranteed, and fundraising 
efforts are not rewarded every year. All organ-
isational efforts at University and school level 
depend on good-will and volunteering as well 
as donations. Changes in Heads of Depart-
ments in Universities and principals in schools 
can impact negatively on funds and participa-
tion levels. This means that core issues need to 
be resolved again every year, for example, the 
ongoing maintenance of the OzCLO web-
site/online registration system, which is both a 
challenge and a solution to other issues. The 
OzCLO website hosting is provided by Mac-
quarie University and the site is maintained by 
a student volunteer.  It has served as the central 
hub of information, with other modes (email, 
Facebook and Twitter) leading back to it for 
detailed information.  In addition to ordinary 
information, it also enables self-service regis-
tration, and the automated generation of PDF 
certificates after the competition. These facili-
ties and the volunteer support of the webmaster 
40
have significantly lowered the administrative 
and financial overhead for the organisers.  
An additional problem for OzCLO is the 
division of Australia?s most populated state 
(NSW, with almost a third of Australia?s popu-
lation) into northern and southern regions, 
which leads to one state providing double the 
competitors of other states into the National 
Round. A model is needed whereby all com-
petitors, no matter whether they come from a 
small or a large region, have an equal opportu-
nity to compete in the National Round.  
Finally, while OzCLO has been able to con-
tribute a number of linguistic problems to the 
ELCLO pool, it has proved extremely difficult 
to obtain contributions from Computational 
Linguistics (Estival, 2011). 
8 Conclusions 
In conclusion, running the OzCLO competition 
has been an activity well worth the effort, and 
it is very rewarding that it has become a fixture 
in the academic calendar for many schools. 
Students, teachers and principals have been 
extremely positive about the experience, giv-
ing encouraging feedback and expressing 
strong support for the competition. The recent 
increases in participation rates have come from 
new regions (only one Australian state cur-
rently has no LOC, but possibilities are being 
explored in this area), new schools, and larger 
numbers from individual schools (up to 100 
participants from a single school). Some 
schools have started a linguistics club as after 
school activity, and others are promoting their 
experiences on social media.  
While there is no data currently available 
regarding any effect on enrolments in tertiary 
linguistics programs, increased interest in and 
awareness of linguistics is certainly a positive 
outcome for a discipline which faces chal-
lenges of funding and viability. The coopera-
tion of academics from universities across the 
country in all the LOCs and the NSC, plus the 
support of the Australian Linguistics Society 
(ALS) and of the Australasian Language 
Technology Association (ALTA), make the 
competition a truly national event. This means 
that the competition is not dependent on any 
one single person or institution (although com-
petition within particular regions is), and al-
lows for further growth. Ongoing funding and 
continued support from both universities and 
schools across the country should see contin-
ued growth in the popularity and spread of the 
competition. 
References  
Derzhanski, Ivan, and Thomas Payne. (2010). The 
linguistic olympiads: academic competitions in 
linguistics for secondary school students. Lin-
guistics at school: language awareness in pri-
mary and secondary education, ed. By Kristin 
Denham and Anne Lobeck, 213?26. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Estival, Dominique. (2011). ?OzCLO: The Austra-
lian Computational Linguistic Olympiad?. Pro-
ceedings of the Australasian Language Technol-
ogy Association Workshop 2011. Canberra, Aus-
tralia.  
Hudson, Richard, and Sheldon, Neil. (2013). ?Lin-
guistics at School: The UK Linguistics Olym-
piad.? Language and Linguistics 
pass, Volume 7, Issue 2. pp. 
Radev, Dragomir R., Lori S. Levin, and Thomas E. 
Payne. (2008). ?The North American Computa-
tional Linguistics Olympiad (NACLO)?. In Pro-
ceedings of The Third Workshop on Issues in 
Teaching Computational Linguistics, Columbus, 
OH, USA. 
91?104,  
Simpson, Jane, and Henderson, John. (2010).  Aus-
tralian Computational and Linguistics Olympiad. 
Cross Section, Vol. 20, No. 3, July 2010: 10-14.  
United Kingdom Linguistics Olympiad Committee. 
(n.d.) The Linguistics Olympiads: Lots of fun, 
but are they educa-
tional? http://www.uklo.org/?page_id=35  .
41
