Web Coverage of the 2004 US Presidential Election 
 
 
Arno Scharl 
Know-Center & Graz  
University of Technology 
Graz, Austria 
scharl@ecoresearch.net  
 Albert Weichselbraun 
Vienna University of Economics and 
Business Administration 
Vienna, Austria 
weichselbraun@ecoresearch.net
 
  
 
Abstract 
When corporations, news media and ad-
vocacy organizations embrace networked 
information technology, intentionally or 
unintentionally, they influence democra-
tic processes. To capture and understand 
the influence of publicly available elec-
tronic content, the US Election 2004 Web 
Monitor1 tracked the online coverage of 
US presidential candidates, and investi-
gated how this coverage reflected their 
position on environmental issues. 
1 Introduction 
Most attempts to monitor the campaign perfor-
mance of presidential candidates focus on public 
opinion, which is influenced by the consumption 
of media products. Analyzing patterns of politi-
cal communication, however, should include the 
consumption as well as the production of content 
(Howard 2003). Monitoring candidates' coverage 
on the Web provides a complementary source of 
empirical data and window into the evolving 
concept of electronic democracy (Dutton, El-
berse et al 1999). 
A recent Pew/Internet survey (Horrigan, 
Garrett et al 2004) found that four out of ten US 
Internet users aged 18 or older accessed political 
material during the 2004 presidential campaign, 
up 50 percent from the 2000 campaign. For po-
litical news in general, more than two thirds of 
American broadband users and over half the dial-
up users seek Web sites of national news organi-
zations. International news sites are the second 
most popular category at 24 and 14 percent, re-
spectively.  
                                                 
1 http://www.ecoresearch.net/election2004 
As traditional media extend their dominant 
position to the online world, analyzing their Web 
sites should therefore reflect the majority of po-
litical content accessed by the average user. 
2 Impact of New Media on Public  
Opinion 
Representative democracy offers significant pos-
sibilities for exploiting information networks 
(Holmes 2002), but there is little agreement on 
their specific impact. Proponents praise the net-
works? potential to increase the accessibility of 
information, encourage participatory decision-
making, and facilitate communication with pol-
icy officials and like-minded citizens. From an 
advocate?s perspective, disseminating environ-
mental information via the Internet, directly or 
through news media, creates awareness by em-
phasizing the interdependency of ecological, eco-
nomic, and social issues (Scharl 2004). 
Critics portray McLuhan?s global village as a 
?neofeudal manor with highly fortified and opu-
lent castles (centers of industrial, financial, and 
media power) surrounded by vast hinterlands of 
working peasants clamoring for survival and rec-
ognition? (Tehranian 1999, p55f.). They argue 
that information networks polarize society by 
linking groups with similar political views. Low-
overhead forms of personal publishing (Gruhl, 
Guha et al 2004) such as Web logs and online 
discussion forums, for example, might reinforce 
a group?s world view and shun opposing opin-
ions. This reinforcement, amplified by biased 
media coverage, polarizes groups (Sunstein 
2004) and degrades the climate of public dis-
course (Horrigan, Garrett et al 2004). 
The communication strategies of news media, 
corporations and advocacy organizations affect 
democratic processes. Yet they only condition, 
rather than determine these processes. Assuming 
35
deterministic effects of information networks 
neglects the world?s ambivalence, and results in 
conflicting claims regarding the networks? politi-
cal impact. News media are free to choose which 
candidate to emphasize, and how to interpret cur-
rent events (Wayne 2001). Most Americans pre-
fer unbiased news sources (Horrigan, Garrett et 
al. 2004), but Web sites tend to reflect their own-
ers? political agenda, and thus contribute to a 
polarized electorate.  
While a narrow margin decided the last two 
US presidential elections, differences in the can-
didates? positions became more pronounced in 
2004, and the political deliberation more parti-
san. Partisans tend to perceive mass media con-
tent as biased against their point of view. Expla-
nations for this hostile media effect range from 
selective recall (preferentially remembering hos-
tile content), selective categorization (perceiving 
the same content differently) and conflicting 
standards (considering hostile content as invalid 
or irrelevant). Recent research suggests that se-
lective categorization best explains hostile media 
effects (Schmitt, Gunther et al 2004). 
3 Methodology 
Given an increasingly polarized electorate and 
hostile media effects that impair partisans? judg-
ment, analyzing political Web content requires 
objective measures of organizational bias. Yet 
the volume and dynamic nature of Web docu-
ments complicate testing the assumption of or-
ganizational bias. To address this challenge, the 
US Election 2004 Web Monitor sampled 1,153 
Web sites in weekly intervals. The project drew 
upon the Newslink.org, Kidon.com and ABYZ-
NewsLinks.com directories to compile a list of 42 
US news organizations and 72 international sites 
from four other English-speaking countries: 
Canada, United Kingdom, Australia and New 
Zealand. To extend the study, the sample in-
cluded the Web sites of the Fortune 1000 (the 
largest US corporations ranked by revenue) and 
39 environmental organizations. 
Considering the dynamics of Web content in 
general and presidential campaigns in particular 
(Howard 2003), a crawling agent mirrored these 
Web sites by following their hierarchical struc-
ture until reaching 50 megabytes of textual data 
for news media, and 10 megabytes for commer-
cial and advocacy sites. These limits help com-
pare sites of heterogeneous size, and reduce the 
dilution of top-level information by content in 
lower hierarchical levels (Scharl 2000). 
Such a collection of recorded content used for 
descriptive analysis is often referred to as corpus. 
This research investigated and visualized regu-
larities in three groups of Web sites by applying 
methods from corpus linguistics and textual sta-
tistics (Biber, Conrad et al 1998; Lebart, Salem 
et al 1998; McEnery and Wilson 2001).  
Quantitative textual analysis of Web docu-
ments necessitates three steps in order to yield a 
useful machine-readable representation (Lebart, 
Salem et al 1998):  
? The first step converts hypertext documents 
into plain text ? i.e., processing the gathered 
data and eliminating markup code and script-
ing elements. 
? The second step segments the textual chain 
into minimal units by removing coding am-
biguities such as punctuation marks, the case 
of letters, hyphens, or points in abbrevia-
tions. In the case of the Election Monitor, 
this process yielded about half a million 
documents each week, comprising about 125 
million words in 10 million sentences. The 
system then identified and removed redun-
dant segments such as headlines and news 
summaries, whose appearance on multiple 
pages distorts frequency counts. 
? The third step, identification, groups identi-
cal units and counts their occurrences ? i.e., 
creating an inventory of words, or multi-
word units of meaning (Danielsson 2004). 
The frequency of candidate references pre-
sented in the following section is based on 
such an exhaustive index, which often uses 
decreasing frequency of occurrence as the 
primary sorting criterion and lexicographic 
order as the secondary criterion.  
Frequency of References (Attention) 
Media coverage and public recognition go hand-
in hand (Wayne 2001), documented by strong 
correlations between the attention of news media 
and both public salience and attitudes toward 
presidential candidates (Kiousis and McCombs 
2004). The US Election 2004 Web Monitor cal-
culated attention as the relative number of refer-
ences to a candidate. To determine references to 
candidates or environmental topics, a pattern 
matching algorithm considered common term 
inflections while excluding ambiguous expres-
sions. Only identifying occurrences of george w. 
bush, for example, ignores equally valid refer-
ences to president bush and george walker bush.  
36
 Figure 1. US Election 2004 Web Monitor one day after the election (Nov 3, 2004) 
Yet a general query for bush fails to distin-
guish the president?s last name from references 
to wilderness areas or woody perennial plants. 
After the election, nearly two thirds of the me-
dia references mentioned George W. Bush and 
Dick Cheney, up four percentage points from the 
preceding week (Figure 1). About one third re-
ported on John Kerry and John Edwards. The 
Fortune 1000 companies and environmental or-
ganizations dedicated over 80 percent of their 
coverage to the president and his running mate.  
Across all three samples, the independent team 
of Ralph Nader and Peter Camejo garnered less 
than five percent of the attention. 
4 Semantic Orientation of References 
(Attitude) 
Calculating the frequency of candidate refer-
ences disregards their context (Yi, Nasukawa et 
al. 2003). Therefore, the system also tracked atti-
tude, the semantic orientation of a sentence to-
wards the candidates (Scharl, Pollach et al 
2003).  
The algorithm calculated the distance between 
the target word and 4,400 positive and negative 
words from the General Inquirer?s tagged dic-
tionary (Stone, Dunphy et al 1966). Reverse 
lemmatization added about 3,000 terms to the 
dictionary by considering plurals, gerund forms, 
past tense suffixes and other syntactical varia-
tions (e.g. manipulate ? manipulates, manipulat-
ing, manipulated). 
Two sentences from news media on Novem-
ber 4 exemplify positive vs. negative coverage of 
a topic (zero indicates neutral coverage). The 
underlined words, identified in the tagged dic-
tionary, were used to compute the semantic ori-
entation of sentences with oil price references. 
? ?US stocks rallied Wednesday, boosted by 
shares of health and defence companies that 
are seen benefiting from the re-election of 
President George W. Bush, but higher oil 
prices checked advances? (NEW ZEALAND 
HERALD). ? (+ 4.09) 
? ?The dollar hit its lowest level in more than 
eight months against the Euro Thursday, fal-
ling sharply on worries about the economic 
effects of rising oil prices and expectations 
of continued trade and budget deficits in 
President Bush's second term? (ST. PETERS-
BURG TIMES). ? (? 4.03) 
Initially, media coverage favored the Republi-
cans, although the Democratic contenders gained 
ground in September 2004 (Figure 2). Kerry's 
performance in the first televised debate acceler-
ated these gains in media attitude, followed by a 
tight race between the two teams in the four 
weeks preceding the election. The re-election of 
George W. Bush again widened the gap, under-
standably considering the positive connotation of 
terms such as winning and victory. 
 
 
37
Bush/Cheney Kerry/Edwards Nader/Camejo
US Media
After Election
Attitude
-5
0
5
10
36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47
Fortune 1000
-5
0
5
10
15
36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45
20
Environmental Organizations
Week
46 47
 
Figure 2. Attitude of the US Media, the Fortune 1000 and environmental organizations 
towards the US presidential candidates between September and November 2004 
Compared to the news media, the other two 
samples showed more bias. Fortune 1000 com-
panies presented the Republican candidates most 
favorably, while environmental organizations 
tended to criticize the environmental record of 
George W. Bush ? particularly abandoning the 
Kyoto Treaty ratification, and reducing air pollu-
tion controls through the Clear Skies Act.  
To investigate these claims, separate analyses 
related environmental issues to Web sites and 
candidates. In terms of energy policy, for exam-
ple, one such analysis investigated Web coverage 
of renewable energy, fossil fuels and nuclear 
power ? a crucial aspect in light of recent geopo-
litical events and the global environmental im-
pact of US energy policy decisions. On a micro 
level, the Election Monitor?s Web site allowed 
users to list sentences containing both candidate 
references and energy-related terms, and sort 
these sentences by semantic orientation. 
 
Figure 3. Perceptual map of energy terms among international news media 
38
On a macro level, the perceptual map of 
Figure 3 summarizes the prominence of energy 
terms among international media sites. The dia-
gram is based on correspondence analysis, which 
processed the table of term frequencies as of 17 
September 2004. Related concepts and organiza-
tions appear close to each other in the computa-
tionally created two-dimensional space. The cir-
cular and rectangular markers represent energy-
related concepts and media sites, respectively. 
When interpreting the diagram it is important to 
note that term frequency, not media attitude, de-
termines the position of data points. 
The distribution of data points shows a tripolar 
structure: fossil fuels in the upper left, renewable 
energies in the upper right, and nuclear energy 
near the bottom of the diagram. The diagram il-
lustrates news organizations with distinct content 
? Fox News and Time, for example, with their 
coverage of nuclear energy and wind energy, 
respectively. Geographic differences are also 
apparent. Fossil fuels align with many Australian 
media, reflecting the country?s richness in min-
eral resources. Most business publications con-
gregate around fossil fuels as well, Business 
Week being a notable exception.  
References to fuel cells and hydrogen often 
appear together. Their potential use with various 
energy sources explains their slightly isolated 
position. Combining the energy carrier hydrogen 
with fuel cell conversion technology yields high 
efficiency and low pollution in applications such 
as zero-emission vehicles, energy storage and 
portable electronics. 
5 Refining Attitude Measures 
Lexically identical occurrences with differing 
or even opposite meanings, depending on the 
context, represent an inherent problem of auto-
matically determining the semantic orientation of 
Web content (Wilson, Wiebe et al 2005). Word-
sense ambiguity, for example, is a common phe-
nomenon. Arrest as a noun takes custody by le-
gal authority, for example, while arrest as a verb 
could mean to catch or to stop. Similarly, in eco-
nomics the noun good refers to physical objects 
or services. As an adjective, good assigns desir-
able or positive qualities. Part of speech tagging 
considers this variability by annotating Web con-
tent and distinguishing between nouns, verbs, 
adjectives and other parts of speech.  
Besides differences in word-sense, analysts 
also encounter other types of ambiguities ? e.g., 
idiomatic versus non-idiomatic term usage, or 
various pragmatic ambiguities involving irony, 
sarcasm, and metaphor (Wiebe, Wilson et al 
2005). 
Given the considerable size of the corpus and 
the need to publish results in weekly intervals, 
the system was designed to maximize throughput 
in terms of documents per second. A comparably 
simple approach restricted to single words and 
without sentence parsing ensured the timely 
completion of the weekly calculations.  
Planned extensions will add multiple-word 
combinations to the tagged dictionary to discern 
morphologically similar but semantically differ-
ent terms such as fuel cell and prison cell. Yet 
the lexis of Web content only partially deter-
mines its semantic orientation, despite using 
multi-word units of meaning instead of single 
words or lemmas (Danielsson 2004). Prototypi-
cal implementations such as the OpinionFinder 
(Wilson, Hoffmann et al 2005) have demon-
strated that grammatical parsing can successfully 
address this limitation by identifying ambiguities 
and capturing meaning-making processes at lev-
els beyond lexis ? correctly identifying, annotat-
ing and evaluating nested expressions of various 
complexity (Wiebe, Wilson et al 2005). 
6 Keyword Analysis 
Keyword Analysis locates words in a given 
text and compares their frequency with a refer-
ence distribution from a usually larger corpus of 
text. To complement measures of attention and 
attitude towards a candidate, keywords grouped 
by political party and geographic region high-
lighted issues associated with each candidate. 
For that purpose, the system compared the term 
frequencies in sentences mentioning a candidate 
(target corpus) with the term frequencies in the 
entire sample of 1,153 Web sites from media 
organizations, the Fortune 1000, and environ-
mental organizations (reference corpus). 
The results suggest that personalities and 
campaign events dominate over substantive pol-
icy issues, a possible reason for the average 
voter?s limited interest in and knowledge about 
political processes (Wayne 2001). Table 1 sum-
marizes keywords that US news media associ-
ated with the presidential candidates and their 
running mates in the week preceding the elec-
tion. The list ranks keywords by decreasing sig-
nificance, computed via a chi-square test with 
Yates? correction for continuity. To avoid out-
liers, the list only considers nouns with at least 
100 occurrences in the reference corpus. 
39
Republicans Democrats Independents 
George Bush Dick Cheney John Kerry John Edwards Ralph Nader Peter Camejo 
debate lynne nominee carolina ballot opinion 
challenger daughter vietnam running percent running 
iraq halliburton challenger debate candidacy respondents 
gore debate debate nominee advocate electors 
war lesbian massachusetts gephardt party commonwealth 
speech rumsfeld nomination iowa supreme ballot 
nominee pensacola war ashton gore endorsement 
guard rally rival optimism petition nominee 
hussein wyoming speech north court battleground 
terrorism wilmington clinton trail pennsylvania balance 
Table 1. Keywords of US news media (Oct 27, 2004)  
The keywords document that the television 
debates between the major candidates and their 
running mates remained topical up until the elec-
tion. The war on terrorism and persistent prob-
lems in dealing with insurgents in Iraq dogged 
Bush, while his challenger?s service in Vietnam 
continued to occupy the media.  
Vice-President and former CEO of Hallibur-
ton Cheney was busy, traveling to Pensacola, 
Wyoming and Wilmington and addressing media 
questions about his wife Lynne and his lesbian 
daughter Mary. A speech of former President 
Clinton, joining Kerry in his first appearance af-
ter undergoing heart surgery, reminded unde-
cided voters of more prosperous times. At the 
same time, actor Ashton Kutcher hit the cam-
paign trail for John Edwards, senator from North 
Carolina and running mate of John Kerry.  
Although the Supreme Court refused his can-
didacy in Pennsylvania over invalid nominating 
petitions, Ralph Nader was on the ballot in more 
than 30 states. Articles about him reiterated con-
troversies over vote-splitting in the previous 
election, and the Supreme Court's decision to end 
the Bush vs. Gore recounts in December 2000. 
7 Conclusion and Future Research 
The US Election 2004 Web Monitor provided a 
weekly snapshot of international Web coverage, 
measuring attention and attitude towards the US 
presidential candidates. Keywords grouped by 
political party and geographic region summarize 
issues associated with each candidate. 
Compared to the Web sites of news media, 
campaign managers have less control of spin and 
impact in media that rely on citizenry for mes-
sage turnover (Howard 2003). Extending the cur-
rent system will allow measuring information 
propagation, not only among corporate Web sites 
but also via Web logs, online discussion forums 
and other forms of personal publishing. Investi-
gating the propagation of political content in 
such environments requires large samples to 
measure spatial effects, and frequent monitoring 
to account for temporal effects.  
For measuring information propagation, Gruhl 
et al (Gruhl, Guha et al 2004) suggest distin-
guishing between internally driven, sustained 
discussions (chatter) and externally induced 
sharp rises in activity (spikes). Occasionally, 
spikes result from chatter through resonance 
when insignificant events trigger massive reac-
tions. Resonance occurs when individual interac-
tions generate large-scale, collective behavior, 
often showing a sensitive dependence on initial 
conditions. Social network analysis attempts to 
explain such macroscopic propagation of infor-
mation between people, groups and organizations 
(Kumar, Raghavan et al 2002). By disseminat-
ing information via their social networks, indi-
viduals create strong peer influence that often 
surpasses exogenous influences. 
Efforts to create a more responsible electorate 
(Dutton, Elberse et al 1999) can leverage this 
peer influence to trigger self-reinforcing content 
propagation among individuals. Relationships 
between these individuals determine the paths of 
information dissemination. It is along these paths 
that inter-individual communication multiplies 
the impact of spikes and creates widespread at-
tention. Knowledge on the structure and deter-
minants of these paths could help promote issue-
oriented voting. This in turn would lead to a bet-
ter-informed electorate aware of its leadership 
choices, and able to hold decision-makers ac-
countable. 
40
Modeling the production, propagation and 
consumption of political Web will help address 
four research questions: How redundant is Web 
content, and what technical and organizational 
factors influence information flows within the 
network? Can existing models of information 
propagation such as hub-and-spoke, syndication 
and peer-to-peer adequately explain these infor-
mation flows? How does Web content influence 
public opinion, and what are appropriate meth-
ods to measure and model the extent, dynamics 
and latency of this process? Finally, which con-
tent placement strategies increase the impact on 
the target audience and support self-reinforcing 
propagation among individuals? 
 
Acknowledgements. Our first word of appre-
ciation goes to Jamie Murphy for his ongoing 
support throughout the project. We would also 
like to thank Astrid Dickinger, Wilhelm Langen-
berger, Wei Liu, Antonijo Nikolic, Maya Pu-
rushothaman, Dave Webb and Mark Winkler for 
their valuable help and suggestions. The US 
Election 2004 Web Monitor represents an initia-
tive of the Research Network on Environmental 
Online Communication (www.ecoresearch.net), 
cooperating with the University of Western Aus-
tralia, Graz University of Technology, Vienna 
University of Economics and Business Admini-
stration, and the Know-Center,  which is funded 
by the Austrian Competence Center program 
Kplus under the auspices of the Austrian Minis-
try of Transport, Innovation and Technology 
(http://www.ffg.at) and by the State of Styria. 
References 
Biber, D., S. Conrad, et al (1998). Corpus Lin-
guistics ? Investigating Language Structure 
and Use. Cambridge, Cambridge University 
Press. 
Danielsson, P. (2004). "Automatic Extraction of 
Meaningful Units from Corpora", Interna-
tional Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 8(1): 
109-127. 
Dutton, W. H., A. Elberse, et al (1999). "A Case 
Study of a Netizen's Guide to Elections", 
Communications of the ACM, 42(12): 48-54. 
Gruhl, D., R. Guha, et al (2004). Information 
Diffusion Through Blogspace. 13th Interna-
tional World Wide Web Conference, New 
York, USA, ACM Press. 
Holmes, N. (2002). "Representative Democracy 
and the Profession", Computer, 35(2): 118-
120. 
Horrigan, J., K. Garrett, et al (2004). The Inter-
net and Democratic Debate. Washington, Pew 
Internet & American Life Project. 
Howard, P. N. (2003). "Digitizing the Social 
Contract: Producing American Political Cul-
ture in the Age of New Media", The Commu-
nication Review, 6: 213-245. 
Kiousis, S. and M. McCombs (2004). "Agenda-
Setting Effects and Attitude Strength ? Politi-
cal Figures during the 1996 Presidential Elec-
tion", Communication Research, 31(1): 36-57. 
Kumar, R., P. Raghavan, et al (2002). "The Web 
and Social Networks", Computer, 35(11): 32-
36. 
Lebart, L., A. Salem, et al (1998). Exploring 
Textual Data. Dordrecht, Kluwer Academic 
Publishers. 
McEnery, T. and A. Wilson (2001). Corpus Lin-
guistics. Edinburgh, Edinburgh University 
Press. 
Scharl, A. (2000). Evolutionary Web Develop-
ment. London, Springer. http://webdev.wu-
wien.ac.at/. 
Scharl, A., Ed. (2004). Environmental Online 
Communication. London, Springer. 
http://www.ecoresearch.net/springer/. 
Scharl, A., I. Pollach, et al (2003). Determining 
the Semantic Orientation of Web-based Cor-
pora. Intelligent Data Engineering and Auto-
mated Learning, 4th International Conference, 
IDEAL-2003 (Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
ence, Vol. 2690). J. Liu, Y. Cheung and H. 
Yin. Berlin, Springer: 840-849. 
Schmitt, K. M., A. C. Gunther, et al (2004). 
"Why Partisans See Mass Media as Biased", 
Communication Research, 31(6): 623-641. 
Stone, P. J., D. C. Dunphy, et al (1966). The 
General Inquirer: A Computer Approach to 
Content Analysis. Cambridge, MIT Press. 
Sunstein, C. R. (2004). "Democracy and Filter-
ing", Communications of the ACM, 47(12): 
57-59. 
Tehranian, M. (1999). Global Communication 
and World Politics ? Domination, Develop-
ment, and Discourse. Boulder, Lynne Rienner. 
41
Wayne, S. J. (2001). The Road to the White 
House 2000 ? The Politics of Presidential 
Elections. New York, Palgrave. 
Wiebe, J., T. Wilson, et al (2005). "Annotating 
Expressions of Opinions and Emotions in 
Language", Language Resources and Evalua-
tion 39(2-3): 165-210. 
Wilson, T., P. Hoffmann, et al (2005). Opinion-
Finder ? A System for Subjectivity Analysis. 
Human Language Technology Conference / 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing (HLT-EMNLP 2005), 
Vancouver, Canada. 
Wilson, T., J. Wiebe, et al (2005). Recognizing 
Contextual Polarity in Phrase-Level Sentiment 
Analysis. Human Language Technology Con-
ference / Conference on Empirical Methods in 
Natural Language Processing (HLT-EMNLP 
2005), Vancouver, Canada. 
Yi, J., T. Nasukawa, et al (2003). Sentiment 
Analyzer: Extracting Sentiments about a 
Given Topic using Natural Language Process-
ing Techniques. 3rd IEEE International Con-
ference on Data Mining, Florida, USA. 
42
