Support Vector Machines Applied to the Classification of Semantic Relations
in Nominalized Noun Phrases
Roxana Girju
Computer Science Department
Baylor University
Waco, Texas
girju@cs.baylor.edu
Ana-Maria Giuglea, Marian Olteanu,
Ovidiu Fortu, Orest Bolohan, and
Dan Moldovan
Department of Computing Science
University of Texas at Dallas
Dallas, Texas
moldovan@utdallas.edu
Abstract
The discovery of semantic relations in text
plays an important role in many NLP appli-
cations. This paper presents a method for the
automatic classification of semantic relations
in nominalized noun phrases. Nominalizations
represent a subclass of NP constructions in
which either the head or the modifier noun is
derived from a verb while the other noun is an
argument of this verb. Especially designed fea-
tures are extracted automatically and used in a
Support Vector Machine learning model. The
paper presents preliminary results for the se-
mantic classification of the most representative
NP patterns using four distinct learning mod-
els.
1 Introduction
1.1 Problem description
The automatic identification of semantic relations in text
has become increasingly important in Information Ex-
traction, Question Answering, Summarization, Text Un-
derstanding, and other NLP applications. This paper dis-
cusses the automatic labeling of semantic relations in
nominalized noun phrases (NPs) using a support vector
machines learning algorithm.
Based on the classification provided by the New Web-
ster?s Grammar Guide (Semmelmeyer and Bolander
1992) and our observations of noun phrase patterns on
large text collections, the most frequently occurring NP
level constructions are: (1) Compound Nominals consist-
ing of two consecutive nouns (eg pump drainage - an IN-
STRUMENT relation), (2) Adjective Noun constructions
where the adjectival modifier is derived from a noun (eg
parental refusal - AGENT), (3) Genitives (eg tone of con-
versation - a PROPERTY relation), (4) Adjective phrases
in which the modifier noun is expressed by a preposi-
tional phrase which functions as an adjective (eg amuse-
ment in the park - a LOCATION relation), and (5) Adjec-
tive clauses where the head noun is modified by a relative
clause (eg the man who was driving the car - an AGENT
relation between man and driving).
1.2 Previous work on the discovery of semantic
relations
The development of large semantically annotated cor-
pora, such as Penn Treebank2 and, more recently, Prop-
Bank (Kingsbury, et al 2002), as well as semantic
knowledge bases, such as FrameNet (Baker, Fillmore,
and Lowe 1998), have stimulated a high interest in the
automatic acquisition of semantic relations, and espe-
cially of semantic roles. In the last few years, many re-
searchers (Blaheta and Charniak 2000), (Gildea and Ju-
rafsky 2002), (Gildea and Palmer 2002), (Pradhan et
al. 2003) have focused on the automatic prediction of se-
mantic roles using statistical techniques. These statistical
techniques operate on the output of probabilistic parsers
and take advantage of the characteristic features of the
semantic roles that are then employed in a learning algo-
rithm.
While these systems focus on verb-argument semantic
relations, called semantic roles, in this paper we inves-
tigate predicate-argument semantic relations in nominal-
ized noun phrases and present a method for their auto-
matic detection in open-text.
1.3 Approach
We approach the problem top-down, namely identify and
study first the characteristics or feature vectors of each
noun phrase linguistic pattern and then develop models
for their semantic classification. The distribution of the
semantic relations is studied across different NP patterns
and the similarities and differences among resulting se-
mantic spaces are analyzed. A thorough understanding
of the syntactic and semantic characteristics of NPs pro-
vides valuable insights into defining the most representa-
tive feature vectors that ultimately drive the discriminat-
ing learning models.
An important characteristic of this work is that it re-
lies heavily on state-of-the-art natural language process-
ing and machine learning methods. Prior to the discovery
of semantic relations, the text is syntactically parsed with
Charniak?s parser (Charniak 2001) and words are seman-
tically disambiguated and mapped into their appropriate
WordNet senses. The word sense disambiguation is done
manually for training and automatically for testing with
a state-of-the-art WSD module, an improved version of
a system with which we have participated successfully
in Senseval 2 and which has an accuracy of 81% when
disambiguating nouns in open-domain. The discovery of
semantic relations is based on learning lexical, syntactic,
semantic and contextual constraints that effectively iden-
tify the most probable relation for each NP construction
considered.
2 Semantic Relations in Nominalized Noun
Phrases
In this paper we study the behavior of semantic relations
at the noun phrase level when one of the nouns is nom-
inalized. The following NP level constructions are con-
sidered: complex nominals, genitives, adjective phrases,
and adjective clauses.
Complex Nominals
Levi (Levi 1979) defines complex nominals (CNs) as ex-
pressions that have a head noun preceded by one or more
modifying nouns, or by adjectives derived from nouns
(usually called denominal adjectives). Each sequence of
nouns, or possibly adjectives and nouns, has a particular
meaning as a whole carrying an implicit semantic rela-
tion; for example, ?parental refusal? (AGENT).
The main tasks are the recognition, and the interpre-
tation of complex nominals. The recognition task deals
with the identification of CN constructions in text, while
the interpretation of CNs focuses on the detection and
classification of a comprehensive set of semantic rela-
tions between the noun constituents.
Genitives
In English there are two kinds of genitives; in one, the
modifier is morphologically linked to the possessive clitic
?s and precedes the head noun (s-genitive e.g. ?John?s
conclusion?), and in the second one the modifier is syn-
tactically marked by the preposition of and follows the
head noun (of-genitive, e.g. ?declaration of indepen-
dence?).
Adjective Phrases are prepositional phrases attached to
nouns and act as adjectives (cf. (Semmelmeyer and
Bolander 1992)). Prepositions play an important role
both syntactically and semantically ( (Dorr 1997). Prepo-
sitional constructions can encode various semantic re-
lations, their interpretations being provided most of the
time by the underlying context. For instance, the preposi-
tion ?with? can encode different semantic relations: (1) It
was the girl with blue eyes (MERONYMY), (2) The baby
with the red ribbon is cute (POSSESSION), (3) The woman
with triplets received a lot of attention (KINSHIP).
The conclusion for us is that in addition to the nouns se-
mantic classes, the preposition and the context play im-
portant roles here.
Adjective Clauses are subordinate clauses attached to
nouns (cf. (Semmelmeyer and Bolander 1992)). Often
they are introduced by a relative pronoun/adverb (ie that,
which, who, whom, whose, where) as in the following ex-
amples: (1) Here is the book which I am reading (book
is the THEME of reading) (2) The man who was driving
the car was a spy (man is the AGENT of driving). Adjec-
tive clauses are inherently verb-argument structures, thus
their interpretation consists of detecting the semantic role
between the head noun and the main verb in the relative
clause. This is addressed below.
3 Nominalizations and Mapping of NPs
into Grammatical Role Structures
3.1 Nominalizations
A further analysis of various examples of noun - noun
pairs encoded by the first three major types of NP-level
constructions shows the need for a different taxonomy
based on the syntactic and grammatical roles the con-
stituents have in relation to each other. The criterion in
this classification splits the noun - noun examples (re-
spectively, adjective - noun examples in complex nom-
inals) into nominalizations and non-nominalizations.
Nominalizations represent a particular subclass of NP
constructions that in general have ?a systematic corre-
spondence with a clause structure? (Quirk et al1985).
The head or modifier noun is derived from a verb while
the other noun (the modifier, or respectively, the head) is
interpreted as an argument of this verb. For example, the
noun phrase ?car owner? corresponds to ?he owns a car?.
The head noun owner is morphologically related to the
verb own. Otherwise said, the interpretation of this class
of NPs is reduced to the automatic detection and inter-
pretation of semantic roles mapped on the corresponding
verb-argument structure.
As in (Hull and Gomez 1996), in this paper we use
the term nominalization to refer only to those senses of
the nominalized nouns which are derived from verbs.
For example, the noun ?decoration? has three senses in
WordNet 2.0: an ornament (#1), a medal (#2), and the act
of decorating (#3). Only the last sense is a nominaliza-
tion. However, there are more complex situations when
the underlying verb has more than one sense that refers to
an action/event. This is the case of ?examination? which
has five senses of which four are action-related. In this
case, the selection of the correct sense is provided by the
context.
We are interested in answering the following ques-
tions: (1) What is the best set of features that can capture
the meaning of noun - noun nominalization pairs for each
NP-level construction? and (2) What is the semantic be-
havior of nominalization constructions across NP levels?
3.2 Taxonomy of nominalizations
Deverbal vs verbal noun.
(Quirk et al1985) generally classify nominalizations
based on the morphological formation of the nominal-
ized noun. They distinguish between deverbal nouns, i.e.
those derived from the underlying verb through word for-
mation; e.g., ?student examination?, and verbal nouns,
i.e. those derived from the verb by adding the gerund
suffix ?-ing?; e.g.: ?cleaning woman?. Most of the time,
verbal nouns are derived from verbs which don?t have a
deverbal correspondent.
Table 1 shows the mapping of the first three major syn-
tactic NP constructions to the grammatical role level. By
analyzing a large corpus, we have observed that Quirk?s
grammatical roles shown in Table 1 are not uniformly dis-
tributed over the types of NP-constructions. For example,
the ?
 	 
