A Very Large Dictionary with Paradigmatic, Syntagmatic, and Paronymic Links between Entries 
Igor A. Bolshakov and Alexander Gelbukh Center for Computing Research, National Polytechnic Institute, 07738 DF, Mexico igor@cic.ipn.mx, gelbukh|@|gelbukh.|com; www.gelbukh|.com 
 
Abstract 
A very large Russian dictionary is described. It contains currently 3.6 million links between its 120,000 entries. The links are syntagmatic (collocations), paradigmatic (WordNet-like), or paronymic (words similar in letters or in morphs). The entries of the dictionary are sin-gle- or multiwords belonging to four main POS. The entries represent so-called gram-memes rather than lexemes: e.g., nouns are represented as singular and plural; verbs are split into ?finite forms + infinitive?, ?participle?, and ?gerund?. The multiword entries in turn can be collocations?idiomatic free?whose parts are also entries of the same dictionary. 
1 Introduction 
The entries of modern dictionaries are usually lex-emes, and semantic relations between lexemes are only morphological derivates of the entry. E.g., Webster?s Universal College Dictionary of English gives with manufacture also manufacturable, manufactural, and manufacturer, having no entry. A rather specialized exception is WordNet (Fell-baum, 1998). It gives paradigmatic semantic links: synonymous (common gloss), antonymous (com-mon presupposed meaning, opposite assertion), XPOS links (same meaning, different POS), etc.  Other exceptions are BBI (Benson et al, 1986) and much vaster OCDSE (OCDSE, 2003), both existing only in printed form. They give colloca-tions, i.e. stable and idiomatic word combinations connected by both syntactic (immediate or through auxiliary words) and semantic links, specifically of syntagmatic type (e.g., a verb and its valence fillers, a noun with its modifiers, etc.). The entries are usually single words, whereas general linguistics also suggests multiwords, which may be both inseparable idiomatic concepts like hot dog or point of view and closely tied and fre-quently used terms like routs of communications.   This paper shortly outlines a very large elec-tronic dictionary with the following main features: 
? It adheres to the grammemic principle of selec-tion of entries. Grammemes are subsets of mor-
phological paradigms of lexemes, i.e. they are between lexemes and wordforms. E.g., noun lexemes are represented by two grammemes: singular and plural; verb lexemes are split into finite forms + infinitive, participle, and gerund. 
? Its entries are only content (semantically autonomous) single and multiwords; the latter can be additionally represented by links be-tween their components (this can be called de-composition principle of entry formation). Auxiliary words are stored as an auxiliary part of the dictionary, e.g., as a list of prepositions. 
? It includes links of three vast classes: semantic syntagmatic (as in OCDSE), semantic para-digmatic (as in WordNet), and paronymic. The latter class is new in dictionaries: it connects entries similar in letters (e.g., sigh vs. sign) or in morphs (e.g., sensible vs. sensitive).  The dictionary is the result of CrossLexica pro-ject (Bolshakov, 2004; Bolshakov and Gelbukh, 2000) and is mainly oriented to collocations.  Specifically, the objectives of this paper are: 
? To describe possible options and features for the dictionary entries; 
? To characterize types of the links: syntagmatic, paradigmatic, and paronymic; 
? To prove language independence of the CrossLexica structure; 
? To statistically characterize CrossLexica dic-tionary in its present state. We use English examples for the illustrations. 
2 Types and Features of Entries 
Wordforms are grouped together into dictionary entries basing on several important features: Parts of speech It can be any of the four main POS. The POS is defined according to the syntac-tic role: participles are considered adjectival; a prepositional phrase can be adjectival or adverbial, e.g., in substance is adjectival in unconstitutional-ity in substance (? ?substantial?) and adverbial in to verify in substance (? ?substantially?). We consider such two-functional entries homonymous. Grammemes For a Russian noun, the singular and plural have their own collocations. Printed dic-
tionaries mark this as mainly plural or the like. So we split the morphoparadigm of a noun to singular and plural, calling such sub-paradigms grammemes. Based on their syntactic roles, we divide mor-phoparadigms of verbs into the grammemes of par-ticiples (adjectival), gerunds (adverbial), and per-sonal forms plus infinitives (predicates). Russian verbs have two aspects differing in their combinability: the perfect tends to collocate with singular nouns, the imperfect being indifferent to number; the perfect is usually modified with ?con-centrated? adverbials like suddenly, at once or straightway, the imperfect preferring ?spread? ad-verbials like gradually, continuously or repeatedly. So we split verbs into aspectual grammemes. Homonyms We consider various homonyms separately. Their combinatorial differences are es-pecially useful for word sense disambiguation. Idioms Idiomatic collocations like point of view are entries, since combinability of an idiom is always different from that of its head. Their com-ponents can, though, be also entries on their own. Multiwords If a non-idiomatic multiword has a single-word synonym, we treat it as an entry, since its combinability differs from that of its head. E.g., Rus. puti soob??enija ?routes of communica-tions? has a synonym kommunikacii. Cf. a similar problem in EuroWordNet (Vossen, 2000). Absolute synonyms, abbreviations, and mor-phological variants Absolute synonyms (sofa = settee) are very rare in any language, but there are other types of equivalence: abbreviations (United States of America = USA = United States) and the so-called morphological variants (e.g., Rus. nul? = nol? ?zero? or mu?at? = mu?it? ?to torture?). Since all their collocations are the same, we store them as one entry, selecting one of them as a representative. Paste-ups Many Russian noun-headed con-cepts are used in two equivalent forms: (1) a bi-gram consisting of a modifier with the stem S1 plus its head noun with the stem S2, or (2) a single noun containing the stems S1 and S2, or their initial parts, or only S1: elektri?eskij tok ?electrical current? = elektrotok; fizi?eskij fakul?tet ?physical faculty? = fizfak; komi?eskij akter ?comical actor? = komik. The number of the paste-ups grows, especially in the newswire and everyday speech, but in diction-aries they are scarce. Our dictionary stores about three thousand of them in both forms.  Compound pairs Russian has numerous sta-ble pairs of nouns separated by a dash, usually with both parts declinable in parallel: strana-u?astnica ?participant country?, let?ik-ispytatel? ?test pilot?, zavod-izgotovitel? ?manufacturing plant?. A com-pound pair is considered an entry. Coordinated pairs Dependency links within multiwords can be of stable coordinative type: 
mother and father, safe and sound, sooner or later. We consider such pairs as both collocations (with syntagmatic links) and separate entries. E.g., each bracketed item of the term [[[probability] [theory]] and [[mathematical] [statistics]]] is an entry. Synonyms, hyperonyms/hyponyms, and anto-nyms These are semantically paradigmatic links. We take their participants as entries. Proper names We consider as entries those names that are a part of everyday life and encyclo-paedic knowledge: names of geographic objects, countries, famous persons, large organizations, etc. They are linked to their hyperonyms: country, mountains, island, writer, organization, etc. Semantic derivates These are lexemes of any POS with same basic meaning, e.g., to marry, mar-riage, bride, bridegroom, and matrimonial (XPOS in WordNet). We take such words as entries. Idiomaticity in general All complete idioms are included as collocations, e.g., sest? | v galo?u ?to get | into a fix?, lit. ?to sit | into a galosh?. In rarer cases of tripartite idioms the dichotomy was merely a practical step; e.g. in byt? | bez carja v golove ?to be stupid?, lit. ?to be | without the Tsar in one?s head?, we regard the right part as a modi-fier. Two marks are used: idiom and possible id-iom, the latter for collocations with both figurative and direct senses, e.g., sest? v lu?u means ?to get into a mess? or ?to sit down into a puddle?. Usage marks Special, bookish or obsolete: the use in writing is recommended if the meaning is clear to the writer; colloquial: the use in official writing is not recommended; vulgar: both written and oral use are prohibited; and incorrect: used sometimes but contradicts language norms.  
3 Types of Syntagmatic Links 
We define a collocation as a syntactically con-nected and semantically compatible pair of content words, like full-length dress, well expressed, to briefly expose, to pick up the knife or to listen to the radio (collocation components are underlined). Syntactical connectedness is understood as in dependency grammars (Mel??uk, 1995) (maybe through an auxiliary word), not as co-occurrence (Bentivogli and Pianta, 2002); the components can be distant in the sentence. We consider colloca-tions from absolutely free to purely idiomatic. The following are collocation types. Modifiers These are modifying or attributive components: great ? country; man ? of letters; eat ? quickly; enormously  ? big; very ? well. Verbs with their subjects The subject is a specific dependent of a predicate verb: soldier ? died; bus ? arrives. A specifically Russian type of the subject-to-predicate link is a predicate contain-
ing the copula byt? ?to be? (omitted in Russian in present tense) and an adjectival in short form: god 
? zaver?en (participle) ?the year is over?; vek ? korotok (adjective) ?the lifetime is short?. Verbs with their noun complements Noun complements of a verb are all nouns dependent on the verb as direct, indirect, or prepositional object: to read a book; to strive for peace. We also con-sider as complements circumstantial phrases like to travel by train. A word can have several comple-ments; each collocation reflects one of them, while the omission of other obligatory complement(s) is marked with the ellipsis: to give ... to the boy. Nouns / adjectivals with their noun comple-ments All POS can have noun complements, e.g., nouns the capital of the country, the struggle against poverty; adjectives blind with rage, men-tioned by the observer or going to the cinema. Verbs / nouns / adjectivals with their infini-tive complements E.g. to stop to talk or to per-mit to enter; permission to enter or cream to pro-tect; forced to return or ready to appeal.  Adverbials with their infinitive complements These are purely Russian collocations: xolodno idti ?it is cold to go?, lit. ?coldly to go?; reshiv (gerund) idti ?after having decided to go?. They are possible only with some predicative adverbs or gerunds.  Adverbials with noun complements Purely Russian: xolodno (adverb) bez pal?to ?it is cold without a coat?, lit. ?coldly without a coat?; poby-vav (gerund) v centre ?after visiting the center?.  Verbs / adjectivals with their adjectival com-plements E.g., to remain silent or to consider... stupid; remaining silent or considering ... stupid.  Coordinated pairs E.g. mom and dad, safe and sound, or sooner or later, cf. (Bolshakov et al, 2003b) for details. 
4 Types of Paradigmatic Links 
These semantic (WordNet-like) links are: Synonyms Unlike WordNet synsets, our syn-onymy groups have a dominant member and may include member(s) marked as its absolute syno-nyms. Synonyms can be periphrastic multiwords or even short definitions: to help ? to give help; fall ? quick descent; suffocation ? lack of fresh air. Non-absolute synonyms can be used for heuristic infer-ences of new collocations from those existing in the dictionary (Bolshakov and Gelbukh, 2002a). Hyponyms vs. hyperonyms Hyperonyms are also used for such inferences. Antonyms Together with standard antonyms (good?bad, vanguard?rearguard), we consider opposite notions: missiles?antimissiles. Meronyms vs. holonyms E.g. finger?hand, motor?car. 
Semantic derivates They connect parts of the morphoparadigms split into grammemes. Also, they describe the same idea from various aspects, thus compensating for the lack of glosses. 
5 Types of Paronymic Links 
The types of such links are as follows: Literal paronyms They are at the distance of few editing operations (replacement, omission, insertion, permutation of adjacent letters) from each other. E.g., for sign: sigh, sin, sing. They are useful, e.g., to correct the malapropisms (Bolsha-kov and Gelbukh, 2003a). Morphemic paronyms They are of the same POS and radix but have different prefixes and/or suffixes, e.g., sens-ation-al, sens-ible, in-sens-ible, sens-itive, sens-less, sens-ual. Foreigners? mala-propisms are often confusion of morphemic paro-nyms, so that we can immediately propose candi-dates for correcting such errors. 
Auxiliary parts of CrossLexica is a Russian-English-Russian dictionary (e.g., by two English words, the user can find a fluent Russian colloca-tion), and a generator of all morphological forms. 
6 Interlingual Structural Universality 
The system operates with two main data structures: a list of entries and a set of links between them. An entry contains a list of its morphological categories. This structure is language-independent. The specific links between entries can, however, be language specific. Let us outline grammatical peculiarities of Russian that influence these links. Nouns and adjectivals declinable In English this problem does not exist.  Too few tenses Russian verbs have only three tenses, whereas English has many. No articles For other languages, it is important to specify the forms of articles in collocations. Nouns cannot modify nouns In English the collocations like book review are quite common. A special attributive type of syntagmatic links should be introduced for such English collocations. Thus the Cross-Lexica structure is (almost) lin-guistically universal. 
7 CrossLexica Statistics and Some Discussion 
As of April 2004, the dictionary contains more than 120,000 entries. Collocations are divided into three classes: primary, secondary, and inferred.  The primary collocations are collected manually. The secondary collocations result from automatic morphological transformations of the primary ones. For example, verbs with their noun complements are transformed into adjectivals with their noun 
complements, e.g., to participate in the meeting gives participating in the meeting. Table 1 shows the statistics of the collocations. 
Type of collocations Primary Secondary Words with modifiers 281,000 99,500 Verbs + subjects 106,400 27,500 Verbs + noun complements 204,900  Nouns + noun complements 129,000  Adjectivals w/ noun compl.  13,800       173,300 Adverbials w/ noun compl. 100 148,900 Other types 29,100  Total 764,300 449,200 
Table 1: Statistics of collocations 
The inferences are performed with constraints (Bolshakov and Gelbukh, 2002a), e.g., the source collocation cannot be an idiom, to avoid the infer-ence like (hot dog)idiom & (poodle IS_A dog) ? *(hot poodle). The total of the inferred collocations never exceeded 6 to 8% of the primaries and is declining because the rare species are getting a full description within the primaries. In Table 2, other link statistics are given. All links are counted, e.g., n antonyms pairs give 2n unilateral links, and a group of n synonyms gives n(n?1)/2. The total is more than 1.2 million. Thus, the total of links of the three classes is 3.6 million.  No. Type of links Amt. of links 1 Semantic derivates 821,600 2 Synonyms 226,200 3 Meronyms vs. holonyms 20,800 4 Hyponyms vs. hyperonyms 13,100 5 Antonyms 10,500 6 Morphemic paronyms 86,600 7 Literal paronyms 24,200  Total 1,203,000 
Table 2: Statistics of paradigmatic/paronymic links 
8 Conclusion 
A dictionary of a new type was developed. Its main features are: 
? Entries belong only to nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs; they are grammemes (i.e. parts of lexemes) and can be multiwords. 
? The links between entries are of semantic (syn-tagmatic or paradigmatic) or paronymic class.  
? Its structure is interlingually universal.  Such dictionaries have a vast specter of applica-tions: language learning (Bolshakov and Gelbukh, 2002b), word processing, syntactic analysis, word sense disambiguation; semantic error detection and correction (2003a); text translation (2001b), gen-
eration and segmentation (2001a); revealing text cohesion (Gelbukh et al, 2000), steganography. 
9 Acknowledgements 
Work was done under partial support of Mexican Government (CONACyT, SNI) and CGPI-IPN. 
References  
M. Benson, E. Benson, R. Ilson. 1986. The BBI Combinatory Dictionary of English, JBP. L. Bentivogli, E. Pianta. 2002. Detecting Hidden Multiwords in Bilingual Dictionaries.  EURALEX-2002, p. 14?17. I. A. Bolshakov. 2004. Getting One?s First Mil-lion? Collocations. CICLing-2004. LNCS 2945:229?242, Springer. I. A. Bolshakov, A. Gelbukh. 2000. A Very Large Database of Collocations and Semantic Links. NLDB-2000. LNCS 1959:103?114, Springer. I. A. Bolshakov, A. Gelbukh. 2001a. Text segmen-tation into paragraphs based on local text cohe-sion. TSD-2001. LNAI 2166:158?166, Springer. I. A. Bolshakov, A. Gelbukh. 2001b. A Large Da-tabase of Collocations and Semantic Refer-ences: Interlingual Applications. International J. of Translation 13(1-2):167?187. I. A. Bolshakov, A. Gelbukh. 2002a. Heuristics-Based Replenishment of Collocation Databases. PorTAL-2002. LNAI 2389:25?32, Springer. I. A. Bolshakov, A. Gelbukh. 2002b. Ense?ando idiomas extranjeros con una base de coloca-ciones. In: La telem?tica y su aplicaci?n en la educaci?n a distancia y en la informatizaci?n de la sociedad, p. 632?638. F?lix Varela. I. A. Bolshakov, A. Gelbukh. 2003a. On Detection of Malapropisms by Multistage Collocation Testing. NLDB-2003. LNI 41:28?41. Bonner K?llen. I. A. Bolshakov, A. Gelbukh, S. Galicia-Haro. 2003b. Stable Coordinated Pairs in Text Proc-essing. TSD-2003. LNAI 2807:27?34, Springer. A. Gelbukh, G. Sidorov, I. A. Bolshakov. 2000. Dictionary-based Method for Coherence Main-tenance in Man-Machine Dialogue with Indirect Antecedents and Ellipses. TSD-2000. LNAI 1902:357?362, Springer.  Ch. Fellbaum (Ed.). 1998. WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press. I. Mel??uk. 1995. Phrasemes in Language and Phraseology in Linguistics. In: Idioms: Struc-tural and Psychological Perspectives, p. 169?252. Lawrence Erlbaum Publ., UK, 1995. OCDSE. 2003. Oxford Collocations Dictionary for Students of English. Oxford University Press. P. Vossen (ed.). 2000. EuroWordNet General Do-cument. Ver. 3, www.hum.uva.nl/~ewn. 
 
