Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Building Educational Applications Using NLP,
pages 53?60, Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?Association for Computational Linguistics, 2005
Direkt Profil: A System for Evaluating Texts of Second Language Learners
of French Based on Developmental Sequences
Jonas Granfeldt1 Pierre Nugues2 Emil Persson1 Lisa Persson2
Fabian Kostadinov3 Malin ?gren1 Suzanne Schlyter1
1Dept. of Romance Languages 2Dept. of Computer Science 3Dept. of Computer Science
Lund University Lund University University of Zurich
Box 201, 221 00 Lund, Sweden Box 118, 221 00 Lund, Sweden CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland
{Jonas.Granfeldt, Malin.Agren, Suzanne.Schlyter}@rom.lu.se
emil.person@telia.com nossrespasil@hotmail.com
Pierre.Nugues@cs.lth.se fabian.kostadinov@access.unizh.ch
Abstract
Direkt Profil is an automatic analyzer of
texts written in French as a second lan-
guage. Its objective is to produce an eval-
uation of the developmental stage of stu-
dents under the form of a grammatical
learner profile. Direkt Profil carries out
a sentence analysis based on developmen-
tal sequences, i.e. local morphosyntactic
phenomena linked to a development in the
acquisition of French.
The paper presents the corpus that we use
to develop the system and briefly, the de-
velopmental sequences. Then, it describes
the annotation that we have defined, the
parser, and the user interface. We con-
clude by the results obtained so far: on the
test corpus the systems obtains a recall of
83% and a precision of 83%.
1 Introduction
With few exceptions, systems for evaluating lan-
guage proficiency and for Computer-Assisted Lan-
guage Learning (CALL) do not use Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP) techniques. Typically, ex-
isting commercial and non-commercial programs
apply some sort of pattern-matching techniques to
analyze texts. These techniques not only reduce the
quality and the nature of the feedback but also limit
the range of possible CALL applications.
In this paper, we present a system that imple-
ments an automatic analysis of texts freely written
by learners. Research on Second Language Acqui-
sition (SLA) has shown that writing your own text
in a communicative and meaningful situation with
a feedback and/or an evaluation of its quality and
its form constitutes an excellent exercise to develop
second language skills.
The aim of the program, called Direkt Profil, is
to evaluate the linguistic level of the learners? texts
in the shape of a learner profile. To analyze sen-
tences, the program relies on previous research on
second language development in French that item-
ized a number of specific constructions correspond-
ing to developmental sequences.
2 The CEFLE Lund Corpus
For the development and the evaluation of the sys-
tem, we used the CEFLE corpus (Corpus ?crit de
Fran?ais Langue ?trang?re de Lund ?Lund Written
Corpus of French as a Foreign Language?). This
corpus currently contains approximately 100,000
words (?gren, 2005). The texts are narratives of
varied length and levels. We elicited them by ask-
ing 85 Swedish high-school students and 22 young
French to write stories evoked by a sequence of im-
ages. Figure 1 shows pictures corresponding to one
of them: Le voyage en Italie ?The journey to Italy?.
The goal of the system being to analyze French as
a foreign language, we used the texts of the French
native speakers as control group.
The following narrative is an example from a be-
53
ginner learner:
Elles sont deux femmes. Elles sont a
italie au une vacanse. Mais L?Auto est
tr?s petite. Elles va a Italie. Au l?hothel
elles demande une chambre. Un homme a
le cl?. Le chambre est grande avec deux
lies. Il fait chaud. C?est noir. Cette
deux femmes est a une restaurang. Dans
une bar cet deux hommes. Ils amour les
femmes. Ils parlons dans la bar. Ils ont
tres bien. Le homme et la femme partic-
ipat a un sightseeing dans la Rome. Ils
achetons une robe. La robe est verte. La
femme et l?homme reste au un banqe. Ils
c?est amour. La femme et l?homme est
au une ristorante. es hommes va avec les
femmes. L?auto est petite.
This text contains a certain number of typical
constructions for French as a foreign language:
parataxis, very simple word order, absence of ob-
ject pronouns, basic verb forms, agreement errors,
spelling mistakes. Research on the acquisition of
French as a foreign language has shown that these
constructions (and others) appear in a certain sys-
tematic fashion according to the proficiency level of
the learners. With Direkt Profil, we aim at detecting
automatically these structures and gathering them
so that they represent a grammatical learner profile.
This learner profile can ultimately be used to assess
learners? written production in French.
3 Direkt Profil and Previous Work
Direkt Profil is an analyzer of texts written in French
as a foreign language. It is based on the linguistic
constructions that are specific to developmental se-
quences. We created an annotation scheme to mark
up these constructions and we used it to describe
them systematically and detect them automatically.
The analyzer parses the text of a learner, annotates
the constructions, and counts the number of occur-
rences of each phenomenon. The result is a text pro-
file based on these criteria and, possibly, an indica-
tion of the level of the text. A graphical user inter-
face (GUI) shows the results to the user and visual-
izes by different colors the detected structures. It is
important to stress that Direkt Profil is not a gram-
mar checker.
The majority of the tools in the field can be de-
scribed as writing assistants. They identify and
sometimes correct spelling mistakes and grammat-
ical errors. The line of programs leading to PLNLP
(Jensen et al, 1993) and NLPWin (Heidorn, 2000)
is one of the most notable achievements. The gram-
matical checker of PLNLP carries out a complete
parse. It uses binary phrase-structure rules and takes
into account some dependency relations. PLNLP is
targeted primarily, but not exclusively, to users writ-
ing in their mother tongue. It was created for En-
glish and then applied to other languages, including
French.
Other systems such as FreeText (Granger et al,
2001) and Granska (Bigert et al, 2005) are rele-
vant to the CALL domain. FreeText is specifically
designed to teach language and adopts a interactive
approach. It uses phrase-structure rules for French.
In case of parsing failure, it uses relaxed constraints
to diagnose an error (agreement errors, for exam-
ple). Granska, unlike FreeText, carries out a par-
tial parsing. The authors justify this type of analysis
by a robustness, which they consider superior and
which makes it possible to accept more easily incor-
rect sentences.
4 An Analysis Based on Developmental
Sequences
The current systems differ with regard to the type
of analysis they carry out: complete or partial. The
complete analysis of sentences and the correction of
errors are difficult to apply to texts of learners with
(very) low linguistic level since the number of un-
known words and incorrect sentences are often ex-
tremely high.
We used a test corpus of 6,842 words to evalu-
ate their counts. In the texts produced by learners
at the lowest stage of development, Stage 1, nearly
100% of the sentences contained a grammatical er-
ror (98.9% were incorrect1) and 24.7% of the words
were unknown.2 At this stage of development, any
complete analysis of the sentences seems very diffi-
cult to us. On the other hand, in the control group the
1An ?incorrect sentence? was defined as a sentence contain-
ing at least one spelling, syntactic, morphological, or semantic
error.
2An ?unknown word? is a token that does not appear in the
lexicon employed by the system (ABU CNAM, see below)
54
Figure 1: Le voyage en Italie ?The journey to Italy?.
corresponding figures are 32.7% for incorrect sen-
tences and 10.6% for unknown words. More impor-
tantly, this analysis shows that using a quantification
of ?unknown words? and ?incorrect sentences? only
is insufficient to define the linguistic level of learn-
ers? texts. Learners at Stage 3 have in fact fewer in-
correct sentences than learners from Stage 4 (70.5%
vs. 80.2%). Moreover, the percentage of unknown
words in the control group (the natives) is slightly
higher than that of learners from the Stage 4 (10.6%
vs. 10.4%). Thus, the simple count of errors is
also insufficient to distinguish more advanced learn-
ers from natives. To identify properly and to define
learners of various linguistic levels, we need more
detailed analyses and more fine-grained measures.
This is exactly the purpose of the developmental se-
quences and learner profiles implemented in Direkt
Profil.
5 Developmental Sequences in French
Direkt Profil carries out an analysis of local phenom-
ena related to a development in the acquisition of
French. These phenomena are described under the
form of developmental sequences. The sequences
are the result of empirical observations stemming
from large learner corpora of spoken language (Bart-
ning and Schlyter, 2004). They show that certain
grammatical constructions are acquired and can be
produced in spontaneous spoken language in a fixed
order. Clahsen and al. (1983) as well as Piene-
mann and Johnston, (1987) determined developmen-
tal sequences for German and spoken English. For
spoken French, Schlyter (2003) and Bartning and
Schlyter (2004) proposed 6 stages of development
and developmental sequences covering more than 20
local phenomena. These morphosyntactic phenom-
ena are described under the form of local structures
inside the verbal or nominal domain. Table 1 shows
a subset of these phenomena. It is a matter of current
debate in field of SLA to what extent these devel-
opmental sequences are independent of the mother
tongue.
The horizontal axis indicates the temporal devel-
opment for a particular phenomenon: The develop-
mental sequence. The vertical axis indicates the set
of grammatical phenomena gathered in such way
that they make up a ?profile? or a stage of acqui-
sition. To illustrate better how this works, we will
compare the C (finite verb forms in finite contexts)
and G (object pronouns) phenomena.
55
At Stage 1, the finite and infinitive forms coexist
in finite contexts. As the main verb of the sentence,
we find in the learners? production je parle (tran-
scription of /je parl/ analyzed as a ?finite form?) as
well as /je parle/ i.e. *je parler or *je parl?. The cur-
rent estimation is that in Stage 1, there are between
50 and 75% of finite forms in finite contexts. At
Stage 4, the percentage of finite forms has increased
to 90?98%. For this morphological phenomenon,
the developmental sequence describes a successive
?morphologization?.
The G phenomenon concerns the developmental
sequence of object pronouns. The first object pro-
nouns are placed in a postverbal position according
to the scheme Subject-Verb-Object (SVO), e.g. *je
vois le/la/lui (instead of je le/la vois). At Stage 3,
learners can produce phrases according to the SvOV
scheme (Pronoun-Auxiliary-Object-Verb): Je veux
le voir (correct) but also *j?ai le vu (incorrect). At
Stage 5, we observe je l?ai vu. For this syntactic phe-
nomenon, the developmental sequence describes a
change in the linear organization of the constituents.
6 Annotation
The concept of group, either noun group or verb
group, correct or not, represents the essential gram-
matical support of our annotation. The majority of
syntactic annotation standards for French takes such
groups into account in one way or another. Gendner
et al (2004) is an example that reconciles a great
number of annotations. These standards are how-
ever insufficient to mark up all the constructions in
Table 1.
We defined a text annotation specific to Direkt
Profil based on the inventory of the linguistic phe-
nomena described by Bartning and Schlyter (2004)
(Table 1). We represented these phenomena by de-
cision trees whose final nodes correspond to a cate-
gory of analysis.
The annotation uses the XML format and anno-
tates the texts using 4 layers. Only the 3rd layer is
really grammatical:
? The first layer corresponds to the segmentation
of the text in words.
? The second layer annotates prefabricated ex-
pressions or sentences (e.g. je m?appelle).
These structures correspond to linguistic ex-
pressions learned ?by heart? in a holistic fash-
ion. It has been shown that they have a great
importance in the first years of learning French.
? The third layer corresponds to a chunk anno-
tation of the text, restricted to the phenomena
to identify. This layer marks up simulta-
neously each word with its part-of-speech
and the verb and noun groups to which they
belong. The verb group incorporates subject
clitic pronouns. The XML element span
marks the groups and features an attribute
to indicate their class in the table. The tag
element annotates the words with attributes to
indicate the lemma, the part-of-speech, and
the grammatical features. The verb group in
the sentence Ils parlons dans la bar extracted
from the learner text above is annotated as:
<span class="p1_t1_c5131"><tag
pos="pro:nom:pl:p3:mas">Ils</tag>
<tag pos="ver:impre:pl:p1">
parlons </tag></span> dans la
bar. The class denoted p1_t1_c5131
corresponds to a ?finite lexical verb, no
agreement?.
? The fourth layer counts structures typical of an
acquisition stage. It uses the counter XML
element, <counter id="counter.2"
counter_name="passe_compose"
rule_id="participe_4b"
value="1"/>.
7 Implementation
The running version of Direkt Profil is restricted to
the analysis of the verb groups and clitic pronouns.
For each category in Table 1, the program identifies
the corresponding constructions in a text and counts
them.
The analyzer uses manually written rules and a
lexicon of inflected terms. The variety of the con-
structions contained in the corpus is large and in or-
der not to multiply the number of rules, we chose
a constraint reinforcement approach. Conceptually,
the analyzer seeks classes of phrase structures in
which all the features are removed. It gradually
identifies the structures while varying the feature
56
Ph. Stages 1 2 3 4 5 6
A. % of sentences
containing a verb
(in a conversa-
tion)
20?40% 30?40% 50% 60% 70% 75%
B. % of lexical
verbs showing
+/-finite opposi-
tion (types)
No opp.;
% in finite
forms
1?3sg
10?20%
of types in
opposition
About 50%
in opposi-
tion
Most in op-
position
All in op-
position
+
C. % of finite
forms of lexical
verbs in oblig-
atory contexts
(occurrences)
Finite
forms
50%?75%
Finite
forms
70?80%
Finite
forms:
80?90%
Finite
forms:
90?98%
Finite
forms:
100%
+
D. 1st, 2nd, 3rd
pers. sing.
(copula/aux)
est, a, va
No opposi-
tion:
J?ai/ c?est
Opposition
j?ai ? il a
je suis ? il
est
Isolated er-
rors *je va,
*je a
+ + +
E. % of 1st pers.
plural S-V agree-
ment nous V-ons
(occurrences)
? 70?80% 80?95% Errors in
complex
construc-
tions
+ +
F. 3rd pers. plural
S-V agreement
with viennent,
veulent, pren-
nent
? ?
ils *prend
Isolated
cases of
agreement
50% of
cases with
agreement
Some
problems
remain
+
G. Object pronouns
(placement)
? SVO S(v)oV SovV
appears
Productive + (y, en)
H. % of gender
agreement
Article-Noun
(occurrences)
55?75% 60?80% 65?85% 70?90% 75?95% 90?
100%
Table 1: Developmental sequences adapted from Schlyter (2003); Bartning and Schlyter (2004).
Legend: ? = no occurrences; + = acquired at a native-like level; aux = auxiliary; pers. = person; S-V =
Subject-Verb
57
values. The recognition of the group boundaries is
done by a set of closed-class words and heuristics
inside the rules. It thus follows an old but robust
strategy used in particular by Vergne (1999), inter
alia, for French.
Direkt Profil applies a cascade of three sets of
rules to produce the four annotation layers. The
first unit segments the text in words. An interme-
diate unit identifies the prefabricated expressions.
The third unit annotates simultaneously the parts-of-
speech and the groups. Finally, the engine creates a
group of results and connects them to a profile. It
should be noted that the engine neither annotates all
the words, nor all segments. It considers only those
which are relevant for the determination of the stage.
The engine applies the rules from left to right then
from right to left to solve certain problems of agree-
ment.
The rules represent partial structures and are di-
vided into a condition part and an action part. The
condition part contains the search parameters. It can
be a lemma, a regular expression, or a class of inflec-
tion. The engine goes through the text and applies
the rules using a decision tree. It tests the condition
part to identify the sequences of contiguous words.
Each rule produces a positive (?match?) or negative
(?no match?) result. The rules are applied accord-
ing to the result of the condition part and annotate
the text, count the number of occurrences of the phe-
nomenon, and connect to another rule. By traversing
the nodes of the tree, the engine memorizes the rules
it has passed as well as the results of the condition
parts of these rules. When arriving at a final node,
the engine applies the action parts of all the rules.
The engine finds the words in a dictionary of
inflected terms. It does not correct the spelling
mistakes except for the accents and certain stems.
Learners frequently build erroneous past participles
inferring a wrong generalization of stems. An exam-
ple is the word *prendu (taken) formed on the stem
prend|re and of the suffix -u.
We used a lexicon available from the As-
sociation des Bibliophiles Universels? web site
(http://abu.cnam.fr/) that we corrected and trans-
posed into XML. We also enriched it with verb
stems.
8 Interface
Direkt Profil merges the annotation levels in a result
object. This object represents the original text, the
annotation, the trace of the rule application, and the
counters. The result object, which can be saved, is
then transformed by the program to be presented to
the user. The display uses the XHTML 1.1 spec-
ifications which can be read by any Web browser.
Direkt Profil has a client-server architecture where
the server carries out the annotation of a text and the
client collects the text with an input form and inter-
acts with the user.
Figure 2 shows a screenshot of Direkt Profil?s
GUI displaying the analysis of the learner text
above. The interface indicates to the user by dif-
ferent colors all the structures that the analyzer de-
tected.
9 Results and Evaluation
We evaluated Direkt Profil with a subset of the CE-
FLE corpus. We chose 20 texts randomly distributed
on 4 learner stages. We also used 5 texts coming
from the control group. In this version, we did not
test the correction of the misspelled words: accent
and stems. Table 2 shows some statistics on the size
of the texts and Table 3 shows the results in the form
of recall and precision.
The results show that Direkt Profil detects well
the desired phenomena. It reveals also interesting
differences according to the levels of the texts. The
results show that Direkt Profil analyzes better the
learner texts than the texts from the native French
adolescents (control group). Without knowing ex-
actly why, we note that it suggests that the adopted
strategy, which aims at analyzing texts in French as
a foreign language, seems promising.
10 Conclusion and Future Work
We presented a system carrying out a machine anal-
ysis of texts based on developmental sequences. The
goal is to produce a learner profile. We built a parser
and developed a set of rules to annotate the texts. Di-
rekt Profil is integrated in a client-server architecture
and has an interface allowing the interaction with the
user.
The results show that it is possible to describe the
vast majority of the local structures defined by the
58
Figure 2: The graphical user interface.
Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4 Control Total
Number of analyzed texts 5 5 5 5 5 25
Word count 740 1233 1571 1672 1626 6842
Sentence count 85 155 166 126 107 639
Average text length (in words) 148 247 314 334 325 274
Average length of sentences (in words) 8.7 7.9 9.5 13.3 15.2 10.9
Table 2: Test corpus.
Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4 Control Total
Reference structures 23 97 101 119 85 425
Detected structures 27 98 100 112 92 429
Correctly detected structures 15 81 89 96 73 354
Non detected structures 5 16 12 20 11 ()64
Overdetected structures 10 17 11 17 19 ()74
Recall 65% 84% 88% 81% 86% 83%
Precision 56% 83% 89% 86% 79% 83%
F-measure 0.6 0.83 0.89 0.83 0.82 0.83
Table 3: Results.
59
developmental sequences under the form of rules.
Direkt Profil can then detect them and automatically
analyze them. We can thus check the validity of the
acquisition criteria.
In the future, we intend to test Direkt Profil in
teaching contexts to analyze and specify, in an au-
tomatic way, the grammatical level of a learner. The
program could be used by teachers to assess student
texts as well as by the students themselves as a self-
assessment and as a part of their learning process.
A preliminary version of Direkt Pro-
fil is available on line from this address
http://www.rom.lu.se:8080/profil
References
Malin ?gren. 2005. Le marquage morphologique
du nombre dans la phrase nominale. une ?tude sur
l?acquisition du fran?ais L2 ?crit. Technical report, In-
stitut d??tudes romanes de Lund. Lund University.
Inge Bartning and Suzanne Schlyter. 2004. Stades et
itin?raires acquisitionnels des apprenants su?dophones
en fran?ais l2. Journal of French Language Studies,
14(3):281?299.
Johnny Bigert, Viggo Kann, Ola Knutsson, and Jonas
Sj?bergh. 2005. Grammar checking for Swedish sec-
ond language learners. In CALL for the Nordic Lan-
guages, Copenhagen Studies in Language, pages 33?
47. Copenhagen Business School, Samfundslitteratur.
Harald Clahsen, J?rgen M. Meisel, and Manfred Piene-
mann. 1983. Deutsch als Fremdsprache. Der
Spracherwerb ausl?ndischer Arbeiter. Narr, T?bin-
gen.
V?ronique Gendner, Anne Vilnat, Laura Mon-
ceaux, Patrick Paroubek, and Isabelle Robba.
2004. Les annotations syntaxiques de r?f?rence
peas. Technical report, LIMSI, Orsay.
http://www.limsi.fr/Recherche/CORVAL/easy/
PEAS_reference_annotations_v1.6.html.
Sylviane Granger, Anne Vandeventer, and Marie-Jos?e
Hamel. 2001. Analyse de corpus d?apprenants pour
l?ELAO bas? sur le TAL. Traitement automatique des
langues, 42(2):609?621.
George E. Heidorn. 2000. Intelligent writing assistance.
In Robert Dale, Hermann Moisl, and Harold Somers,
editors, Handbook of Natural Language Processing.
Marcel Dekker.
Karen Jensen, George E. Heidorn, and Stephen D.
Richardson. 1993. Natural Language Processing:
The PLNLP Approach. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Manfred Pienemann and Malcolm Johnston. 1987. Fac-
tors influencing the development of second language
proficiency. In David Nunan, editor, Applying sec-
ond language acquisition research, pages 45?141. Na-
tional Curriculum Resource Centre, Adelaide.
Suzanne Schlyter. 2003. Stades de d?veloppe-
ment en fran?ais L2. Technical report, Insti-
tut d??tudes romanes de Lund, Lund University.
http://www.rom.lu.se/durs/
STADES_DE_DEVELOPPEMENT_EN
_FRANCAIS_L2.PDF.
Jacques Vergne. 1999. ?tude et mod?lisation de la
syntaxe des langues ? l?aide de l?ordinateur. Analyse
syntaxique automatique non combinatoire. Synth?se et
R?sultats. Habilitation ? diriger des recherches, Uni-
versit? de Caen, 29 septembre.
60
