Proceedings of the Interactive Question Answering Workshop at HLT-NAACL 2006, pages 49?56,
New York City, NY, USA. June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
User-Centered Evaluation of Interactive Question Answering Systems 
 
Diane Kelly1, Paul B. Kantor2, Emile L. Morse3, Jean Scholtz3 & Ying Sun2 
University of North Carolina Rutgers University National Institute of Standards & Technology 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599 New Brunswick, NJ 08901 Gaithersburg, MD 
dianek@email.unc.edu kantor@scils.rutgers.edu
ysun@scils.rutgers.edu 
emile.morse@nist.gov 
jean.scholtz@nist.gov 
Abstract 
We describe a large-scale evaluation of 
four interactive question answering sys-
tem with real users.  The purpose of the 
evaluation was to develop evaluation 
methods and metrics for interactive QA 
systems. We present our evaluation 
method as a case study, and discuss the 
design and administration of the evalua-
tion components and the effectiveness of 
several evaluation techniques with respect 
to their validity and discriminatory power. 
Our goal is to provide a roadmap to others 
for conducting evaluations of their own 
systems, and to put forward a research 
agenda for interactive QA evaluation.  
1 Introduction 
There is substantial literature on the evaluation 
of systems in the context of real users and/or real-
istic problems. The overall design issues were pre-
sented by Tague-Sutcliffe (1992) in a classic paper. 
Other authors who have contributed substantially 
to the discussion include Hersh and Over (2001). 
The basic change in viewpoint required, in the 
study of interactive systems with real users, is that 
one cannot follow the Cranfield Model, in which 
specific items (whether documents, or snippets of 
information) are known to be ?good,? so that 
measures can be based on the count of such items 
(e.g., precision and recall).  Instead, one must de-
velop methods and metrics that are sensitive to 
individual users, tasks and contexts, and robust 
enough to allow for valid and reliable comparisons 
across systems.  
Most evaluations of QA systems have been con-
ducted as part of the QA Track at TREC.  They are 
system-oriented rather than user-oriented, with a 
focus on evaluating techniques for answer extrac-
tion, rather than interaction and use (Voorhees, 
2003).  In this paper, we consider an interactive 
system to be a system that supports at least one 
exchange between the user and system. Further, an 
interactive system is a system that allows the user 
full or partial control over content and action.  
While factoid QA plays a role in analytical QA, 
analytical QA also includes other activities, such as 
comparison and synthesis, and demands much 
richer interactions between the system, the infor-
mation, and the user. Thus different evaluation 
measures are needed for analytical QA systems 
than for those supporting factoid QA. Emerging 
work in the QA community is addressing user in-
teraction with factoid-based QA systems and other 
more complex QA tasks (Diekema, et al, 2004; 
Liddy, et al, 2004), but developing robust evalua-
tion methods and metrics for interactive, analytical 
QA systems in realistic settings with target users 
and tasks remains an unresolved research problem.   
We describe a large-scale evaluation of four in-
teractive QA systems with target users, completing 
target tasks. Here we present the evaluation 
method and design decisions for each aspect of the 
study as a case study.  The goal of this paper is to 
identify key issues in the design of evaluations of 
interactive QA systems and help others construct 
their own evaluations. While systems participating 
in this evaluation received individual feedback 
about the performances of their systems, the pur-
pose of the project was not to compare a series of 
systems and declare a ?winner.? In this paper we 
focus on the method and results of that method, 
rather than the performance of any one system.   
In section 2, we describe our evaluation ap-
proach, the evaluation environment, systems stud-
ied, subjects, corpus and scenarios, and 
49
experimental design. In Section 3 we report our 
instruments and other data collection techniques.  
In Section 4 we discuss our evaluation methods, 
and present key findings regarding the effective-
ness of the various evaluation techniques.  We 
conclude by considering future research directions 
for interactive QA evaluation. 
2 Evaluation Approach 
This evaluation was conducted as a two-week 
workshop. The workshop mode gives analysts an 
opportunity to fully interact with all four systems, 
complete time-intensive tasks similar to their nor-
mal work tasks and lets us evaluate a range of 
methods and metrics.    
The researchers spent approximately 3 weeks 
onsite preparing and administering the workshop.  
Intelligence analysts, the study participants, spent 2 
weeks onsite. The evaluation employed 8 analysts, 
8 scenarios in the chemical/biological WMD do-
main, and 4 systems ? 3 QA systems and a 
Google1 baseline system. Each analyst used each 
system to analyze 2 scenarios and wrote a pseudo-
report containing enough structure and content for 
it to be judged by peer analysts.  
During the planning stage, we generated hy-
potheses about interactive QA systems to guide 
development of methods and metrics for measuring 
system effectiveness. Fifteen hypotheses were se-
lected, of which 13 were operationalized. Example 
hypotheses are presented in Table 1.   
 
A good interactive QA system should ? 
1 Support information gathering with lower cognitive 
workload 
2 Assist analysts in exploring more paths/hypotheses 
3 Enable analysts to produce higher quality reports 
4 Provide useful suggestions to the analyst 
5 Provide analysts with more good surprises than bad 
   Table 1: Example hypotheses 
2.1 Evaluation Environment  
The experiment was done at the Pacific North-
west National Laboratory (PNNL) in Richland, 
WA.  We used one room with support servers, four 
rooms with two copies of one system in each and a 
                                                          
1 Any mention of commercial products or companies is for 
information only and does not imply recommendation or en-
dorsement by NIST. 
conference room seating 20, for general meetings, 
focus group discussions, meetings among observ-
ers, meetings among developers, etc.  
2.2 QA Systems  
Three end-to-end interactive QA systems and a 
Google baseline were used.  System developers 
were assigned a room, and installed their systems 
on two workstations in the room. 
Before analysts used each system, they were 
trained by the system developer. Training included 
a skills check test, and free experimentation. 
Methods of training included: a script with trainees 
reproducing steps on their own workstations, a 
slide presentation with scripted activities, a presen-
tation from a printed manual, and a presentation, 
orally and with participation, guided by a checklist. 
The workstations used during the experiment 
were Dell workstations configured with Windows 
XP Professional with updated OS, Intel Pentium 
IV processor 3.40 Ghz 512 K/800 Mhz, 2 GB 
DDR 400 SD RAM, 120 GB SATA 7200 RPM 
hard drive with Data Burst Cache, video card, 
floppy drive, 16 DVD ROM, and 48/32/48 CDRW.   
2.3 Subjects 
Analysts who participated in the study were 
volunteers serving their yearly two-week service 
requirement as U.S. Naval Reservists.  Analysts 
were recruited by email solicitation of a large pool 
of potential volunteers. The first 8 positive re-
sponders were inducted into the study.  
We collected the following data from analysts: 
age, education level, job type, number of years in 
the military, number of years conducting analysis 
work, computer usage, computer expertise, and 
experience with querying systems. Data about ana-
lysts characterizes them on several dimensions.  
With small samples, this step is critical, but it is 
also important in studies with larger samples. This 
type of data lets us describe participants in pub-
lished reports and ask whether individual differ-
ences affect study results. For instance, one might 
look for a relationship between computer experi-
ence and performance.   
2.4 Scenarios 
Scenarios were developed by a team of analysts 
from the Air Force Rome Research Lab, and were 
50
vetted to produce 14 appropriate to the collection 
and target participants. We found after the first two 
scenarios that while scenario descriptions were 
sufficient in describing the content of the task, im-
portant information regarding context of the de-
scription and the format of the report, such as 
customer and length, was lacking. This omission 
generated ambiguity in report creation, and caused 
some uncertainty for the analysts on how to pro-
ceed with the task. Thereafter, analysts met as a 
group in the conference room to agree on addi-
tional specifications for each scenario when it was 
assigned. In addition to this information, the pro-
ject director and one analyst worked together to 
design a template for the report, which established 
a uniform report structure, and specified formatting 
guidelines such as headings and length.  An exam-
ple scenario is displayed in Figure 1.  
Scenario B: [country] Chemical Weapons Program  
 
Before a U.S. military presence is reestablished in 
[country], a current, thorough study of [country] 
chemical weapons program must be developed. Your 
task is to produce a report for the Secretary of the 
United States Navy regarding general information on 
[country] and the production of chemical weapons. 
Provide information regarding [country] access to 
chemical weapons research, their current capabilities 
to use and deploy chemical weapons, reported stock-
piles, potential development for the next few years, 
any assistance they have received for their chemical 
weapons program, and the impact that this informa-
tion will have on the United States. Please add any 
other related information to your report. 
 
Customer: Secretary of U.S. Navy 
Role: Country desk ? [country] 
What they want: General report on [country] and 
CW production 
Figure 1. Example Scenario 
2.5 Corpus 
Using the live Web would make it impossible to 
replicate the experiment, so we started with the 
AQUAINT corpus from the Center for Non-
Proliferation Studies (CNS). The CNS data con-
sists of the January 2004 distribution of the Eye on 
Proliferation CD, which has been "disaggregated" 
by CNS into about 40,000 documents. Once the 
initial 14 scenarios were delivered to NIST, they 
were characterized with respect to how well the 
CNS corpus could support them.  Several scenarios 
had less than 100 documents in the CNS corpus, so 
to increase the number of documents available for 
each scenario we supplemented the corpus by min-
ing the Web. 
Documents were collected from the Web by 
semi-automated querying of Google and manual 
retrieval of the documents listed in the results. A 
few unusually large and useless items, like CD im-
ages, pornography and word lists, were deleted.  
The approximate counts of different kinds of files, 
as determined by their file extensions, are summa-
rized in Table 2.   
Source All Files Documents Images 
CNS 40192 39932 945
Other 261590 48035 188729
Table 2: Characteristics of corpus in bytes 
2.6 Experimental Design  
The evaluation workshop included four, two-day 
blocks. In each block, a pair of analysts was as-
signed to each room, and a single observer was 
assigned to the pair of analysts.  Analysts used the 
two machines in each room to work independently 
during the block.  After each block, analysts and 
observers rotated to different system rooms, so that 
analysts were paired together only once and ob-
servers observed different analysts during each 
block.  The goal in using designed experiments is 
to minimize the second-order interactions, so that 
estimates of the main effects can be obtained from 
a much smaller set of observations than is required 
for a full factorial design.  For instance, one might 
imagine potential interaction effects of system and 
scenario (some systems might be better for certain 
scenarios); system and analysts (some analysts 
might adapt more quickly to a system); and analyst 
and scenario (some analysts might be more expert 
for certain scenarios).  To control these potential 
interactions, we used a modified Greco-Latin 4x4 
design.  
This design ensured that each analyst was ob-
served by each of the four observers, and used each 
of the four systems.  This design also ensured that 
each system was, for some analyst, the first, sec-
ond, third or last to be encountered, and that no 
analyst did the same pair of scenarios twice.  Ana-
lyst pairings were unique across blocks. Following 
standard practice, analysts and scenarios were ran-
51
domly assigned codenames (e.g. A1, and Scenario 
A), and systems were randomly assigned to the 
rows of Table 3.  Although observers were simply 
rotated across the system rows, the assignment of 
human individuals to code number was random.  
 
Dates Day 1 2 Day 3 4  Day 5 6 Day 7 8 
Scenarios A, B C, D E, F G, H 
O1 O2 O3 O4
A1 A2 A3 A4System 1 
A5 A6 A7 A8
O2 O1 O4 O3
A4 A3 A2 A1System 2 
A7 A8 A5 A6
O3 O4 O1 O2
A2 A1 A4 A3System 3  
A8 A7 A6 A5
O4 O3 O2 O1
A3 A4 A1 A2System 4 
A6 A5 A8 A7
Table 3.  Experimental design (O=observer; 
A=analyst) 
3 Data Collection 
System logs and Glass Box (Hampson & Crow-
ley, 2005) were the core logging methods provid-
ing process data. Post-scenario, post-session, post-
system and cognitive workload questionnaires, 
interviews, focus groups, and other user-centered 
methods were applied to understand more about 
analysts? experiences and attitudes. Finally, cross-
evaluation (Sun & Kantor, 2006) was the primary 
method for evaluating reports produced. 
Each experimental block had two sessions, cor-
responding to the two unique scenarios.  Methods 
and instruments described below were either ad-
ministered throughout the experimental block (e.g., 
observation and logging); at the end of the session, 
in which case the analyst would complete two of 
these instruments during the block (e.g., a post-
session questionnaire for each scenario); or once, 
at the end of the experimental block (e.g., a post-
system questionnaire). We added several data col-
lection efforts at the end of the workshop to under-
stand more about analysts? overall experiences and 
to learn more about the study method. 
3.1 Observation  
Throughout the experimental sessions, trained 
observers monitored analysts? interactions with 
systems.  Observers were stationed behind ana-
lysts, to be minimally intrusive and to allow for an 
optimal viewing position.  Observers used an Ob-
servation Worksheet to record activities and behav-
iors that were expected to be indicative of analysts? 
level of comfort, and feelings of satisfaction or 
dissatisfaction.  Observers noted analysts? apparent 
patterns of activities. Finally, observers used the 
Worksheet to note behaviors about which to fol-
low-up during subsequent session interviews.   
3.2 Spontaneous Self-Reports   
During the evaluation, we were interested in ob-
taining feedback from analyst in situ.  Analysts 
were asked to report their experiences spontane-
ously during the experimental session in three 
ways: commenting into lapel microphones, using 
the ?SmiFro Console? (described more fully be-
low), and completing a three-item online Status 
Questionnaire at 30 minute intervals. 
The SmiFro Console provided analysts with a 
persistent tool for commenting on their experiences 
using the system. It was rendered in a small display 
window, and analysts were asked to leave this 
window open on their desktops at all times. It dis-
played smile and frown faces, which analysts could 
select using radio buttons. The Console also dis-
played a text box, in which analysts could write 
additional comments. The goal in using smiles and 
frowns was to create a simple, recognizable, and 
quick way for analysts to provide feedback. 
The SmiFro Console contained links to the 
Status Questionnaires which were designed to so-
licit analysts? opinions and feedback about the 
progress of their work during the session.  Each 
questionnaire contained the same three questions, 
which were worded differently to reflect different 
moments in time. There were four Status Ques-
tionnaires, corresponding to 30-minute intervals 
during the session:  30, 60, 90, 120 minutes.   
3.3 NASA TLX Questionnaire  
After completing each scenario, analysts com-
pleted the NASA Task Load Index (TLX)2. The 
NASA TLX is a standard instrument used in avia-
tion research to assess pilot workload and was used 
in this study to assess analysts? subjective cogni-
tive workloads while completing each scenario.   
The NASA TLX assesses six factors: 
 
                                                          
2 http://www.nrl.navy.mil/aic/ide/NASATLX.php  
52
1. Mental demand: whether this searching task 
affects a user's attention, brain, and focus.  
2. Physical demand: whether this searching 
task affects a user's health, makes a user 
tired, etc.  
3. Temporal demand: whether this searching 
task takes a lot of time that can't be af-
forded.  
4. Performance: whether this searching task is 
heavy or light in terms of workload.  
5. Frustration: whether this searching task 
makes a user unhappy or frustrated.  
6. Effort: whether a user has spent a lot of ef-
fort on this searching task.  
3.4 Post-Scenario Questionnaire 
Following the NASA TLX, analysts completed 
the six-item Scenario Questionnaire.  This Ques-
tionnaire was used to assess dimensions of scenar-
ios, such as their realism and difficulty.   
3.5 Post-Session Questionnaire   
After completing the Post-Scenario Question-
naire, analysts completed the fifteen-item Post-
Session Questionnaire.  This Questionnaire was 
used to assess analysts? experiences using this par-
ticular system to prepare a pseudo-report. Each 
question was mapped to one or more of our re-
search hypotheses. Observers examined these re-
sponses and used them to construct follow-up 
questions for subsequent Post-Session Interviews.   
3.6 Post-Session Interview 
Observers used a Post-Session Interview Sched-
ule to privately interview each analyst. The Inter-
view Schedule contained instructions to the 
observer for conducting the interview, and also 
provided a list of seven open-ended questions. One 
of these questions required the observer to use 
notes from the Observation Worksheet, while two 
called for the observer to use analysts? responses to 
Post-Session Questionnaire items.   
3.7 NASA TLX Weighting Instrument  
After using the system to complete two scenar-
ios, analysts completed the NASA-TLX Weighting 
instrument.  The NASA-TLX Weighting instru-
ment was used to elicit a ranking from analysts 
about the factors that were probed with the NASA-
TLX instrument. There are 15 pair-wise compari-
sons of 6 factors and analysts were forced to 
choose one in each pair as more important. A sim-
ple sum of ?wins? is used to assign a weight to 
each dimension, for the specific analyst.  
3.8 Post-System Questionnaire 
After the NASA-TLX Weighting instrument, 
analysts completed a thirty-three item Post-System 
Questionnaire, to assess their experiences using the 
specific system used during the block. As with the 
Post-Session Questionnaire, each question from 
this questionnaire was mapped to one or more of 
our research hypotheses and observers asked fol-
low-up questions about analysts? responses to se-
lect questions during the Post-System Interview.   
3.9 Post-System Interview 
Observers used a Post-System Interview Sched-
ule to privately interview each analyst at the end of 
a block.  The Interview Schedule contained in-
structions to the observer for conducting the inter-
view, as well as six open-ended questions.  As in 
the Post-Session Interview, observers were in-
structed to construct content for two of these ques-
tions from analysts? responses to the Post-System 
Questionnaire.   
3.10 Cross-Evaluation 
The last component of each block was Cross 
Evaluation (Ying & Kantor, 2006). Each analyst 
reviewed (using a paper copy) all seven reports 
prepared for each scenario in the block (14 total 
reports). Analysts used an online tool to rate each 
report according to 7 criteria using 5-point scales. 
After analysts completed independent ratings of 
each report according to the 7 criteria, they were 
asked to sort the stack of reports into rank order, 
placing the best report at the top of the pile.  Ana-
lysts were then asked to use a pen to write the ap-
propriate rank number at the top of each report, 
and to use an online tool to enter their report rank-
ings.  The criteria that the analysts used for evalu-
ating reports were: (1) covers the important 
ground; (2) avoids the irrelevant materials; (3) 
avoids redundant information; (4) includes selec-
tive information; (5) is well organized; (6) reads 
clearly and easily; and (7) overall rating. 
3.11 Cross-Evaluation Focus Groups 
After the Cross Evaluation, focus groups of four 
53
analysts were formed to discuss the results of the 
Cross Evaluation. These focus groups had two 
purposes: to develop a consensus ranking of the 
seven reports for each scenario, and to elicit the 
aspects, or dimensions, which led each analyst to 
rank a report high or low in overall quality.  These 
discussions were taped and an observer took notes 
during the discussion. 
3.12 System Logs and Glass Box 
Throughout much of the evaluation, logging and 
Glass Box software captured analysts? interactions 
with systems.  The Glass Box software supports 
capture of analyst workstation activities including 
keyboard/mouse data, window events, file open 
and save events, copy/paste events, and web 
browser activity. The Glass Box uses a relational 
database to store time-stamped events and a hierar-
chical file store where files and the content of web 
pages are stored. The Glass Box copies every file 
the analyst opens so that there is a complete record 
of the evolution of documents. Material on every 
web page analysts visit is explicitly stored so that 
each web page can be later recreated by research-
ers as it existed at the time it was accessed by ana-
lysts; screen and audio capture are also available. 
The data captured by the Glass Box provides de-
tails about analysts? interaction with Microsoft 
desktop components, such as MS Office and Inter-
net Explorer. User interaction with applications 
that do not run in a browser and Java applications 
that may run in a browser are opaque to Glass Box. 
Although limited information, e.g. Window Title, 
application name, information copied to the system 
Clipboard, is captured, the quantity and quality of 
the data is not sufficient to serve as a complete log 
of user-system interaction.  Thus, a set of logging 
requirements was developed and implement by 
each system. These included: time stamp; set of 
documents the user copied text from; number of 
documents viewed; number of documents that the 
system said contained the answer; and analyst?s 
query/question. 
3.13 End-of-Workshop Activities 
On the final day of the workshop, analysts com-
pleted a Scenario Difficulty Assessment task, pro-
vided feedback to system developers and 
participated in two focus group interviews.  As part 
of the Scenario Difficulty Assessment, analysts 
rated each scenario on 12 dimensions, and also 
rank-ordered the scenarios according to level of 
difficulty. After the Scenario Difficulty Assess-
ment, analysts visited each of the three experimen-
tal system developers in turn, for a 40-minute free 
form discussion to provide feedback about sys-
tems.  As the last event in the workshop, analysts 
participated in two focus groups.  The first was to 
obtain additional feedback about analysts? overall 
experiences and the second was to obtain feedback 
from analysts about the evaluation process.  
4 Discussion  
In this section, we present key findings with re-
gard to the effectiveness of these data collection 
techniques in discriminating between systems.  
Corpus. The corpus consisted of a specialized 
collection of CNS and Web documents.  Although 
this combination resulted in a larger, diverse cor-
pus, this corpus was not identical to the kinds of 
corpora analysts use in their daily jobs.  In particu-
lar, analysts search corpora of confidential gov-
ernment documents. Obviously, these corpora are 
not readily available for QA system evaluation. 
Thus, creation of a realistic corpus with documents 
that analysts are used to is a significant challenge.  
Scenarios. Scenarios were developed by two 
consultants from the Rome AFRL.  The develop-
ment of appropriate and robust scenarios that mim-
icked real-world tasks was a time intensive 
process. As noted earlier, we discovered that in 
spite of this process, scenarios were still missing 
important contextual details that govern report 
generation.  Thus, creating scenarios involves more 
than identifying the content and scope of the in-
formation sought.  It also requires identifying in-
formation such as customer, role and deadline.        
Analysts.  Analysts in this experiment were na-
val reservists, recruited by email solicitation of a 
large pool of potential volunteers; the first 8 posi-
tive responders were inducted into the study. Such 
self-selection is virtually certain to produce a non-
random sample. However, this sample was from 
the target population which adds to the validity of 
the findings. We recommend that decision makers 
evaluating systems expend substantial effort to 
recruit analysts typical of those who will be using 
the system and be aware that self selection biases 
are likely to be present.  Care should be taken to 
ensure that subjects have a working knowledge of 
54
basic tasks and systems, such as using browsers, 
Microsoft Word, and possibly Microsoft Excel. 
Experimental Design. We used a great deal of 
randomization in our experimental design; the pur-
pose was to obtain more valid statistical results.  
All statistical results are conditioned by the state-
ment ?if the analysts and tasks used are a random 
sample from the universe of relevant analysts and 
tasks.?  Scenarios were not a random selection 
among possible scenarios; instead, they were tai-
lored to the corpus. Similarly, analysts were not a 
random sample of all possible analysts, since they 
were in fact self-selected from a smaller pool of all 
possible analysts.  The randomization in the ex-
perimental rotation allowed us to mitigate biases 
introduced by non-probability sampling techniques 
across system, as well as curtail any potential bias 
introduced by observers.  
Data Collection. We employed a wide variety 
of data collection techniques.  Key findings with 
respect to each technique are presented below.  
Questionnaires were powerful discriminators 
across the range of hypotheses tested. They were 
also relatively economical to develop and analyze. 
Most analysts were comfortable completing ques-
tionnaires, although with eight repetitions they 
sometimes became fatigued.  Questionnaires also 
provided a useful opportunity to check the validity 
of experimental materials such as scenarios. 
The NASA TLX was sensitive in assessing ana-
lysts? workloads for each scenario. It was cheap to 
administer and analyze, and has established valid-
ity and reliability as an instrument in a different 
arena, where there are real time pressures to con-
trol a mechanical system. 
Formative techniques, such as interviews and 
focus groups, provided the most useful feedback, 
especially to system developers. Interview and fo-
cus group data usually provide researchers with 
important information that supplements, qualifies 
or elaborates data obtained through questionnaires.  
With questionnaires, users are forced to quantify 
their attitudes using numeric values.  Data collec-
tion methods designed to gather qualitative data, 
such as interviews, provide users with opportuni-
ties to elaborate and qualify their attitudes and 
opinions.  One effective technique used in this 
evaluation was to ask analysts to elaborate on some 
of their numeric ratings from questionnaires.  This 
allows us to understand more about why analysts 
used particular values to describe their attitudes 
and experiences. It is important to note that analy-
sis of qualitative data is costly ? interviews were 
transcribed and training is needed to analyze and 
interpret data.  Training is also necessary to con-
duct such interviews.  Because researchers are es-
sentially the ?instrument? it is important to learn to 
moderate one?s own beliefs and behaviors while 
interviewing. It is particularly important that inter-
viewers not be seen by their interviewees as ?in-
vested in? any particular system; having 
individuals who are not system developers conduct 
interviews is essential. 
The SmiFro Console was not effective as im-
plemented. Capturing analysts? in situ thoughts 
with minimal disruption remains a challenge.  Al-
though SmiFro Console was not particularly effec-
tive, status report data was easy to obtain and 
somewhat effective, but defied analysis. 
Cross evaluation of reports was a sensitive and 
reliable method for evaluating product. Comple-
menting questionnaires, it is a good method for 
assessing the quality of the analysts? work prod-
ucts. The method is somewhat costly in terms of 
analysts? time (contributing approximately 8% of 
the total time required from subjects), and analysis 
requires skill in statistical methods.  
System logs answered several questions not ad-
dressable with other methods including the Glass 
Box. However, logging is expensive, rarely reus-
able, and often unruly when extracting particular 
measures. Development of a standard logging for-
mat for interactive QA systems is advisable. The 
Glass Box provided data on user interaction across 
all systems at various levels of granularity. The 
cost of collection is low but the cost of analysis is 
probably prohibitive in most cases. NIST?s previ-
ous experience using Glass Box allowed for more 
rapid extraction, analysis and interpretation of data, 
which remained a very time consuming and labori-
ous process. Other commercial tools are available 
that capture some of the same data and we recom-
mend that research teams evaluate such tools for 
their own evaluations.  
Hypotheses. We started this study with hy-
potheses about the types of interactions that a good 
QA system should support. Of course, different 
methods were more or less appropriate for assess-
ing different hypotheses. Table 4 displays part of 
our results with respect to the example hypotheses 
presented above in Table 1. For each of the exam-
ple hypotheses provided in Table 1, we show 
55
which method was used.   
 Ques. NASA 
TLX 
Smi-
Fro 
Cross- 
Eval. 
Logs Glass 
Box 
1  X   X X 
2 X      
3 X   X   
4 X    X X 
5 X  X    
   Table 4: Most effective methods for gathering 
data about example hypotheses (see Table 1). 
 
Although not reported here, we note that the 
performance of each of the systems evaluated in 
this study varied according to hypothesis; in par-
ticular, some systems did well according to some 
hypotheses and poor according to others.  
Interaction.  Finally, while the purposes of this 
paper were to present our evaluation method for 
interactive question answering systems, our in-
struments elicited interesting results about ana-
lysts? perceptions of interaction. Foremost among 
them, users of interactive systems expect systems 
to exhibit behaviors which can be characterized as 
understanding what the user is looking for, what 
the user has done and what the user knows. Ana-
lysts in this study expected interactive systems to 
track their actions over time, both with the system 
and with information.   
5 Conclusions 
We have sketched a method for evaluating in-
teractive analytic question answering system, iden-
tified key design decisions that developers must 
make in conducting their own evaluations, and de-
scribed the effectiveness of some of our methods.  
Clearly, each evaluation situation is different, and 
it is difficult to develop one-size-fits-all evaluation 
strategies, especially for interactive systems.  
However, there are many opportunities for devel-
oping shared frameworks and an infrastructure for 
evaluation.  In particular, the development of sce-
narios and corpora are expensive and should be 
shared. The creation of sharable questionnaires and 
other instruments that are customizable to individ-
ual systems can also contribute to an infrastructure 
for interactive QA evaluation.  
We believe that important opportunities exist 
through interactive QA evaluation for understand-
ing more about the interactive QA process and de-
veloping extensive theoretical and empirical 
foundations for research.  We encourage system 
developers to think beyond independent system 
evaluation for narrow purposes, and conduct 
evaluations that create and inform theoretical and 
empirical foundations for interactive question an-
swering research that will outlive individual sys-
tems. Although we do not have space here to detail 
the templates, instruments, and analytical schemas 
used in this study, we hope that the methods and 
metrics developed in connection with our study are 
a first step in this direction3.  We plan to publish 
the full set of results from this study in the future.  
References  
Diekema, A. R., Yilmazel, O., Chen, J., Harwell, S., He, 
L., & Liddy, E. D. (2004). Finding answers to com-
plex questions. In M. T. Maybury?s, New directions 
in question answering. MIT Press, MA., 141-152. 
Hampson, E., & Crowley, P. (2005).  Instrumenting the 
intelligence analysis process. Proceedings of the 
2005 International Conference on Intelligence Analy-
sis, McLean, VA.   
Hersh, W. & Over, P. (2001).  Introduction to a special 
issue on interactivity at the Text Retrieval Confer-
ence (TREC). Information Processing & Manage-
ment 37(3), 365-367. 
Liddy, E. D., Diekema, A. R., & Yilmazel, O. (2004). 
Context-based question-answering evaluation.  Pro-
ceedings of SIGIR ?04, Sheffield, UK, 508-509.  
Sun, Y., & Kantor, P. (2006).  Cross-evaluation: A new 
model for information system evaluation. Journal of 
American Society for Information Science & Tech-
nology. 
Tague-Sutcliffe, J. (1992).  The pragmatics of informa-
tion retrieval experimentation, revisted. Information 
Processing & Management, 28(4), 467-490. 
Voorhees, E. M. (2003). Evaluating the evaluation: A 
case study using the TREC 2002 Question Answer-
ing Task. Proceedings of HLT-NAACL?03, 181-188.   
                                                          
3 The NIST team maintains a password-protected website 
(http://control.nist.gov/amc/) for materials related to this pro-
ject. Send email to emile.morse@nist.gov. 
 
56
