 
Spoken Dialogue for Simulation Control and Conversational Tutoring 
 
Elizabeth Owen Bratt Karl Schultz Brady Clark 
CSLI,  
Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA 94305 
CSLI,  
Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA 94305 
CSLI,  
Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA 94305 
ebratt@csli.stanford.edu schultzk@csli.stanford.edu bzack@csli.stanford.edu 
 
  
 
 
Abstract 
 
 
This demonstration shows a flexible tutoring 
system for studying the effects of different 
tutoring strategies enhanced by a spoken 
language interface.  The hypothesis is that 
spoken language increases the effectiveness 
of automated tutoring.  The domain is Navy 
damage control. 
1 Technical Content 
 
This demonstration shows a flexible tutoring 
system for studying the effects of different tutoring 
strategies enhanced by a spoken language interface.  
The hypothesis is that spoken language increases the 
effectiveness of automated tutoring.  Our focus is on 
the SCoT-DC spoken language tutor for Navy 
damage control; however,  because SCoT-DC 
performs reflective tutoring on DC-Train simulator 
sessions, we have also developed a speech interface 
for the existing DC-Train damage control simulator, 
to promote ease of use as well as consistency of 
interface. 
Our tutor is developed within the Architecture for 
Conversational Intelligence (Lemon et al 2001).  We 
use the Open Agent Architecture (Martin et al 1999) 
for communication between agents based on the 
Nuance speech recognizer, the Gemini natural 
language system (Dowding et al 1993), and Festival 
speech synthesis. Our tutor adds its own dialogue 
manager agent, for general principles of 
conversational intelligence, and a tutor agent, which 
uses tutoring strategies and tactics to plan out an 
appropriate review and react to the student's answers 
to questions and desired topics. 
  
The SCoT-DC tutor, in Socratic style, asks 
questions rather than giving explanations.  The tutor 
has a repertoire of hinting tactics to deploy in 
response to student answers to questions, and 
identifies and iscusses repeated mistakes.  The 
student is able to ask "why" questions after certain 
tutor explanations, and  to alter the tutorial plan by 
requesting that the tutor skip discussion of certain 
topics. In DC-Train, the system uses several windows 
to provide information graphically, in addition to the 
spoken messages.  In SCoT-DC, the Ship Display 
from DC-Train is used for both multimodal input and 
output.  
 
Both DC-Train and SCoT-DC use the same 
overall Gemini grammar, with distinct top-level 
grammars producing appropriate subsets for each 
application. Our Gemini grammar currently has 166 
grammar rules and 811 distinct words.  In a Nuance 
language model compiled from the Gemini grammar 
(Moore 1998), different top-level grammars are used 
in SCoT-DC to enhance speech recognition based on 
expected answers. 
 
2 Performance Assessment 
 
Experiments to assess the effectiveness of SCoT-
DC tutoring are underway in March 2004, with 15 
subjects currently scheduled.  In July 2003, students 
in the Repair Locker Head class at the Navy Fleet 
Training Center in San Diego ran 12 sessions with 
DC-Train. Sessions ranged from 1 to 65 user 
utterances, with an average of  21.  The average 
utterance length was 7 words. In speech recognition, 
about 22% of utterances were rejected, and the
sentences with a recognition hypothesis had a word 
error rate of 27%.  The transcribed data, combined 
with developer test run data, gave us 327 unique out-
of-grammar sentences.  Of these, we found 79 
examples where the automatic Nuance endpointing 
cut off an utterance too early, and 20 examples of 
disfluent speech.  118 sentences were determined to 
be potentially useful phrasings to add to the grammar, 
while 73 sentences were found to lie outside the 
scope of the application. 
 
To address these issues, w have added new 
phrasings to the grammar.  We also intend to use 
Nuance?s Listen & Learn offline grammar adaptation 
tool, to give higher probabilities to likely sentences 
while retaining broad grammar-based coverage.  We 
may also adjust endpointing time, based on partial 
speech recognition hypothesis, to give extra time to 
the kinds of sentences typically occurring with more 
internal pauses. Disfluencies may decrease as users 
become more familiar with DC-Train and SCoT-DC 
during the comparatively longer use xpected from 
each user in a typical tutoring session
The graphical interface for the DC-Train 
simulator is shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 1: DC-Train simulator GUI 
 
Each window on the screen is modeled on a 
source of information available to a real-lifeDCA on 
a ship, including as a detailed drawing of the several 
hundred compartments on the ship, a record of all 
communications to and from the DCA, a hazard 
detection panel showing the locations of alarms 
which have occurred, and a panel showing the 
firemain, i.e. the pipes carrying water throughout the 
ship, and the valves and pumps controlling the flow 
of the water.  The window depicting heads represents 
the other personnel in the same room as the DCA, 
who are available to receive and transmit messages. 
 While in the original version of DC-Train, 
the DCA?s orders and communications to other 
personnel on the ship took place through a menu 
system, this demo presents the newer spoken 
dialogue interface.  Spoken commands take the form 
of actual Navy commands, thus enabling the Navy 
student to train in the same manner as they would 
perform these duties through radio communications 
on a ship. 
The user clicks a button to begin speaking, 
and the speech is recognized by Nuance, using a 
grammar-based language model automatically 
derived from the Gemini grammar used for parsing 
and interpretation of the commands.  A dialogue 
manager then maps the Gemini logical forms into 
DC-Train commands.  To allow the student to 
monitor the success of the speech recognizer, the text 
of the utterance is displayed. Responses from the 
simulated personnel are spoken by Festival speech 
synthesis, and also displayed as text on the screen. 
Most spoken interactions with DC-Train 
involve the student DCA giving single commands 
without any use of dialogue structure; however, the 
system will query the student for missing  required 
parameters of commmands, such as the repair team 
who is to perform the action, or the number of  the 
pump to start on the firemain.  If the student does not 
respond to these queries, the system will provide the 
context of the command missing the parameter as 
part of a more informative request.  The student 
retains the ability to issue other commands at this 
time, and need not respond to the system if there is a 
more pressing crisis elsewhere. 
At the end of a DC-Train session, the 
student can then receive customized feedback and 
tutoring from SCoT-DC, based on a record of the 
student?s actions compared to what an expert DCA 
would have done at each point, based on  rules 
accounting for the state of the simulation. The goal of 
the tutorial interaction is to identify and remediate 
any gaps in the student?s understanding of damage 
control doctrine, and to improve the student?s 
performance in issuing the correct commands without 
hesitation.   
The graphical interface to the SCoT-DC 
tutor is shown in Figure 2. 
  
 
 
Figure 2: ScoT-DC tutor GUI 
 
SCoT-DC uses two instances of the Ship Display 
from DC-Train, seen in Figure 3, one to give an 
overall view of the ship and one to zoom in on 
affected compartments, with color indicating the type 
of crisis in a compartment and the state of damage 
control there.   The student can click on a 
compartment in the Ship Display as a way of 
indicating that compartment to the system. The 
automated tutor and the student communicate 
through speech, while the lower window displays the 
text of both sides of the interaction, and permits the 
user to scroll back through the entire tutorial session.   
 
Figure 3: Highlighted Compartment  
 
The tutor can also display bulkheads used to set 
boundaries for firefighting, as in Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4:  Highlighted Bulkhead Walls 
 
A third kind of graphical information that the 
tutor may convey to the student involves regions of 
jurisdiction for repair  teams, shown in Figure 5.
 
Figure 5: Repair Team Jurisdiction Regions 
As in DC-Train, the student clicks to begin 
speaking, then Nuance speech recognition provides a 
string of words to be interpreted by a Gemini 
grammar.  Also as in DC-Train, responses from the 
tutor are  synthesized by Festival, although the tutor 
speaks with a more natural voice provided by 
FestVox limited domain synthesis, in which large 
units of the tutor?s utterances may be taken from 
prompts recorded for this application.   
Interpretation of the Gemini interpreted 
forms is handled by a more complex dialogue 
manager in SCoT-DC than in DC-Train, with a 
structured representation of the dialogue, which is 
used to guide the system?s use of discourse markers, 
among other things.  The dialogue is mainly driven 
by the tutor agent?s strategies, though the student can 
request to move on to future topics without 
completing the current discussion, and also ask a 
?Why? question after some explanations. 
 Tutorial strategies generally guide the 
overall path of the conversation, such as choosing 
which crises to discuss based on the errors made by 
the student. Tutorial tactics apply at a lower-level 
throughout the dialogue, for example, when a student 
gives an incorrect answer, the tutor will give a 
general hint and repos the question.  If the student 
answers incorrectly a second time the tutor will give 
a more specific hint and ask the question again.  If 
the student fails a third time the tutor will give the 
correct answer, and proceed. 
 Running a  full DC-Train scenario takes 20-
40 minutes, and has the flavor of the following 
excerpt: 
 
 [buzzing alarm goes off, it is a fire alarm] 
 
DCCO: Fire in compartment 2-78-01-L. 
Student: Net80 to repair locker 2, investigate 
compartment 2-78-01-L. 
Repair Locker 2: Reports, fire in compartment 2-78-
01-L. 
Repair Locker 2: Reports, smoke in compartment 2-
78-01-L. 
Student: Net80 to repair locker 2, fight the fire in 
compartment 2-78-01-L. 
Student: Net80 to repair locker 2, set fire and smoke 
boundaries on primary forward 78, primary aft 126, 
secondary forward 42, secondary aft 174, above 1, 
below 2. 
 
A reflective dialogue with the tutor will takes 
around 10 minutes.  The following gives a sample of 
the kind of tutorial interaction.  
 
Tutor: Hello, we are about to review your session 
from earlier today. 
Tutor: All right, are you ready? 
Student: Yes. 
Tutor: In this session there were 5 primary crises and 
1 secondary crisis. 
Tutor: 5 of the 6 crises were resolved. 
Tutor: Most of your actions were correct, however 
you made several mistakes. 
Tutor: OK, let?s discuss a few of those crises.
Tutor: The first crisis was a fire here in Crew Living 
space No. 1. [centers on this compartment] 
Tutor: This fire was not contained early enough.
Tutor: As a result, the fire spread to the adjacent 
Combat sytem equipment room No. 2. [highlights 
2nd compartment] 
Tutor: OK, let?s review how to handle this crisis. 
[removes highlight from 2nd compartment] 
Tutor: What?s the first thing you should do when the 
fire alarm sounds? 
Student: Send repair two to investigate. 
Tutor: Yes, that?s right. 
Tutor: However, you failed to do this during the 
session. 
Tutor: This is a mistake you made more than once. 
Tutor: Remember, alarms need to be verified first. 
Tutor: OK, suppose that there is a fire. 
Tutor: What?s the next step? 
Student: Set fire and smoke boundaries. 
Tutor: Yes. That?s what you did during the session.
Tutor: OK, what else needs to be done? 
Student: The repair team should fight the fire. 
Tutor: No, you missed a step. 
Tutor: Remember, the crisis might interfere with 
other ship systems. 
Tutor: Let?s try again. 
Tutor: What else needs to be done?
Student: I don?t know. 
Tutor: Well. 
Tutor: You should order repair five to mechanically 
and electrically isolate the compartment. 
 
 
A video clip of an older version of the ScoT-DC 
system is available at http://www-
csli.stanford.edu/semlab/muri/November2002Demo.h
tml 
 
3 Acknowledgements 
 
This work is supported by the Department of the 
Navy under research grant N000140010660, a 
multidisciplinary university research initiative on 
natural language interaction with intelligent tutoring 
systems. 
 
3.1 References  
 
A. Black and K. Lenzo, 1999. Building Voices in the 
Festival Speech Synthesis System (DRAFT) 
Available at 
http://www.cstr.ed.ac.uk/projects/festival/papers.h
tml. 
A. Black and P. Taylor. 1997. Festival speech 
synthesis system: system documentation (1.1.1). 
Technical Report Technical Report HCRC/TR-
83, University of Edinburgh Human 
Communication Research Centre. 
V. V. Bulitko and D. C. Wilkins. 1999. Automated 
instructor assistant for ship damage control. In  
Proceedings of AAAI-99. 
J. Dowding, M. Gawron, D. Appelt, L. Cherny, R. 
Moore, and D. Moran. 1993. Gemini: A natural 
language system for spoken language 
understanding.  In Procdgs of ACL 31. 
Oliver Lemon, Alexander Gruenstein, and Stanley 
Peters. 2002. Collaborative Activities and Multi-
tasking in Dialogue Systems , Traitement 
Automatique des Langues (TAL), 43(2):131- 54, 
special issue on dialogue. 
D. Martin, A. Cheyer, and D. Moran. 1999. ``The 
open agent architecture: A framework for 
building distributed software systems,'' Applied 
Artificial Intelligence, v.13:91-128. 
Robert C. Moore. 1998. Using Natural Language 
Knowledge Sources in Speech Recognition." 
Proceedings of the NATO Advanced Study 
Institute. 
Karl Schultz, Elizabeth Owen Bratt, Brady Clark, 
Stanley Peters, Heather Pon-Barry, and Pucktada 
Treeratpituk. 2003. A Scalable, Reusable Spoken 
Conversational Tutor: SCoT. In AIED 2003 
Supplementary Procdgs. (V. Aleven et aleds). 
Univ. of Sydney. 367-377.  
 
 
