Proceedings of the BioNLP Workshop on Linking Natural Language Processing and Biology at HLT-NAACL 06, pages 82?89,
New York City, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Postnominal Prepositional Phrase Attachment in Proteomics
Jonathan Schuman and Sabine Bergler
The CLaC Laboratory
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering
Concordia University, Montreal, Canada
{j schuma,bergler}@cs.concordia.ca
Abstract
We present a small set of attachment
heuristics for postnominal PPs occurring
in full-text articles related to enzymes.
A detailed analysis of the results sug-
gests their utility for extraction of rela-
tions expressed by nominalizations (often
with several attached PPs). The system
achieves 82% accuracy on a manually an-
notated test corpus of over 3000 PPs from
varied biomedical texts.
1 Introduction
The biomedical sciences suffer from an overwhelm-
ing volume of information that is growing at explo-
sive rates. Most of this information is found only
in the form of published literature. Given the large
volume, it is becoming increasingly difficult for re-
searchers to find relevant information. Accordingly,
there is much to be gained from the development of
robust and reliable tools to automate this task.
Current systems in this domain focus primarily
on abstracts. Though the salient points of an article
are present in the abstract, much detailed informa-
tion is entirely absent and can be found only in the
full text (Shatkay and Feldman, 2003; Corney et al,
2004). Optimal conditions for enzymatic activity,
details of experimental procedures, and useful ob-
servations that are tangential to the main point of the
article are just a few examples of such information.
Full-text articles in enzymology are characterized
by many complex noun phrases (NPs), usually with
chains of several prepositional phrases (PPs). Nom-
inalized relations are particularly frequent, with ar-
guments and adjuncts mentioned in attached PPs.
Thus, the tasks of automated search, retrieval, and
extraction in this domain stand to benefit signifi-
cantly from efforts in semantic interpretation of NPs
and PPs.
There are currently no publicly available biomed-
ical corpora suitable for this task. (See (Cohen et al,
2005) for an overview of currently available biomed-
ical corpora.) Therefore, statistical approaches that
rely on extensive training data are essentially not
feasible. Instead, we approach the task through care-
ful analysis of the data and development of heuris-
tics. In this paper, we report on a rule-based post-
nominal PP attachment system developed as a first
step toward a more general NP semantics for pro-
teomics.
2 Background
Leroy et al (2002; 2003) note the importance of
noun phrases and prepositions in the capture of rela-
tional information in biomedical texts, citing the par-
ticular significance of the prepositions by, of, and in.
Their parser can extract many different relations us-
ing few rules by relying on closed-class words (e.g.
prepositions) instead of restricting patterns with spe-
cific predefined verbs and entities. This bottom-
up approach achieves high precision (90%) and a
claimed (though unquantified) high recall. However,
they side-step the issue of prepositional attachment
ambiguity altogether. Also, their system is targeted
specifically and only toward relations. While rela-
tions do cover a considerable portion of the most rel-
evant information in biomedical texts, there is also
much relevant lower frequency information (partic-
ularly in enzymology) such as the conditions under
which these relations are expressed.
82
Hahn et al (2002) point out that PPs are crucial
for semantic interpretation of biomedical texts due
to the wide variety of conceptual relations they in-
troduce. They note that this is reflected in their
training and test data, extracted from findings re-
ports in histopathology, where prepositions account
for about 10% of all words and more than 25% of
the text is contained in PPs. The coverage of PPs in
our development and test data, comprised of varied
texts in proteomics, is even higher with 26% of the
text occurring in postnominal PPs alone.
Little research in the biomedical domain ad-
dresses the problem of PP attachment proper. This
is partly due to the number of systems that pro-
cess text using named-entity-based templates, dis-
regarding PPs. In fact, the only recent BioNLP sys-
tem found in the literature that makes any mention
of PP attachment is Medstract (Pustejovsky et al,
2002), an automated information extraction system
for Medline abstracts. The shallow parsing module
used in Medstract performs ?limited? prepositional
attachment?only of prepositions are attached.
There are, of course, several PP attachment sys-
tems for other domains. Volk (2001) addresses PP
attachment using the frequency of co-occurrence of
a PP?s preposition, object NP, and possible attach-
ment points, calculated from query results of a web-
based search engine. This system was evaluated
on sentences from a weekly computer magazine,
scoring 74% accuracy for both VP and NP attach-
ment. Brill & Resnik (1994) put transformation-
based learning with added word-class information
from WordNet to the task of PP attachment. Their
system achieves 81.8% accuracy on sentences from
the Penn Treebank Wall Street Journal corpus.
The main concerns of both these systems differ
from the requirements for successful PP attachment
in proteomics. The main attachment ambiguity in
these general texts is between VP and NP attach-
ment, where there are few NPs to choose from for a
given PP. In contrast, proteomics texts, where NPs
are the main information carriers, contain many NPs
with long sequences of postnominal PPs. Conse-
quently, the possible attachment points for a given
PP are more numerous. By ?postnominal?, we de-
note PPs following an NP, where the attachment
point may be within the NP but may also precede
it. In focusing on postnominal PPs, we exclude here
PPs that trivially attach to the VP for lack of NP at-
tachment points and focus on the subset of PPs with
the highest degree of attachment ambiguity.
3 Approach
For this exploratory study we compiled two manu-
ally annotated corpora1 , a smaller, targeted devel-
opment corpus consisting of sentences referring to
enzymes in five articles, and a larger test corpus con-
sisting of the full text of nine articles drawn from a
wider set of topics. This bias in the data was set de-
liberately to test whether NPs referring to enzymes
follow a distinct pattern. Our results suggest that
the compiled heuristics are in fact not specific to en-
zymes, but work with comparable performance for a
much wider set of NPs.
As our goal is semantic interpretation of NPs,
only postnominal PPs were considered. A large
number of these follow a very simple attachment
principle?right association.
Right association (Kimball, 1973), or late clo-
sure, describes a preference for parses that result in
the parse tree with the most right branches. Sim-
ply stated, right association assumes that new con-
stituents are part of the closest possible constituent
that is under construction. In the case of postnomi-
nal PPs, right association attaches each PP to the NP
that immediately precedes it. An example where this
strategy does fairly well is given below.
The effect of hydrolysis of the hemicelluloses in the
milled wood lignin on the molecular mass distribu-
tion was then examined. . .
Notice that, except for the last PP, attachment to the
preceding NP is correct. The last PP, on the molecu-
lar mass distribution, modifies the head NP effect.
Another frequent pattern in our corpus is given
below with a corresponding text fragment. In this
pattern, the entire NP consists of one reaction fully
described by several PPs that all attach to a nominal-
ization in the head NP. Attachment according to this
pattern is in direct opposition to right association.
<ACTION> <PREPOSITION> <PRODUCT>
<PREPOSITION> <SUBSTRATE>
<PREPOSITION> <ENZYME>
<PREPOSITION> <MEASUREMENT>
1There was a single annotator for both corpora, who was
also the developer of the heuristics.
83
. . . the release of reducing sugars from car-
boxymethylcellulose by cellulase at 37 oC, pH
4.8. . .
In general, the attachment behavior of a large per-
centage of PPs in the examined literature can be
characterized by either right association or attach-
ment to a nominalization. The preposition of a PP
seems to be the main criterion for determining which
attachment principle to apply. A few prepositions
were observed to follow right association almost ex-
clusively, while others show a strong affinity toward
nominalizations, defaulting to right association only
when no nominalization is available.
These observations were implemented as attach-
ment heuristics for the most frequently occurring
PPs, as distinguished by their prepositions (see Ta-
ble 1 for frequency data). These rules, as outlined
below, account for 90% of all postnominal PPs in
the corpus. The remaining 10%, for which no clear
pattern could be found, are attached using right as-
sociation.
Devel. Corpus Test Corpus
Prep Freq Syst Base Freq Syst Base
of 50.0 99.0 99.0 53.4 98.2 98.2
in 11.9 74.8 55.6 11.7 67.0 54.6
from 8.3 87.0 87.0 3.67 71.8 71.8
for 4.5 81.1 81.0 5.1 56.1 56.0
with 4.5 83.8 75.7 4.7 70.8 65.2
between 4.2 68.6 68.6 1.2 84.2 84.2
at 3.3 81.5 18.5 4.0 68.3 40.7
on 3.1 84.6 57.7 2.1 80.0 53.9
by 2.5 95.2 23.8 2.4 76.7 45.2
to 2.3 63.2 63.2 5.0 51.6 51.6
as 1.8 66.7 46.7 0.7 40.9 36.4
Table 1: Frequency of prepositions with correspond-
ing PP attachment accuracy for the implemented
heuristics and the baseline (right association) on de-
velopment and test set.
Right Association (of, from, for)
PPs headed by of, from, and for attach almost exclu-
sively according to right association. In particular,
no violation of right association by of PPs has been
found. The system, therefore, attaches any PP from
this class to the NP immediately preceding it.
Strong Nominalization Affinity (by, at)
In contrast, by and at PPs attach almost exclusively
to nominalizations. Only rarely have they been ob-
served to attach to non-nominalization NPs. In most
cases where no nominalizations are present in the
NP, a PP of this class actually attaches to a preced-
ing VP. Typical nominalization and VP attachments
found in the corpus are exemplified in the following
two sentences.
. . . the formation of stalk cells by culB? pkaR?
cells decreased about threefold. . .
. . . xylooligosaccharides were not detected in hy-
drolytic products from corn cell walls by TLC
analysis.
This attachment preference is implemented in the
system as the heuristic for strong nominalization
affinity. Given a PP from this class, the system first
attempts attachment to the closest nominalization to
the left. If no such NP is found, the PP is assumed
to attach to a VP.
Weak Nominalization Affinity (in, with, as)
In, with, and as PPs show similar affinity toward
nominalizations. In fact, initially, these PPs were
attached with the strong affinity heuristic. How-
ever, after further observation it became apparent
that these PPs do often attach to non-nominalization
NPs. A typical example for each of these possibili-
ties is given as follows.
. . . incubation of the substrate pullulan with protein
fractions.
The major form of beta-amylase in Arabidopsis. . .
Here, the system first attempts nominalization at-
tachment. If no nominalizations are present in the
NP, instead of defaulting to VP attachment, the PP
is attached to the closest NP to its left that is not
the object of an of PP. This behavior is intuitively
consistent since in PPs are usually adjuncts to the
main NP (which is usually an entity if not a nom-
inalization) and are unlikely to modify any of the
NP?s modifiers.
?Effect on?
The final heuristic encodes the frequent attachment
of on PPs with NPs indicating effect, influence, im-
pact, etc. While this relationship seems intuitive and
likely to occur in varied texts, it may be dispropor-
tionally frequent in proteomics texts. Nonetheless,
the heuristic does have a strong basis in the exam-
ined literature. An example is provided below.
84
. . . the effects of reduced ?-amylase activity on seed
formation and germination. . .
The system checks NPs preceding an on PP for the
closest occurrence of an ?effect? NP. If no such NPs
are found, right association is used.
4 System Overview
There are three main phases of processing that must
occur before the PP attachment heuristics can be ap-
plied. These include preprocessing and two stages
of NP chunking. Upon completion of these three
phases, the PP attachment module is executed.
The preprocessing phase consists of standard to-
kenization and part-of-speech tagging, as well as
named entity recognition (and other term lookup)
using gazetteer lists and simple transducers. Recog-
nition is currently limited to enzymes, organisms,
chemicals, (enzymological) activities, and measure-
ments. A comprehensive enzyme list including syn-
onyms was compiled from BRENDA2 and some
limited organism lists3, including common abbrevi-
ations, were augmented based on organisms found
in the development corpus. For recognition of sub-
strates and products, some of the chemical entity
lists from BioRAT (Corney et al, 2004) are used.
Activity lists from BioRAT, with several enzyme-
specific additions, are also used.
The next phase of processing uses a chunker re-
ported in (Bergler et al, 2003) and further developed
for a related project. NP chunking is performed in
two stages, using two separate context-free gram-
mars and an Earley-type chart parser. No domain-
specific information is used in either of the gram-
mars; recognized entities and terms are used only for
improved tokenization. The first stage chunks base
NPs, without attachments. Here, the parser input
is segmented into smaller sentence fragments to re-
duce ambiguity and processing time. The fragments
are delimited by verbs, prepositions, and sentence
boundaries, since none of these can occur within a
base NP. In the second chunking stage, entire sen-
tences are parsed to extract NPs containing conjunc-
tions and PP attachments. At this stage, no attempt
is made to determine the proper attachment structure
of the PPs or to exclude postnominal PPs that should
2http://www.brenda.uni-koeln.de
3Compiled for a related project.
actually be attached to a preceding VP?any PP that
follows an NP has the potential to attach somewhere
in the NP.
The final phase of processing is performed by the
PP attachment module. Here, each postnominal PP
is examined and attached according to the rule for its
preposition. Only base NPs within the same NP are
considered as possible attachment points. For the
strong nominalization affinity heuristic, if no nomi-
nalization is found, the PP is assumed to attach to the
closest preceding VP. For both nominalization affin-
ity heuristics, the UMLS SPECIALIST Lexicon4 is
used to determine whether the head noun of each
possible attachment point is a nominalization.
5 Results & Analysis
The development corpus was compiled from five ar-
ticles retrieved from PubMed Central5 (PMC). The
articles were the top-ranked results returned from
five separate queries6 using BioKI:Enzymes, a lit-
erature navigation tool (Bergler et al, 2006). Sen-
tences containing enzymes were extracted and the
remaining sentences were discarded. In total, 476
sentences yielding 830 postnominal PPs were man-
ually annotated as the development corpus.
Attachment accuracy on the development corpus
is 88%. The accuracy and coverage of each rule is
summarized in Table 2 and discussed in the follow-
ing sections. Also, as a reference point for perfor-
mance comparison, the system was tested using only
the right association heuristic resulting in a baseline
accuracy of 80%. The system performance is con-
trasted with the baseline and summarized for each
preposition in Table 1.
Devel. Corpus Test Corpus
Heuristic Freq Accuracy Freq Accuracy
Right Association 62.8 96.2 62.1 93.3
Weak NA 18.2 76.2 17.1 67.0
Strong NA 5.8 87.5 6.4 71.4
?Effect on? 3.1 84.6 2.1 80.0
Default (RA) 10.1 60.7 12.3 49.5
Table 2: Coverage and accuracy of each heuristic.
4http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/
5http://www.pubmedcentral.com
6Amylase, CGTase, pullulanase, ferulic acid esterase, and
cellwallase were used as the PMC search terms and a list of
different enzymes was used for scoring.
85
To measure heuristic performance, the PP attach-
ment heuristics were scored on manual NP and PP
annotations. Thus all reported accuracy numbers re-
flect performance of the heuristics alone, isolated
from possible chunking errors. The PP attachment
module is, however, designed for input from the
chunker and does not handle constructs which the
chunker does not provide (e.g. PP conjunctions and
non-simple parenthetical NPs).
5.1 Right Association
The application of right association for PPs headed
by of, for, and from resulted in correct attachment in
96.2% of their occurrences in the development cor-
pus. Because this class of PPs is processed using
the baseline heuristic without any refinements, it has
no effect on overall system accuracy as compared to
overall baseline accuracy. However, it does provide
a clear delineation of the subset of PPs for which
right association is a sufficient and optimal solution
for attachment. Given the coverage of this class of
PPs (62.8% of the corpus), it also provides an expla-
nation for the relatively high baseline performance.
Of PPs are attached with 99% accuracy.
All errors involve attachment of PP conjunc-
tions, such as ?. . . a search of the literature
and of the GenBank database. . . ?, or attachment
to NPs containing non-simple parenthetical state-
ments, such as ?The synergy degree (the activi-
ties of XynA and cellulase cellulosome mixtures di-
vided by the corresponding theoretical activities)
of cellulase. . . ?. Sentences of these forms are not
accounted for in the NP chunker, around which the
PP attachment system was designed. Both scenarios
reflect shortcomings in the NP grammars, not in the
heuristic.
For and from PPs are attached with 81% and 87%
accuracy, respectively. The majority of the error
here corresponds to PPs that should be attached to a
VP. For example, attachment errors occurred both in
the sentence ?. . . this was followed by exoglucanases
liberating cellobiose from these nicks. . . ? and in the
sentence ?. . . the reactions were stopped by placing
the microtubes in boiling water for 2 to 3 min.?
5.2 Strong Nominalization Affinity
The heuristic for strong nominalization affinity deals
with only two types of PPs, those headed by the
prepositions by and at, both of which occur with
relatively low frequency in the development corpus.
Accordingly, the heuristic?s impact on the overall ac-
curacy of the system is rather small. However, it af-
fords the largest increase in accuracy for the PPs of
its class. The heuristic correctly determines attach-
ment with 87.5% accuracy.
While these PPs account for a small portion of
the corpus, they play a critical role in describing
enzymological information. Specifically, by PPs
are most often used in the description of relation-
ships between entities, as in the NP ?degradation
of xylan networks between cellulose microbrils
by xylanases?, while at PPs often quantitatively in-
dicate the condition under which observed behavior
or experiments take place, as in the NP ?Incubation
of the enzyme at 40 oC and pH 9.0?.
The heuristic provides a strong performance in-
crease over the baseline, correctly attaching 95.2%
of by PPs in contrast to 23.8% with the baseline. In
fact, only a single error occurred in attaching by PPs
in the development corpus and the sentence in ques-
tion, given below, appears to be ungrammatical in all
of its possible interpretations.
The TLC pattern of liberated cellooligosaccharides
by mixtures of XynA cellulosomes and cellulase cel-
lulosomes was similar to that caused by cellulase
cellulosomes alone.
A few other errors (e.g. typos, omission of words,
and grammatically incorrect or ambiguous con-
structs) were observed in the development corpus.
The extent of such errors and the degree to which
they affect the results (either negatively or posi-
tively) is unknown. However, such errors are in-
escapable and any automated system is susceptible
to their effects.
Although no errors in by PP attachment were
found in the development corpus, aside from the
given problematic sentence, one that would be pro-
cessed erroneously by the system was found manu-
ally in the GENIA Treebank7. It is given below to
demonstrate a boundary case for this heuristic.
. . . modulation of activity in B cells by human T-cell
leukemia virus type I tax gene. . .
Here, the system would attach the by PP to the clos-
est nominalization activity, when in fact, the cor-
7http://www-tsujii.is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp/GENIA/
86
rect attachment is to the nominalization modulation.
This error scenario is relevant to all of the PPs with
nominalization affinity. A possible solution is to
separate general nominalizations, such as activity
and action, from more specific ones, such as mod-
ulation, and to favor the latter type whenever possi-
ble. An experiment toward this end, with emphasis
on in PPs, was performed with promising results. It
is discussed in the following section.
For at PPs, 81.5% accuracy was achieved, as com-
pared to 18.5% with the baseline. The higher de-
gree of error with at PPs is indicative of their more
varied usage, requiring more contextual information
for correct attachment. An example of typical vari-
ation is given in the following two sentences, both
of which contain at PPs that the system incorrectly
attached to the nominalization activity.
The amylase exhibited maximal activity at pH 8.7
and 55 oC in the presence of 2.5 M NaCl.
. . . Bacillus sp. strain IMD370 produced alkaline
?-amylases with maxima for activity at pH 10.0.
While both sentences report observed conditions for
maximal enzyme activity using similar language, the
attachment of the at PPs differs between them. In the
first sentence, the activity was exhibited at the given
pH and temperature (VP attachment), but in the sec-
ond sentence, the enzyme was not necessarily pro-
duced at the given pH (NP attachment)?production
may have occurred under different conditions from
those reported for the activity maxima.
For errors of this nature, it seems that employing
semantic information about the preceding VP and
possibly also the head NP would lead to more ac-
curate attachment. There are, however, other similar
errors where even the addition of such information
does not immediately suggest the proper attachment.
5.3 Weak Nominalization Affinity
The weak nominalization affinity heuristic covers a
large portion of the development corpus (18.2%).
Overall system improvement over baseline attach-
ment accuracy can be achieved through successful
attachment of this class of PPs, particularly in and
with PPs, which are the second and fourth most fre-
quently used PPs in the development corpus, respec-
tively. Unfortunately, the usage of these PPs is also
perhaps the hardest to characterize. The heuristic
achieves only 76.2% accuracy. Though noticeably
better than right association alone, it is apparent that
the behavior of this class of PPs cannot be entirely
characterized by nominalization affinity.
Accuracy of in PP attachment increased by 19.2%
from the baseline with this heuristic. A significant
source of attachment error is the problem of mul-
tiple nominalizations in the same NP. As men-
tioned above, splitting nominalizations into general
and specific classes may solve this problem. To ex-
plore this conjecture, the most common (particularly
with in PPs) general nominalization, activity, was
ignored when searching for nominalization attach-
ment points. This resulted in a 3% increase in the
accuracy for in PPs with no adverse effects on any
of the other PPs with nominalization affinity.
Despite further anticipated improvements from
similar changes, attachment of in PPs stands to ben-
efit the most from additional semantic information in
the form of rules that encode containment semantics
(i.e. which types of things can be contained in other
types of things). Possible containment rules exist
for the few semantic categories that are already im-
plemented; enzymes, for instance, can be contained
in organisms, but organisms are rarely contained in
anything (though organisms can be said to be con-
tained in their species, the relationship is rarely ex-
pressed as containment). Further analysis and more
semantic categories are needed to formulate more
generally applicable rules.
With and as PPs are attached with 83.8% and
66.7% accuracy, respectively. All of the errors for
these PPs involve incorrect attachment to an NP
when the correct attachment is to a VP. Presented
below are two sentences that provide examples of
the particular difficulty of resolving these errors.
The xylanase A . . . was expressed by E. coli
with a C-terminal His tag from the vector pET-
29b. . .
The pullulanase-type activity was identified as
ZPU1 and the isoamylase-type activity as SU1.
In the first sentence, the with PP describes the
method by which xylanase A was expressed; it does
not restrict the organism in which the expression
occurred. This distinction requires understanding
the semantic relationship between C-terminal His
tags, protein (or enzyme) expression, and E. coli.
Namely, that His tags (polyhistidine-tags) are amino
87
acid motifs used for purification of proteins, specif-
ically proteins expressed in E. coli. Such informa-
tion could only be obtained from a highly domain-
specific knowledge source. In the second sentence,
the verb to which the as PP attaches is omitted. Ac-
cordingly, even if the semantics of verbs were used
to help determine attachment, the system would
need to recognize the ellipsis for correct attachment.
5.4 ?Effect on? Heuristic
The attachment accuracy for on PPs is 84.6% using
the ?effect on? heuristic, a noticeable improvement
over the 57.7% accuracy of the baseline. The few at-
tachment errors for on PPs were varied and revealed
no regularities suggesting future improvements.
5.5 Unclassified PPs
The remaining PPs, for which no heurisitics were
implemented, represent 10% of the development
corpus. The system attaches these PPs using right
association, with accuracy of 60.7%. Most frequent
are PPs headed by between, which are attached with
68.6% accuracy. A significant improvement is ex-
pected from a heuristic that attaches these PPs based
on observations of semantic features in the corpus.
Namely, that most of the NPs to which between PPs
attach can be categorized as binary relations (e.g.
bond, linkage, difference, synergy). This relational
feature can be expressed in the head noun or in a
prenominal modifier. In fact, more than 25% of be-
tween PPs in the development corpus attach to the
NP synergistic effects (or some similar alternative),
where between shows affinity toward the adjective
synergistic, not the head noun effects, which does
not attract between PP attachment on its own.
6 Evaluation on Varied Texts
To assess the general applicability of the heuristics
to varied texts, the system was evaluated on a test
corpus of an additional nine articles8 from PMC.
The entire text, except the abstract and introduc-
tion, of each article was manually annotated, result-
ing in 1603 sentences with 3079 postnominal PPs.
The system?s overall attachment accuracy on this
8PMC query terms: metabolism, biosynthesis, proteolysis,
peptidyltransferase, hexokinase, epimerase, laccase, ligase, de-
hydrogenase.
test data is 82%, comparable to that for the develop-
ment enzymology data. The accuracy and coverage
of each rule for the test data, as contrasted with the
development set, is given in Table 2. The baseline
heuristic achieved an accuracy of 77.5%. A com-
parative performance breakdown by preposition is
given in Table 1.
Overall, changes in the coverage and accuracy of
the heuristics are much less pronounced than ex-
pected from the increase in size and variance of both
subject matter and writing style between the devel-
opment and test data. The only significant change
in rule coverage is a slight increase in the number of
unclassified PPs to 12.3%. These PPs are also more
varied and the right-associative default heuristic is
less applicable (49.5% accuracy in the test data vs.
60.7% in the development data). The largest contri-
bution to this additional error stems from a doubling
of the frequency of to PPs in the test corpus. Prelim-
inary analysis of the corresponding errors suggests
that these PPs would be much better suited to the
strong nominalization affinity heuristic than the right
association default. The error incurred over all un-
classified PPs accounts for 1.4% of the accuracy dif-
ference between the development and test data. The
larger number of these PPs also explains the smaller
overall difference between the system and baseline
performance.
For PPs were observed to have more frequent VP
attachment in the test data. In particular, for PPs
with object NPs specifying a duration (or other mea-
surement), as exemplified below, attach almost ex-
clusively to VPs and nominalizations.
The sample was spun in a microfuge for 10 min. . .
This behavior is also apparent in the development
data, though in much smaller numbers. Applying the
strong nominalization affinity heuristic to these PPs
resulted in an increase of for PP attachment accuracy
in the test corpus to 75.8% and an overall increase in
accuracy of 1.0%.
A similar pattern was observed for at PPs, where
the pattern <CHEMICAL> at <CONCENTRATION> ac-
counts for 25.6% of all at PP attachment errors and
the majority of the performance decrease for the
strong nominalization affinity heuristic between the
two data sets. The remainder of the performance de-
crease for this heuristic is attributed to gaps in the
88
UMLS SPECIALIST Lexicon. For instance, the un-
derlined head nouns in the following examples are
not marked as nominalizations in the lexicon.
The double mutant inhibited misreading by paro-
momycin . . .
. . . the formation of stalk cells by culB? pkaR?
cells. . .
In our test corpus, these errors were only apparent
in by PP attachment, but can potentially affect all
nominalization-based attachment.
Aside from the cases mentioned in this section,
attachment trends in the test corpus are quite similar
to those observed in the development corpus. Given
the diversity in the test data, both in terms of subject
matter (between articles) and writing style (between
sections), the results suggest the suitability of our
heuristics to proteomics texts in general.
7 Conclusion
The next step for BioNLP is to process the full text
of scientific articles, where heavy NPs with poten-
tially long chains of PP attachments are frequent.
This study has investigated the attachment behav-
ior of postnominal PPs in enzyme-related texts and
evaluated a small set of simple attachment heuris-
tics on a test set of over 3000 PPs from a collec-
tion of more varied texts in proteomics. The heuris-
tics cover all prepositions, even infrequent ones,
that nonetheless convey important information. This
approach requires only NP chunked input and a
nominalization dictionary, all readily available from
on-line resources. The heuristics are thus useful
for shallow approaches and their accuracy of 82%
puts them in a position to reliably improve both,
proper recognition of entities and their properties
and bottom-up recognition of relationships between
entities expressed in nominalizations.
References
Sabine Bergler, Rene? Witte, Michelle Khalife?, Zhuoyan
Li, and Frank Rudzicz. 2003. Using knowledge-
poor coreference resolution for text summarization. In
On-line Proceedings of the Workshop on Text Summa-
rization, Document Understanding Conference (DUC
2003), Edmonton, Canada, May.
Sabine Bergler, Jonathan Schuman, Julien Dubuc, and
Alexandr Lebedev. 2006. BioKI:Enzymes - an
adaptable system to locate low-frequency informa-
tion in full-text proteomics articles. Poster abstract
in Proceedings of the HLT-NAACL Workshop on
Linking Natural Language Processing and Biology
(BioNLP?06), New York, NY, June.
Eric Brill and Philip Resnik. 1994. A rule-based ap-
proach to prepositional phrase attachment disambigua-
tion. In Proceedings of the 15th International Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics (COLING-94).
Kevin Bretonnel Cohen, Lynne Fox, Philip V. Ogren, and
Lawrence Hunter. 2005. Corpus design for biomed-
ical natural language processing. In Proceedings of
the ACL-ISMB Workshop on Linking Biological Lit-
erature, Ontologies and Databases (BioLINK), pages
38?45, Detroit, MI, June. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
David P.A. Corney, Bernard F. Buxton, William B. Lang-
don, and David T. Jones. 2004. BioRAT: extracting
biological information from full-length papers. Bioin-
formatics, 20(17):3206?3213.
Udo Hahn, Martin Romacker, and Stefan Schulz. 2002.
Creating knowledge repositories from biomedical re-
ports: the MEDSYNDIKATE text mining system. In
Proceedings of the 7th Pacific Symposium on Biocom-
puting, pages 338?49, Hawaii, USA.
John Kimball. 1973. Seven principles of surface struc-
ture parsing in natural language. Cognition, 2:15?47.
Gondy Leroy and Hsinchun Chen. 2002. Filling
preposition-based templates to capture information
from medical abstracts. In Proceedings of the 7th
Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing, pages 350?361,
Hawaii, USA.
Gondy Leroy, Hsinchun Chen, and Jesse D. Martinez.
2003. A shallow parser based on closed-class words
to capture relations in biomedical text. Journal of
Biomedical Informatics, 36:145?158, June.
James Pustejovsky, Jose? Castan?o, Roser Sauri, Anna
Rumshisky, Jason Zhang, and Wei Luo. 2002. Med-
stract: Creating large-scale information servers for
biomedical libraries. In ACL 2002 Workshop on Nat-
ural Language Processing in the Biomedical Domain,
Philadelphia, PA.
Hagit Shatkay and Ronen Feldman. 2003. Mining the
biomedical literature in the genomic era: An overview.
Journal of Computational Biology, 10(6):821?855.
Martin Volk. 2001. Exploiting the WWW as a corpus
to resolve PP attachment ambiguities. In Paul Rayson,
Andrew Wilson, Tony McEnery, Andrew Hardie, and
Shereen Khoja, editors, Proceedings of Corpus Lin-
guistics, pages 601?606, Lancaster, England, March.
89
Proceedings of the BioNLP Workshop on Linking Natural Language Processing and Biology at HLT-NAACL 06, pages 91?92,
New York City, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
BioKI:Enzymes ? an adaptable system to locate low-frequency information
in full-text proteomics articles
Sabine Bergler, Jonathan Schuman, Julien Dubuc, Alexandr Lebedev
The CLaC Laboratory
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering
Concordia University, 1455 de Maisonneuve Blvd West, Montreal, Quebec, H3G 1M8
bioki@cs.concordia.ca
1 Goals
BioKI:Enzymes is a literature navigation system that
uses a two-step process. First, full-text articles are
retrieved from PubMed Central (PMC). Then, for
each article, the most relevant passages are identified
according to a set of user selected keywords, and the
articles are ranked according to the pertinence of the
representative passages.
In contrast to most existing systems in informa-
tion retrieval (IR) and information extraction (IE) for
bioinformatics, BioKI:Enzymes processes full-text
articles, not abstracts. Full-text articles1 permit to
highlight low-frequency information?i.e. informa-
tion that is not redundant, that does not necessarily
occur in many articles, and within each article, may
be expressed only once (most likely in the body of
the article, not the abstract). It contrasts thus with
GoPubMed (Doms and Schroeder, 2005), a cluster-
ing system that retrieves abstracts using PMC search
and clusters them according to terms from the Gene
Ontology (GO).
Scientists face two major obstacles in using IR
and IE technology: how to select the best keywords
for an intended search and how to assess the validity
and relevance of the extracted information.
To address the latter problem, BioKI provides
convenient access to different degrees of context by
allowing the user to view the information in three
different formats. At the most abstract level, the
ranked list of articles provides the first five lines of
the most pertinent text segment selected by BioKI
(similar to the snippets provided by Google). Click-
ing on the article link will open a new window with a
1Only articles that are available in HTML format can cur-
rently be processed.
side-by-side view of the full-text article as retrieved
through PMC on the left and the different text seg-
ments2, ordered by their relevance to the user se-
lected keywords, on the right. The user has thus the
possibility to assess the information in the context of
the text segment first, and in the original, if desired.
2 Keyword-based Ranking
To address the problem of finding the best keywords,
BioKI:Enzymes explores different approaches. For
research in enzymology, our users specified a stan-
dard pattern of information retrieval, which is re-
flected in the user interface.
Enzymes are proteins that catalyze reactions dif-
ferently in different environments (pH and tem-
perature). Enzymes are characterized by the sub-
strate they act on and by the product of their catal-
ysis. Accordingly, a keyphrase pattern has enti-
ties (that tended to recur) prespecified for selection
in four categories: enzymes, their activities (such
as carbohydrate degrading), their qualities (such
as maximum activity), and measurements (such as
pH). The provided word lists are not exhaustive
and BioKI:Enzymes expects the user to specify new
terms (which are not required to conceptually fit the
category). The word lists are convenient for select-
ing alternate spellings that might be hard to enter (?-
amylase) and for setting up keyphrase templates in a
prole, which can be stored under a name and later
reused. Completion of the keyword lists is provided
through stemming and the equivalent treatment of
Greek characters and their different transliterations.
The interface presents the user with a search win-
dow, which has two distinct fields, one to specify
2We use TextTiler (Hearst, 1997) to segment the article.
91
the search terms for the PMC search, the other to
specify the (more fine-grained) keywords the sys-
tem uses to select the most relevant passages in the
texts and to rank the texts based on this choice. The
BioKI specific keywords can be chosen from the
four categories of keyword lists mentioned above or
entered. What distinguishes BioKI:Enzymes is the
direct control the user has over the weight of the key-
words in the ranking and the general mode of con-
sidering the keywords. Each of the four keyword
categories has a weight associated with it. In ad-
dition, bonus scores can be assigned for keywords
that co-occur at a distance less than a user-defined
threshold. The two modes of ranking are a basic
?and?, where the weight and threshold settings are
ignored and the text segment that has the most spec-
ified keywords closest together will be ranked high-
est. This is the mode of choice for a targeted search
for specific information, like ?pH optima? in a PMC
subcorpus for amylase.
The other mode is a basic ?or?, with additional
points for the co-occurrence of keywords within the
same text segment. Here, the co-occurrence bonus
is given for terms from the four different lists, not
for terms from the same list. While the search space
is much too big for a scientist to control all these de-
grees of freedom without support, our initial exper-
iments have shown that we could control the rank-
ing behavior with repeated refinements of the weight
settings, and even simulate the behavior of an ?and?
by judicious weight selection.
3 Assessment and Future Work
The evaluation of a ranking of full-text articles, for
which there are no Gold standards as of yet, is dif-
ficult and begins in the anecdotal. Our experts did
not explore the changes in ranking based on differ-
ent weight settings, but found the ?and? to be just
what they wanted from the system. We will ex-
periment with different weight distribution patterns
to see whether a small size of different weight set-
tings can be specified for predictable behavior and
whether this will have better acceptance.
The strength of BioKI lies in its adaptability to
user queries. In this it contrasts with template-based
IE systems like BioRAT (Corney et al, 2004), which
extracts information from full-length articles, but
uses handcoded templates to do so. Since BioKI
is not specific to an information need, but is meant
to give more control to the user and thus facilitate
access to any type of PMC search results, it is im-
portant that the same PMC search results can be re-
ordered by successively refining the selected BioKI
keywords until more desirable texts appear at the
top. This behavior is modeled after frequent behav-
ior using search engines such as Google, where of-
ten the first search serves to better select keywords
for a subsequent, better targeted search. This rerank-
ing based on keyword refinement can be done al-
most instantaneously (20 sec for 480 keyphrases on
161 articles), since the downloaded texts from PMC
are cached, and since the system spends most of its
runtime downloading and storing the articles from
PMC. This is currently a feasibility study, targeted to
eventually become a Web service. Performance still
needs to be improved (3:14 min for 1 keyphrase on
161 articles, including downloading), but the quality
of the ranking and variable context views might still
entice users to wait for them.
In conclusion, it is feasible to develop a highly
user-adaptable passage highlighting system over
full-text articles that focuses on low-frequency infor-
mation. This adaptability is provided both through
increased user control of the ranking parameters and
through presentation of results in different contexts
which at the same time justify the ranking and au-
thenticate keyword occurrences in their source text.
Acknowledgments
The rst prototype of BioKI was implemented by Evan Desai.
We thank our domain experts Justin Powlowski, Emma Masters,
and Regis-Olivier Benech. Work funded by Genome Quebec.
References
D. P. A. Corney, B.F. Buxton, W.B. Langdon, and D.T. Jones.
2004. BioRAT: Extracting biological information from full-
length papers. Bioinformatics, 20(17):3206?3213.
Andreas Doms and Michael Schroeder. 2005. GoPubMed: ex-
ploring PubMed with the Gene Ontology. Nucleic Acids Re-
search, 33:W783?W786. Web Server issue.
M.A. Hearst. 1997. Texttiling: Segmenting text into multi-
paragraph subtopic passages. Computational Linguistics,
23(1):34?64.
92
