Usability and Acceptability Studies of Conversational Virtual Human 
Technology 
Curry Guinn1, Robert Hubal1, Geoffrey Frank1, Henry Schwetzke1, James Zimmer1, 
Sarah Backus1, Robin Deterding2, Michael Link1, Polly Armsby1, Rachel Caspar1, 
Laura Flicker1, Wendy Visscher1, Amanda Meehan1, Harvey Zelon1 
1 RTI International, Research Triangle Park, NC 
2 University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO 
 
 
 
Abstract 
Acceptance, accessibility, and usability data 
from a series of studies of a series of applica-
tions suggest that most users readily accept re-
sponsive virtual characters as valid 
conversational partners. By responsive virtual 
characters we mean full-body animated, con-
versant, realistic characters with whom the 
user interacts via natural language and who 
exhibit emotional, social, gestural, and cogni-
tive intelligence. We have developed applica-
tions for medical clinicians interviewing 
pediatric patients, field interviewers learning 
about in-formed consent procedures, and tele-
phone interviewers seeking to obtain coopera-
tion from respondents on federally-funded 
surveys. Usage data from informational kiosks 
using the same underlying technology (e.g., at 
conference exhibits) provide additional cor-
roboration. Our evidence suggests the tech-
nology is both sufficient to actively engage 
users and appropriate for consideration of use 
in training, assessment, and marketing envi-
ronments. 
1 Introduction 
An ?accessible? user interface is one that is easy to learn 
and easy to use, and can result in measurable goals such 
as decreased learning time and greater user satisfaction 
(i.e., acceptance) [28]. Characteristics of easy to learn 
and easy to use interfaces have been de-scribed as hav-
ing navigational and visual consistency, clear communi-
cation between the user and application, appropriate 
representations, few and non-catastrophic errors, task 
support and feedback, and user control [15,20,21,28]. 
As part of our Technology Assisted Learning (TAL) 
initiative, we have been particularly interested in how 
accessible responsive virtual human technology 
(RVHT) applications are. Usability testing, commonly 
conducted for commercial software to ensure that it 
meets the needs of the end user, is likewise vital to cre-
ating effective training and assessment software em-
ploying innovative technologies. This paper presents 
findings from a series of studies investigating how users 
accept and evaluate RVHT applications. 
1.1 Background on RVHT and TAL 
Since approximately 1996, we have worked on a series 
of PC-based applications in which the user interacts 
with responsive virtual characters. Applications have 
ranged from trauma patient assessment [13] to learning 
tank maintenance diagnostic skills [9] to gaining skills 
in avoiding non-response during field interviews [3]. In 
these applications, which we collectively categorize as 
involving RVHT, the PC simulates a person?s behavior 
in response to user input. Users interact with the virtual 
characters via voice, mouse, menu, and/or keyboard. 
We are certainly not alone in developing training, as-
sessment, marketing, and other RVHT applications (see, 
e.g., [2,4,7,16,17,19,22,24,25]), but the breadth across 
do-mains and combination of technologies is unusual. 
The RVHT applications are representative of those 
developed in our TAL division. We define TAL as 
?proactively applying the benefits of technology to help 
people train more safely, learn better, retain skills 
longer, and achieve proficiency less expensively?. We 
develop TAL applications for jobs requiring compli-
cated knowledge and skills, complex or expensive 
equipment or work material, a high cost of on-the-job 
training or failure on the job, jobs where safety or spa-
tial awareness is essential, and for large student 
throughput requirements [6,12]. 
Practicing skills in a safe and supportive environ-
ment allows the student to learn flexible approaches. 
Flexibility is critical for interaction skills [8] and for 
performing well under time constraint, information-
poor, and other difficult conditions [4,14]. The consis-
tency that is gained by repeating this practice in virtual 
environments leads directly to good decisions on the job 
[24]. By practicing skills in safe, computer-generated 
settings, students have the opportunity through repeti-
tion to develop practical experience and skills which 
would otherwise be difficult to acquire. Practice also 
leads to increased confidence prior to the first real on-
the-job experience. 
1.2 RVHT Architecture 
We have developed a PC-based architecture, Avatalk, 
that enables users to engage in unscripted conversations 
with virtual humans and see and hear their realistic re-
sponses [10]. Among the components that underlie the 
architecture are a Language Processor and a Behavior 
Engine. The Language Processor accepts spoken input 
and maps this input to an under-lying semantic repre-
sentation, and then functions in reverse, mapping se-
mantic representations to gestural and speech output. 
Our applications variously use spoken natural language 
interaction [9], text-based inter-action, and menu-based 
interaction. The Behavior Engine maps Language Proc-
essor output and other environmental stimuli to virtual 
human behaviors. These behaviors include decision-
making and problem solving, performing actions in the 
virtual world, and spoken dialog. The Behavior Engine 
also controls the dynamic loading of contexts and 
knowledge for use by the Language Processor. The vir-
tual characters are rendered via a Visualization Engine 
that performs gesture, movement, and speech actions, 
through morphing of vertices of a 3D model and playing 
of key-framed animation files (largely based on motion 
capture data). Physical interaction with the virtual char-
acter (e.g., using medical instruments) is realized via 
object-based and instrument-specific selection maps 
[29]. These interactions are controlled by both the Be-
havior Engine and Visualization Engine. 
We keep track of domain knowledge via state vari-
able settings and also by taking advantage of the plan-
ning structure inherent in our architecture [11]. Our 
virtual humans reason about social roles and conven-
tions (what can be stated or asked at any point in the 
dialog) [23] and grammar definitions (how it gets stated 
or asked). The architecture was designed to al-low ap-
plication creators flexibility in assigning general and 
domain-specific knowledge. Hence, our virtual humans 
discuss relevant concerns or excuses based on specific 
setup variables indicating knowledge level and initial 
emotional state. Our personality mod-els and emotion 
reasoning are based on well-accepted theories that guide 
realistic emotional behavior [1,4,23,24,26]. After user 
input, we update emotional state based on lexical, syn-
tactic, and semantic analyses [11]. 
1.3 Overview of Paper 
We present findings from studies of four different 
applications. The applications are, in order of presenta-
tion, a virtual pediatric standardized patient, a trainer for 
practicing informed consent procedures, a telephone 
surveys interview trainer, and two implementations of a 
tradeshow booth marketing product. For each we briefly 
describe the application, the participants, and the results, 
concentrating on results that get at accessibility, en-
gagement, and usability. We tie the results together in a 
lessons learned section. 
2 Virtual Pediatric Patient 
Training and assessment in pediatrics is complicated by 
the poor reliability of children to behave in a consistent 
manner. Consequently, curriculum is difficult to de-
velop, performance assessment is restricted, and prac-
tice opportunities are limited. Our goals using RVHT 
have been to develop specific interactive training ses-
sions using virtual pediatric characters and to explore 
related educational issues [10]. 
Figure 1. Virtual Pediatric Patient 
One educational issue in pediatric medicine is in-
struction. Medical students rotating through pediatrics 
have limited exposure to children and are given limited 
one-on-one faculty observation time, hence the curricu-
lar material is mostly passive, while on-the-job learning 
involves variable experiences with behaviors or prob-
lems and dispersed learners. Another educational need 
in pediatric medicine is associated with assessment, 
since there is no reliable or valid authentic assessment 
in young children (it is currently text-based or multime-
dia videos) as is possible with standardized patients for 
adults, and since interaction skills with children may not 
be valued by the student. 
Our use of virtual pediatric patients follows models 
of experiential learning, where abstract conceptualiza-
tion leads to active engagement and experimentation, 
which leads to concrete experience, which leads to re-
flective observation, which leads back to the beginning 
of the cycle [15,21]. By adding virtual characters, we 
are adding experiential learning to the traditional class-
room, discussions, and rounds. 
Our work supports training and assessment not only 
of verbal interaction skills, but also of medical diagnos-
tic skills, dealing with the spectrum of behavioral re-
sponses, and other types of high-level problem solving. 
2.1 Methods 
Three specific interactive pediatric scenarios have been 
developed to date in our virtual pediatric standardized 
patient (VPSP) application. In one scenario, the clini-
cian is tasked with obtaining an ear exam in a very 
young girl. The girl may be helpful if she is healthy but 
whiny if she has an ear infection. In another scenario, 
the clinician is asked to examine the lungs of a pre-teen 
boy. In the last scenario, the clinician must obtain a 
high-risk behavior history from a teenage girl. 
Educational issues that we are addressing include 
defining ? and identifying ? pediatric interactive strate-
gies, program validity, scoring performance, and pro-
viding feedback. Our goal is to provide information for 
a ?gold-standard? setting language acquisition to im-
prove the robust nature of the interaction, and to address 
face, content, and construct validity. We hypothesize 
that expert and novice users will provide valuable de-
velopment information about language and strategies in 
these scenarios, and the differences will exist based 
upon expertise with children and technology experience. 
2.2 Results 
Interactive pediatric scenarios were created and shown 
to content and educational experts. The first rounds of 
feedback from experts, on the girl and boy scenarios, 
came at exhibits sessions at the Association of Ameri-
can Medical Colleges annual meeting in November 
2002 and the Medicine Meets Virtual Reality confer-
ence in January 2003. From comments at these sessions 
we revised the scenarios and added the adolescent sce-
nario. The latest round of feedback, and the results de-
scribed here, came from the Council on Medical Student 
Education in Pediatrics (COMSEP) annual meeting in 
April 2003. 
Fourteen attendees at the COMSEP meeting were 
recruited to use the VPSP application. The attendees 
were first given a questionnaire asking about their ex-
perience with completing ear exams, lung exams, and 
adolescent social history, and also about their comput-
ing experience. They were then given brief instructions 
on how to use the application, told to choose whichever 
of the scenarios they wanted, and handed headphones to 
avoid distraction. Finally, they were given a question-
naire asking their perceptions of the realism of the ap-
plication in comparison to clinical experience. 
In a way, this was the toughest group of all we?ve 
tested. These participants were true experts, unaware of 
the technology (until a debriefing at the end of each 
session), and presented with an application prototype. 
Given this rationalization, the data are acceptable. On 
average, these participants rated the realism of the re-
sponse time and the realism of the objections, concerns, 
and questions posed by the virtual characters as ?some-
what? realistic. They rated the realism of the overall 
conversation as a little better than ?not very? realistic. 
However, somewhat surprisingly, when asked to com-
pare the simulated clinical experience with real clinical 
experience, the participants rated the comparison as 
somewhat challenging, that is, the comparison is rea-
sonable. Four of the participants even found the simu-
lated experience ?moderately? or ?extremely? 
challenging. Analysis of the participants? log files 
shows they spent an average of almost 4 1/2 minutes in 
the scenarios, taking eight conversational turns, and 
collectively covering 32 topics (of a possible 130 topics 
across all scenarios, and with no prompting). The par-
ticipants were observed to take the cases seriously, ask-
ing strategic questions to get the virtual character to 
cooperate, and becoming frustrated when their questions 
were misinterpreted. (We are pleased by frustration, as 
it implies engagement, though anxious, too, to make the 
application work better.) We take these data as encour-
aging, but fully understand the need to revise in depth 
the language and behavior of the virtual characters to 
satisfy acceptance criteria. 
3 Practice on Informed Consent 
3.1 Methods 
Under grant funds to enhance our IRB program, we 
created a virtual reality simulation for teaching proper 
informed consent procedures. In the application, a po-
tential survey respondent poses questions regarding the 
survey, the sponsor, confidentiality, privacy, compensa-
tion, and contact information [27]. 
In November 2003, we presented the trainer to a 
group of five experienced telephone or field interview-
ers who were being trained for a study intended to better 
understand the health effects of exposure to smoke, 
dust, and debris from the collapse of the World Trade 
Center. We observed the participants and also had them, 
after completing the interactions, fill out a short ques-
tionnaire on their familiarity with computers and their 
impressions of the application.  
3.2 Results 
The application forced the respondents to touch on all 
aspects of informed consent before finishing. The only 
way an interaction could be cut short was if the partici-
pant replied incorrectly to a question (e.g., giving the 
wrong sponsor name, or indicating that participation 
was mandatory rather than voluntary). Participants in-
teracted no fewer than three times with the virtual char-
acter and up to six times. 
Figure 2. Informed Consent Training 
The results were generally positive, particularly in 
the subjects? assessment of usability and enjoyment. 
The realism of the character was consistently rated by 
the participants as moderately realistic (average of 5.2 
on a 7 point scale), a decent rating given the virtual 
character?s relatively few body movements and facial 
gestures. Ease of use (5.8), enjoyment (5.6), and effec-
tiveness (5.4) were all rated moderately to very easy, 
enjoyable, or effective. An observer also rated the level 
of engagement of the interaction. Engagement, verbali-
zation, and information seeking were all moderately or 
highly demonstrated. Participants were judged either 
relaxed or amused by the interaction, they responded in 
a moderate amount of time, and they appeared to com-
prehend what was being asked. As would be expected, 
they were also judged to find the interaction not at all 
provocative and needed very little negotiation. 
4 Telephone Survey Interviewer 
 One of the most difficult skills for a telephone in-
terviewer to learn is gaining cooperation from sample 
members and avoiding refusals. In telephone inter-
viewing in particular, the first half-minute on the tele-
phone with a sample member is crucial. Sample 
members almost automatically turn to common phrases 
to avoid taking part in surveys: ?How long will this 
take?? ?How was I selected?? ?I don?t do surveys.? ?I 
don?t have time.? ?I?m just not interested.? ?What is the 
survey about?? Non-response research suggests that the 
best approach to obtaining participa-tion is for the 
interviewer to immediately reply with an appropriate, 
informative, tailored response [2,9]. 
We tested an RVHT application designed to simu-
late the first 30-60 seconds of a telephone interview 
[21]. Interviewers begin with an introduction and then 
need to respond to a series of objections or questions 
raised by the virtual respondent. Ultimately, the virtual 
character ends the conversation by either granting the 
interview or hanging-up the telephone. The emotional 
state of the virtual respondent varies from scenario to 
scenario. A total of six basic objections were recorded 
in four different tones of voice for both a male and fe-
male virtual respondent. 
Figure 3. Telephone Survey User Interface 
4.1 Methods 
The assessment provided here of the interviewer train-
ing module is based on researcher/instructor observa-
tions, and user debriefings in the form of a 
questionnaire. Empirical data were collected on users? 
observed ability to interact with the application as well 
as their perception of the interaction. The training appli-
cation was tested with a group of 48 novice telephone 
interviewers during Spring 2002. 
To evaluate the accessibility of the application we 
focused on the users? understanding of the application?s 
basic features, their ability to complete each task, and 
capabilities shown by different users (e.g., based on 
ethnicity, job level, and education level. To evaluate 
acceptance of the application by the trainees, we de-
briefed participants using a structured questionnaire and 
moderator-facilitated focus groups to gauge reactions 
and engagement in the application. We were interested 
in the virtual humans? realism, speed and accuracy of 
the speech recognition, and detection of changes in the 
emotive states of the virtual human. 
Finally, each training session was observed by either 
the researchers or training instructors, who made notes 
of their observations. These observations are included as 
part of the analysis. 
4.2 Results 
Ease of Use: Users of the RVHT application found it 
very accessible, with 84 percent indicating the software 
was either extremely easy or very easy to use (52% ex-
tremely, 31% very, 13% somewhat, 4% not too, 0% not 
at all). Only eight (17%) of the 48 trainees indicated that 
they required additional assistance to use the training 
software (after the initial training received by all train-
ees). 
Realism of the Training Environment: The prom-
ise of RVHT-based training tools is that they can simu-
late a real environment, thereby allowing trainees 
repetitive practice in conditions that are as close as pos-
sible to what they will encounter on the job. For this 
particular application, the virtual respondent needed to 
mirror the behaviors and emotions of real respondents 
encountered when doing live interviewing. This means 
delivering an array of objections to the trainees in dif-
ferent tones of speech and emotional levels in a fast-
paced manner. Interviewers were asked a series of ques-
tions to try to assess how well they accepted the virtual 
environment as a substitute for real work conditions. 
The answer is somewhat mixed. In general, trainees 
did not find the virtual environment to be realistic and 
they cited two primary reasons: the slowness of the re-
sponse of the virtual respondent and the limited number 
of different objections/questions offered by the virtual 
respondent. They did, however, find the responses that 
were offered to be realistic and stated that they could 
detect and respond to changes in tone and emotional 
cues offered by the virtual respondents. A majority of 
the trainees also indicated that they felt the sessions 
helped them to improve their skills needed at the outset 
of an interview either ?somewhat? or ?a lot?. 
When asked how realistic they found the overall 
conversation with the virtual respondent, 17 percent of 
participants said they thought it was ?extremely? or 
?very? realistic, and 44 percent said it was ?somewhat? 
realistic. Slowness of the virtual respondents in replying 
(due to the lag caused by the speech recognizer as it 
interpreted the interviewer?s responses and determined 
the next script to launch) was the primary problem cited 
by interviewers. Over three-quarters (77%) of the users 
felt the response time was too slow (4% felt it was too 
fast and 19% indicated the speed was just right). 
The trainees were, however, more positive when 
evaluating the realism of the objections and questions 
offered by the virtual respondent. A plurality (48%) 
indicated that the content of what was said was either 
?extremely? or ?very? realistic, with 40 percent saying 
it was ?somewhat? realistic. They also felt it was rela-
tively easy to determine the emotional state of the vir-
tual respondent based on the tone of voice they heard 
(23% ?extremely? easy, 44% ?very? easy, 29% ?some-
what? easy, and 4% ?not too? easy). Likewise, the con-
tent of the speech used by the virtual character was also 
a good cue to trainees as to the virtual human?s emo-
tional state (8% ?extremely? easy to tell, 54% ?very? 
easy, 27% ?somewhat? easy, 10% ?not too? easy). 
Being able to recognize changes in the emotional 
state of the virtual respondent changed how the inter-
viewer approached the situation. Nearly 60 percent indi-
cated that they behaved differently in the practice 
scenario based on the tone of the virtual respondent?s 
voice. Thus, the content of the objections raised by the 
virtual respondent and the emotional behavior of the 
virtual human were generally accepted by the trainees 
and caused them to react differently within the various 
training scenarios. It appears, however, that while the 
interviewers do recognize and react to emotional cues, 
they do not necessarily process these as being very dis-
tinct. They focus more on the actual content of the ar-
gument (regardless of the tone of voice or gender) when 
considering how diverse the scenarios offered are. 
Enjoyment and Reuse: An effective training tool is 
also one that trainees should enjoy using, would use 
again, and recommend to others. Approximately two-
thirds (65%) of the users said that they found using the 
RVHT software to be fun and enjoyable. Nearly three-
quarters (73%) said they would like to use the software 
again. In addition, 83 percent said they would recom-
mend the program as a training tool for other interview-
ers. In open-ended responses, a number of interviewers 
indicated that it would be a very good practice vehicle 
for new or less experienced interviewers. 
5 ExhibitAR Applications 
5.1 Methods 
Using earlier versions of the same underlying technol-
ogy we created a product called ExhibitAR that was 
positioned as a virtual tradeshow attendant. It was put 
into operation as a kiosk, drawing attention to the booth, 
augmenting the sales and marketing staff, and providing 
engaging dialog with visitors regarding the company 
and company products. We report on user data collected 
at three particular venues, the Exhibitor Show held in 
February 1999, the Space Congress held in April 1999, 
and the American Society for Training and Develop-
ment (ASTD) International Conference & Exposition 
held in May 1999. 
5.2 Results 
The ExhibitAR product did attract visitors to the booths 
and answered visitors? questions, a definite advantage 
on the competitive tradeshow floor. At the Space Con-
gress show, in front of a reasonably technical audience 
over four days, the application attracted 335 visitors, 
who conversed with the virtual characters an average of 
61.4 seconds with five conversational turns. At ASTD, 
with less technical attendees, over three days, 197 visi-
tors spoke with the virtual characters for an average of 
28.4 seconds and 2.6 conversational turns. 
 
 
Figure 4. Virtual Tradeshow Attendant 
We analyzed not only the number of visitors and 
their conversations, but also the content of the conversa-
tions. For ASTD, every single one of the 63 topics of 
conversation was covered at least once. The average per 
topic was almost nine occurrences (i.e., nine different 
visitors asked about the topic). For Space Congress, 
again every topic was covered, the average number of 
times per topic for the 39 topics was 35 occurrences. 
The most common topics for both applications were a 
greeting, asking about the company and its associates, 
asking what to do or say, asking how the technology 
worked, and asking the current date or time, but topics 
specific to each application were also discussed. 
The Exhibitor data are less telling, but this was the 
show at which ExhibitAR was introduced, and this was 
the only venue where the visitor was not at all 
prompted. The application attracted 45 visitors over 
2 1/2 days, each visitor averaging 2.5 turns and 21.4 
seconds. Though each of the 25 topics was covered at 
least once, the only topic that was covered considerably 
more often than any other was a request for assistance. 
(This led us to devise a prompting feature.) 
Visitor data from RVHT marketing applications are 
not conclusive of usability or acceptability, but sugges-
tive. Even at the time these data were collected (five 
years ago), less technical users were sufficiently en-
gaged to converse with the virtual characters for just 
under half a minute, and more technical users for just 
over a minute. Given prompting, the users covered the 
range of topics designed into the applications. It is im-
portant that these users had never before seen the appli-
cations, had no training or practice time, had to learn to 
use the applications at that moment, yet stuck with the 
conversation for a significant period of time. 
It is only anecdotal data, but RVHT continues to at-
tract visitors to exhibit booths. The various applications 
described in earlier sections, and others, have been 
shown since 1999 at least a dozen times to audiences 
varying from educators to medical practitioners to pub-
lic health workers to military service personnel. Visitors 
are increasingly less surprised (skeptical?) to encounter 
virtual characters, and more impressed with the state of 
the art. They appear willing to accept virtual characters 
as sensible for training, assessment, and marketing uses. 
6 Conclusions and Lessons Learned 
In this paper we describe usability and acceptance data 
derived from a number of studies using a number of 
different RVHT applications. No data suggest that our 
applications are completely accessible yet to these users, 
but the data in aggregate suggest we are moving in the 
right direction. 
The different studies involved various user groups, 
from experts (medical clinicians) to novices (field and 
telephone survey interviewers) to ?common folk? (ex-
hibit visitors) in greatly different domains. A common 
finding was for our participants to suggest additional 
potential audiences, also ranging from novice to expert. 
Further, the majority of participants said they enjoyed 
using the applications ? and/or were observed to be en-
gaged with the virtual characters ? despite technical 
obstacles, prototype-stage content, and conspicuous 
presence of the investigators. 
Some specific lessons learned include: 
? It is critical in applications to be able to detect 
and respond appropriately to ?bad? or inappro-
priate input. In all our applications, users (often 
but not always intentionally) spoke utterances 
that were outside the range of what was expected 
in the context of the dialog. This occurred most 
frequently in the tradeshow exhibit application 
where users would try to test the limits of the 
system. But we even found that in the training 
applications that users would often express frus-
tration by cursing or otherwise verbally mistreat-
ing the virtual character. 
? Without explicit prompting by the virtual charac-
ter, users often seemed lost as to what to say 
next. We found that explicit statements or ques-
tions by the virtual character helped to supply the 
user with the necessary context. This also helped 
to prune the language processing space. . In the 
ExhibitAR domain, a subset of possible relevant 
questions was always present on the screen. 
? Because of shortcomings in speech recognition 
technology, we found that typed input was often 
needed to overcome the limitations of large 
grammars. This was particularly true in the more 
open-ended pediatric trainer. We also found 
typed input to be invaluable in development 
stage even in applications that were ultimately 
going to be speech-driven. The typed inputs in 
development helped us to derive grammars that 
we could later use to improve the speech recog-
nizer. 
? Our greatest difficulties in understanding the sys-
tem occurred when the user replied with very 
complex compound sentences, multiple sentence, 
and even paragraph long utterances. This phe-
nomenon led us to set user expectations in the 
training environment prior to their using the sys-
tem. 
? Anecdotally we found that pre-recorded speech 
was much more acceptable than any currently 
available speech synthesizer. This effect seemed 
to be less noticeable the longer the user spoke 
with the system. We would like to conduct a 
study comparing the use of the two technologies.  
? Ultimately, because of the limitations in lan-
guage understanding, the user would adapt to 
environment, adjusting the manner in which they 
spoke. 
We are encouraged by results so far, but feel it is 
important to continue to investigate more robust and 
effective RVHT models and more efficient means of 
creating the models, to better understand user prefer-
ences and acceptance of RVHT, and to determine how 
best to use RVHT in combination with other approaches 
to produce cost-effective training, assessment, and other 
applications. We propose several areas of active re-
search: 
? Usability and acceptability studies across differ-
ent populations. Are there differences in accep-
tance of virtual characters across boundaries of 
age, gender, education level, and cultural di-
vides? 
? Usability and acceptability studies with varied 
input modes. What are the tradeoffs between us-
ing a typed natural language interface versus a 
spoken interface? We found that a typed inter-
face improved the computer's ability to compre-
hend the user which leads to more cohesive 
dialog. On the other hand, a typed interface re-
duces the naturalness of the dialog, the believ-
ability of the character, and the usability of the 
system. 
? Usability and acceptability studies with varied 
degrees of visual realism. How realistic do vir-
tual characters have to be in order to receive high 
ratings of acceptability by users? What is the 
contrast in user impressions between video of ac-
tual humans versus more cartoon-like animated 
characters? 
? Usability and acceptability studies with multi-
modal input. Currently our systems make no at-
tempt to use the user's vocal affect, facial 
expressions, eye movement, body gesture, or 
other physiological input (such as galvanic skin 
response) in interpreting the user's emotional 
state and intentions. We would like to introduce 
these elements into our systems to assess 
whether such input can create more realistic 
characters. 
Acknowledgements 
The studies described here were performed under awards # 
290-00-0021 from the Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality, # 1-S07-RR18257-01 from the National Institutes of 
Health, and # R9898-002 from the Research Triangle Institute. 
Preparation of this paper was supported under award # EIA-
0121211 from the National Science Foundation. Points of 
view in this document are those of the authors, and do not 
necessarily represent the official position of any of the above-
listed agencies. 
References 
Andr?, E., Klesen, M., Gebhard, P., Allen, S., & Rist, T. 
(2000). Exploiting Models of Personality and Emo-
tions to Control the Behavior of Animated Interface 
Agents. Proceedings of the International Conference 
on Autonomous Agents (pp. 3-7). Barcelona, Spain. 
Andr?, E., Rist, T., & M?ller, J. (1999). Employing AI 
Methods to Control the Behavior of Animated Inter-
face Agents. International Journal of Applied Artifi-
cial Intelligence, 13 (4-5), 415-448. 
Camburn, D.P., Gunther-Mohr, C., & Lessler, J.T. 
(1999). Developing New Models of Interviewer 
Training. Proceedings of the International Confer-
ence on Survey Nonresponse. Portland, OR. 
Dahlb?ck, N., J?nsson, A., & Ahrenberg, L. (1993). 
Wizard of Oz Studies ? Why and How. Knowledge-
based Systems, 6(4), 258-266. 
Frank, G.A., Guinn, C.I., Hubal, R.C., Stanford, M.A., 
Pope, P., & Lamm-Weisel, D. (2002). JUST-TALK: 
An Application of Responsive Virtual Human Tech-
nology. Proceedings of the Interservice/Industry 
Training, Simulation and Education Conference. Or-
lando, FL. 
Frank, G.A., Helms, R., & Voor, D. (2000). Determin-
ing the Right Mix of Live, Virtual, and Constructive 
Training, Proceedings of the Interservice/Industry 
Training Systems and Education Conference. Or-
lando, FL. 
Graesser, A., Wiemer-Hastings, K., Wiemer-Hastings, 
P., Kreuz, R., & the Tutoring Research Group 
(2000). AutoTutor: A simulation of a human tutor. 
Journal of Cognitive Systems Research, 1, 35-51. 
Groves, R., & Couper, M. (1998). Nonresponse in 
Household Interview Surveys. New York, NY: John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Guinn, C.I., & Montoya, R.J. (1998). Natural Language 
Processing in Virtual Reality. Modern Simulation & 
Training, 6, 44-45. 
Hubal, R.C., Deterding, R.R., Frank, G.A., Schwetzke, 
H.F., & Kizakevich, P.N. (2003). Lessons Learned in 
Modeling Pediatric Patients. In J.D. Westwood, H.M. 
Hoffman, G.T. Mogel, R. Phillips, R.A. Robb, & D. 
Stredney (Eds.) NextMed: Health Horizon (pp. 127-
130). Amsterdam, Holland: IOS Press. 
Hubal, R.C., Frank, G.A., & Guinn, C.I. (2003). Les-
sons Learned in Modeling Schizophrenic and De-
pressed Responsive Virtual Humans for Training. 
Proceedings of the Intelligent User Interface Confer-
ence. Miami, FL. 
Hubal, R.C., & Helms, R.F. (1998). Advanced Learning 
Environments. Modern Simulation & Training, 5, 40-
45. 
Kizakevich, P.N., McCartney, M.L., Nissman, D.B., 
Starko, K., & Smith, N.T. (1998). Virtual Medical 
Trainer: Patient Assessment and Trauma Care Simu-
lator. In J.D. Westwood, H.M. Hoffman, D. Stred-
ney, & S.J. Weghorst (Eds.), Art, Science, 
Technology: Healthcare (R)evolution (pp. 309-315). 
Amsterdam, Holland: IOS Press. 
Klein, G. (1998). Sources of Power. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. 
Kolb, D.A. (1984). Experiential Learning. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Lester, J., Converse, S., Kahler, S., Barlow, S., Stone, 
B., & Bhogal, R. (1997). The Persona Effect: Affec-
tive Impact of Animated Pedagogical Agents. Pro-
ceedings of the Human Factors in Computing 
Systems Conference, (pp. 359-366). New York, NY: 
ACM Press. 
Lindheim, R., & Swartout, W. (2001). Forging a New 
Simulation Technology at the ICT. Computer, 34 (1), 
72-79. 
Link, M., Armsby, P.P., Hubal, R., & Guinn, C.I. 
(2002). A Test of Responsive Virtual Human Tech-
nology as an Interviewer Skills Training Tool. Pro-
ceedings of the American Statistical Association, 
Survey Methodology Section. Alexandria, VA: 
American Statistical Association. 
Lundeberg, M., & Beskow, J. (1999). Developing a 3D-
Agent for the August Dialogue System. Proceedings 
of the Auditory-Visual Speech Processing Confer-
ence. Santa Cruz, CA. 
Nielsen, J. (1993). Usability Engineering. Boston: Aca-
demic Press. 
Norman, D.A. (1993). Things That Make Us Smart. 
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Olsen, D.E. (2001). The Simulation of a Human for 
Interpersonal Skill Training. Proceedings of the Of-
fice of National Drug Control Policy International 
Technology Symposium. San Diego, CA. 
Ortony, A., Clore, G.L., & Collins, A. (1988). The Cog-
nitive Structure of Emotions. Cambridge, England: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Rickel, J., & Johnson, W.L. (1999). Animated Agents 
for Procedural Training in Virtual Reality: Percep-
tion, Cognition, and Motor Control. Applied Artifi-
cial Intelligence, 13, 343-382. 
Rousseau, D., & Hayes-Roth, B. (1997). Improvisa-
tional Synthetic Actors with Flexible Personalities. 
KSL Report #97-10, Stanford University.. 
Russell, J.A. (1997). How Shall an Emotion Be Called? 
In R. Plutchik & H.R. Conte (Eds.), Circumplex 
Models of Personality and Emotions (pp. 205-220). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Associa-
tion. 
Sugarman, J., McCrory, D.C., Powell, D., Krasny, A., 
Adams, B., Ball, E., & Cassell, C. (1999). Empirical 
Research on Informed Consent: An Annotated Bibli-
ography. Hastings Center Report. January-February 
1999; Supplement: S1-S42. 
Weiss, E. (1993). Making Computers People-Literate. 
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Zimmer, J., Kizakevich, P., Heneghan, J., Schwetzke, 
H., & Duncan, S. (2003). The Technology Behind 
Full Body 3D Patients. Poster presented at the Medi-
cine Meets Virtual Reality Conference. Newport 
Beach, CA. Available at 
http://www.rvht.info/publications.cfm. 
