Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Important Unresolved Matters, pages 105?111,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
The Spanish Resource Grammar: pre-processing strategy and lexical acquisi-
tion 
Montserrat Marimon, N?ria Bel, Sergio Espeja, Natalia Seghezzi 
IULA - Universitat Pompeu Fabra 
Pl. de la Merc?, 10-12 
 08002-Barcelona 
{montserrat.marimon,nuria.bel,sergio.espeja,natalia.seghezzi}@upf.edu
 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes work on the develop-
ment of an open-source HPSG grammar for 
Spanish implemented within the LKB sys-
tem. Following a brief description of the 
main features of the grammar, we present 
our approach for pre-processing and on-
going research on automatic lexical acqui-
sition.1   
1 Introduction 
In this paper we describe the development of the 
Spanish Resource Grammar (SRG), an open-
source 2  medium-coverage grammar for Spanish. 
The grammar is grounded in the theoretical 
framework of HPSG (Head-driven Phrase Struc-
ture Grammar; Pollard and Sag, 1994) and uses 
Minimal Recursion Semantics (MRS) for the se-
mantic representation (Copestake et al 2006). The 
SRG is implemented within the Linguistic Knowl-
edge Building (LKB) system (Copestake, 2002), 
based on the basic components of the grammar 
Matrix, an open?source starter-kit for the devel-
opment of HPSG grammars developed as part of 
the LinGO consortium?s multilingual grammar 
engineering (Bender et al, 2002).  
The SRG is part of the DELPH-IN open-source 
repository of linguistic resources and tools for 
writing (the LKB system), testing (The [incr 
tsbd()]; Oepen and Carroll, 2000) and efficiently 
                                                 
                                                
1 This research was supported by the Spanish Ministerio de 
Educaci?n y Ciencia: Project AAILE (HUM2004-05111-C02-
01), Ramon y Cajal, Juan de la Cierva programmes and PTA-
CTE/1370/2003 with Fondo Social Europeo. 
2 The Spanish Resource Grammar may be downloaded from: 
http://www.upf.edu/pdi/iula/montserrat.marimon/. 
processing HPSG grammars (the PET system; 
Callmeier, 2000). Further linguistic resources that 
are available in the DELPH-IN repository include 
broad-coverage grammars for English, German and 
Japanese as well as  smaller grammars for French, 
Korean, Modern Greek, Norwegian and 
Portuguese .3   
The SRG has a full coverage of closed word 
classes and it contains about 50,000 lexical entries 
for open classes (roughtly: 6,600 verbs, 28,000 
nouns, 11,200 adjectives and 4,000 adverbs).  
These lexical entries are organized into a type 
hierachy of about 400 leaf types (defined by a type 
hierarchy of  around 5,500 types). The grammar 
also has 40 lexical rules to perform valence 
changing operations on lexical items and 84 
structure rules to combine words and phrases into 
larger constituents and to compositionally build up 
the semantic representation.  
We have been developing the SRG since 
January 2005. The range of linguistic phenomena 
that the grammar handles includes almost all types 
of subcategorization structures, valence 
alternations,  subordinate clauses, raising and 
control, determination,  null-subjects and 
impersonal constructions, compound tenses, 
modification,  passive constructions, comparatives 
and superlatives, cliticization, relative and 
interrogative clauses and sentential adjuncts, 
among others. 
Together with the linguistic resources (grammar 
and lexicon) we provide a set of controlled hand-
constructed test suites. The construction of the test 
suites plays a major role in the development of the 
SRG, since test suites provide a fine-grained diag-
 
3 See . http://www.delph-in.net/
 
105
nosis of grammar performance and they allow us to 
compare the SRG with other DELPH-IN gram-
mars. In building the test suites we aimed at (a) 
testing specific phenomena in isolation or in con-
trolled interaction, (b) providing test cases which 
show systematic and exhaustive variations over 
each phenomenon, including infrequent phenom-
ena and variations, (c) avoiding irrelevant variation 
(i.e. different instances of the same lexical type), (d) 
avoiding ambiguity, and (e) including negative or 
ungrammatical data. We have about 500 test cases 
which are distributed by linguistic phenomena (we 
have 17 files). Each test case includes a short lin-
guistic annotation describing the phenomenon and 
the number of expected results when more than 
one analysis cannot be avoided (e.g. testing op-
tionality). 
Test suites are not the only source of data we 
have used for testing the SRG. Hand-constructed 
sentences were complemented by real corpus cases 
from: (a) the Spanish questions from the Question 
Answering track at CLEF (CLEF-2003, CLEF-
2004, CLEF-2005 and CLEF-2006), and (b) the 
general sub-corpus of the Corpus T?cnic de 
l?IULA (IULA?s Technical Corpus; Cabr? and 
Bach, 2004); this sub-corpus includes newspaper 
articles and it has been set up for contrastive 
studies. CLEF cases include short queries showing 
little interaction of phenomena and an average of 
9.2 words; newspaper articles show a high level of 
syntactic complexity and interaction of phenomena, 
sentences are a bit longer, ranging up to 35 words. 
We are currently shifting to much more varied 
corpus data of the Corpus T?cnic de l?IULA, which 
includes specialized corpus of written text in the 
areas of computer science, environment, law, 
medicine and economics, collected from several 
sources, such as legal texts, textbooks, research 
reports, user manuals, ? In these texts sentence 
length may range up to 70 words.  
The rest of the paper describes the pre-
processing strategy we have adopted and on our 
on-going research on lexical acquisition. 
2 Pre-processing in the SRG 
Following previous experiments within the 
Advanced Linguistic Engineering Platform (ALEP) 
platform (Marimon, 2002), we have integrated a 
shallow processing tool, the FreeLing tool, as a 
pre-processing module of the grammar.  
The FreeLing tool is an open-source4 language 
analysis tool suite (Atserias et al, 2006) perfoming 
the following functionalities (though 
disambiguation, named entity classification and the 
last three functionalities have not been integrated):  
 
? Text tokenization (including MWU and 
contraction splitting). 
? Sentence splitting. 
? Morpho-syntactic analysis and 
disambiguation. 
n. 
                                                
? Named entity detection and classification. 
? Date/number/currency/ratios/physical 
magnitude (speed, weight, temperature, 
density, etc.) recognitio
? Chart-based shallow parsing. 
? WordNet-based sense annotation.  
? Dependency parsing.  
FreeLing also includes a guesser to deal with 
words which are not found in the lexicon by 
computing the probability of each possible PoS tag 
given the longest observed termination string for 
that word. Smoothing using probabilities of shorter 
termination strings is also performed. Details can 
be found in Brants (2000) and Samuelson (1993).  
Our system integrates the FreeLing tool by 
means of the LKB Simple PreProcessor Protocol 
(SPPP; http://wiki.delph-in.net/moin/LkbSppp), 
which assumes that a preprocessor runs as an 
external process to the LKB system, and uses the 
LKB inflectional rule component to convert the 
PoS tags delivered by the FreeLing tool into partial 
descriptions of feature structures. 
2.1 The integration of PoS tags 
The integration of the morpho-syntactic analysis in 
the LKB system using the SPPP protocol means 
defining inflectional rules that propagate the mor-
pho-syntactic information associated to full-forms, 
in the form of PoS tags, to the morpho-syntactic 
features of the lexical items. (1) shows the rule 
propagating the tag AQMS (adjective qualitative 
masculine singular) delivered by FreeLing. Note 
 
4 The FreeLing tool may be downloaded from 
http://www.garraf.epsevg.upc.es/freeling/. 
106
that we use the tag as the rule identifier (i.e. the 
name of the inflectional rule in the LKB).  
(1) aqms :=  
 %suffix () 
 [SYNSEM.LOCAL[CAT adj, 
               AGR.PNG[PN 3sg, 
                     GEN masc]]] 
 
In Spanish, when the verb is in non-finite form, 
such as infinitive or gerund, or it is in the impera-
tive, clitics5 take the form of enclitics. That is, they 
are attached to the verb forming a unique word, 
e.g. hacerlo (hacer+lo; to do it), gustarle (gus-
tar+le; to like to him). FreeLing does not split 
verbs and pronouns, but uses complex tags that 
append the tags of each word. Thus, the form ha-
cerlo gets the tag VMN+PP3MSA (verb main in-
finitive + personal pronoun 3rd masculine singular 
accusative). In order to deal with these complex 
tags, the SRG includes a series of rules that build 
up the same type of linguistic structure as that one 
built up with the structure rules attaching affixes to 
the left of verbal heads. Since the application of 
these rules is based on the tag delivered by FreeL-
ing, they are included in the set of inflectional rules 
and they are applied after the set of rules dealing 
with complement cliticization.   
 Apart from avoiding the implementation of in-
flectional rules for such a highly inflected lan-
guage, the integration of the morpho-syntactic 
analysis tags will allow us to implement default 
lexical entries (i.e. lexical entry templates that are 
activated when the system cannot find a particular 
lexical entry to apply) on the basis of the category 
encoded to the lexical tag delivered by FreeLing, 
for virtually unlimited lexical coverage. 6
2.2 The integration of multiword expressions 
All multiword expressions in FreeLing are stored 
in a file. The format of the file is one multiword 
per line, having three fields each: form, lemma and 
PoS.7 (2) shows two examples of multiword fixed 
                                                 
                                                
5 Actually, Spanish weak pronouns are considered pronominal 
affixes rather than pronominal clitics. 
6 The use of underspecified default lexical entries in a 
highly lexicalized grammar, however, may increase 
ambiguity and overgeneration (Marimon and Bel, 
2004). 
7 FreeLing only handles continuous multiword expres-
sions. 
expressions; i.e. the ones that are fully lexicalized 
and never show morpho-syntactic variation, a 
trav?s de (through) and a buenas horas (finally). 
 
(2) a_trav?s_de a_trav?s_de SPS00 
   a_buenas_horas a_buenas_horas RG 
 
The multiword form field may admit lemmas in 
angle brackets, meaning that any form with that 
lemma will be a valid component for the multi-
word. Tags are specified directly or as a reference 
to the tag of some of the multiword components. 
(3) builds a multiword with both singular and plu-
ral forms  (apartado(s) de correos (P.O Box)). The 
tag of the multiform is that of its first form ($1) 
which starts with NC and takes the values for 
number depending on whether the form is singular 
or plural.  
 
(3) <apartado>_de_correos apar-
tado_de _correos \$1:NC 
 
Both fixed expressions and semi-fixed expres-
sions are integrated by means of the inflectional 
rules that we have described in the previous sub-
section and they are treated in the grammar as 
word complex with a single part of speech.  
2.3 The integration of messy details and 
named entities 
FreeLing identifies, classifies and, when appropri-
ate, normalizes special text constructions that may 
be considered peripheral to the lexicon, such as 
dates, numbers, currencies, ratios, physical magni-
tudes, etc.  FreeLing also identifies and classifies 
named entities (i.e. proper names); however, we do 
not activate the classification functionality, since 
high performance of that functionality is only 
achieved with PoS disambiguated contexts.   
To integrate these messy details and named enti-
ties into the grammar, we require special inflec-
tional rules and lexical entry templates for each 
text construction tag delivered by FreeLing. Some 
of these tags are: W for dates, Z for numbers, Zm 
for currencies, ... In order to define one single en-
try for each text construct, we identify the tag and 
the STEM feature. (4) shows the lexical entry for 
dates.8
 
8 Each lexical entry in the SRG consists of a unique identifier, 
a lexical type, an orthography and a semantic relation. 
107
 
(4)  
date := date_le & 
[STEM <?w?>, 
SYNSEM.LKEY.KEYREL.PRED time_n_rel] 
 
The integration of these messy details allows us 
to release the analysis process from certain tasks 
that may be reliably dealt with by shallow external 
components.  
3 Automatic Lexical Acquisition 
We have investigated Machine Learning (ML) 
methods applied to the acquisition of the informa-
tion contained in the lexicon of the SRG. 
ML applied to lexical acquisition is a very active 
area of work linked to deep linguistic analysis due 
to the central role that lexical information has in 
lexicalized grammars and the costs of hand-
crafting them. Korhonen (2002), Carroll and Fang 
(2004), Baldwin (2005), Blunsom and Baldwin 
(2006), and Zhang and Kordoni (2006) are just a 
few examples of reported research work on deep 
lexical acquisition. 
The most successful systems of lexical acquisi-
tion are based on the linguistic idea that the con-
texts where words occur are associated to particu-
lar lexical types. Although the methods are differ-
ent, most of the systems work upon the syntactic 
information on words as collected from a corpus, 
and they develop different techniques to decide 
whether this information is relevant for type as-
signment or it is noise, especially when there are 
just a few examples. In the LKB grammatical 
framework, lexical types are defined as a combina-
tion of grammatical features. For our research, we 
have looked at these morpho-syntactically moti-
vated features that can help in discriminating the 
different types that we will ultimately use to clas-
sify words. Thus, words are assigned a number of 
grammatical features, the ones that define the lexi-
cal types. 
Table 1 and Table 2 show the syntactic features 
that we use to characterize 6 types of adjectives 
and 7 types of nouns in Spanish, respectively.9 As 
can be observed, adjectives are cross-classified 
according to their syntactic position within the NP, 
i.e. (preN(ominal)) vs  postN(ominal), the possibil-
ity of co-occurring in predicative constructions 
                                                 
9 The SRG has 35 types for nouns and 44 types for adjectives. 
(pred) and being modified by degree adverbs (G), 
and their subcategorization frame (pcomp); 
whereas lexical types for nouns are basically de-
fined on the basis of the mass/countable distinction 
and valence information. Thus, an adjective like 
bonito (nice), belonging to the type a_qual_intr, 
may be found both in pre-nominal and post-
nominal position or in predicative constructions, it 
may also be modified by degree adverbs, this type 
of adjectives, however, does not take comple-
ments. Nouns belonging to the type n_intr_count, 
like muchacha (girl), are countable intransitive 
nouns. 
 
TYPE/SF preN postN pred G pcomp 
a_adv_int yes no no no no 
a_adv_event yes yes no no no 
a_rel_nonpred no yes no no no 
a_rel_pred no yes yes no no 
a_qual_intr yes yes yes yes no 
a_qual_trans yes yes yes yes yes 
Table 1. Some adjectival types of the SRG 
 
TYPE/SF mass count intr trans pcomp 
n_intr_mass yes no yes no no 
n_intr_count no yes yes no no 
n_intr_cnt-
mss 
yes yes yes no no 
n_trans_mass yes no no yes no 
n_trans_count no yes no yes no 
n_ppde_pcom
p_count 
no yes no yes yes 
n_ppde_pcom
p_mss 
yes no no yes yes 
Table 2. Some nominal types of the SRG 
 
We have investigated two methods to automati-
cally acquire such linguistic information for Span-
ish nouns and adjectives: a Bayesian model and a 
decision tree. The aim of working with these two 
methods was to compare their performance taking 
into account that while the decision tree gets the 
information from previously annotated data, the 
Bayesian method learns it from the linguistic ty-
pology as defined by the grammar. These methods 
are described in the following subsections.  
3.1 A Bayesian model for lexical acquisition 
We have used a Bayesian model of inductive learn-
ing for assigning grammatical features to words 
occurring in a corpus. Given a hypothesis space 
(the linguistic features of words according to its 
lexical type) and one or more occurrences of the 
108
word to classify, the learner evaluates all hypothe-
ses for word features and values by computing 
their posterior probabilities, proportional to the 
product of prior probabilities and likelihood.  
In order to obtain the likelihood, grammatical 
features are related to the expected contexts where 
their instances might appear. The linguistic typol-
ogy provides likelihood information that is the 
learner?s expectation about which contexts are 
likely to be observed given a particular hypothesis 
of a word type. This likelihood is used as a substi-
tute of the computations made by observing di-
rectly the data, which is what a supervised machine 
learning method does. As said, our aim was to 
compare these two strategies.   
The decision on a particular word is determined 
by averaging the predictions of all hypothesis 
weighted by their posterior probabilities. More 
technically, for each syntactic feature {sf1, sf2, ..., 
sfn} of the set SF (Syntactic Features) represented 
in the lexical typology, we define the goal of our 
system to be the assignment of a value, {no, yes}, 
that maximizes the result of a function f: ?? SF, 
where ? is the collection of its occurrences (? = 
{v1, v2, ..., vz}), each being a n-dimensional vector. 
The decision on value assignment is achieved by 
considering every occurrence as a cumulative evi-
dence in favour or against of having each syntactic 
feature. Thus, our function Z?(SF, ?), shown in (5), 
will assess how much relevant information is got 
from all the vectors. A further function, shown in 
(8), will decide on the maximal value in order to 
assign sfi,x. 
(5)  ?= z
j j
vxisfPxisfZ )|,(),,(' ?
 
To assess P(sfi,x|vj), we use (6), which is the ap-
plication of Bayes Rule for solving the estimation 
of the probability of a vector conditioned to a par-
ticular feature and value.  
(6) 
?
=
k ki
sfPkisfjvP
xisfPxisfjvP
jvxisfP ),(),|(
),(),|(
)|,(
 
 
For solving (6), the prior P(sfi,x) is computed on 
the basis of a lexical typology too, assuming that 
what is more frequent in the typology will corre-
spondingly be more frequent in the data. For com-
puting the likelihood P(vj|sfi,x), as each vector is 
made of m components, that is, the linguistic cues 
vz = {lc1, lc2, ..., lcm}, we proceed as in (7) on the 
basis of P(lcl|sfi,x); i.e. the likelihood of finding the 
word in a particular context given a particular syn-
tactic feature. 
(7)  ?==
m
l xi
sfllcPxisfjvP 1
),|(),|(
 
Finally Z, as in (8), is the function that assigns 
the syntactic features to ? .10
 
(8)  
??
??
?
??
??
?
?=>=
?=>==
no
yesxi
sfZ
noxi
sfZ
yes
noxi
sfZ
yesxi
sfZ
Z
)|
,
(')|
,
('
)|
,
(')|
,
('
??
??
 
For computing the likelihood, we count on the 
conditional probabilities of the correlations be-
tween features as defined in the typology. We use 
these correlations to infer the expectation of ob-
serving the linguistic cues associated to particular 
syntactic features, and to make it to be conditional 
to a particular feature and value. However, linguis-
tic cues and syntactic features are in two different 
dimensions; syntactic features are properties of 
lexical items, while linguistic cues show the char-
acteristics of actual occurrences. As we assume 
that each syntactic feature must have at least one 
corresponding linguistic cue, we must tune the 
probability to acknowledge the factors that affect 
linguistic cues. For such a tuning, we have consid-
ered the following two issues: (i) to include in the 
assessments the known uncertainty of the linguistic 
cues that can be present in the occurrence or not; 
and (ii) to create a dummy variable to deal with the 
fact that, while syntactic features in the typology 
are independent from one another, evidences in 
text are not so. 
We have also observed that the information that 
can be gathered by looking at all word occurrences 
as a complex unit have a conclusive value. Take 
for instance the case of prepositions. The observa-
tion of a given prepositions in different occur-
rences of the same word is a conclusive evidence 
for considering it a bound preposition.  In order to 
take this into account, we have devised a function 
that acts as a dynamic weighting module. The 
function app_lc(sfi, ?) returns the number of con-
texts where the cue is found. In the case that in a 
                                                 
10 In the theoretical case of having the same probability 
for yes and for no, Z is undefined.  
109
particular signature there is no context with such a 
lc, it returns ?1?. Thus, app_lc is used to reinforce 
this conclusive evidence in (5), which is now (9). 
 
(9) 
 
),(_*)|,(),,(' ?? isflcapp
z
j j
vyesxisfPyesxisfZ ??
???
?? ===
 ? ===
z
j j
vnoxisfPnoxisfZ )|,(),,(' ?  
 
3.2 A Decision tree 
Linguistic motivated features have also been 
evaluated using a C4.5 Decision Tree (DT) classi-
fier (Quinlan, 1993) in the Weka implementation 
(Witten and Frank, 2005). These features corre-
spond to the expected contexts for the different 
nominal and adjectival lexical types. 
We have trained the DT with all the vectors of 
the word occurrences that we had in the different 
gold-standards, using their encoding for the super-
vised experiment in a 10-fold cross-validation test-
ing (Bel et al 2007).  
3.3 Evaluation and Results 
For the evaluation, we have applied both methods 
to the lexical acquisition of nouns and adjectives.  
We have worked with a PoS tagged corpus of 
1,091,314 words. Datasets of 496 adjectives and 
289 nouns were selected among the ones that had 
occurrences in the corpus. Some manual selection 
had to be done in order to have all possible types 
represented but still it roughly corresponds to the 
distribution of features in the existing lexicon. 
We evaluated by comparing with Gold-
standard files; i.e. the manually encoded lexicon of 
the SRG. The usual accuracy measures as type 
precision (percentage of feature values correctly 
assigned to all values assigned) and type recall 
(percentage of correct feature values found in the 
dictionary) have been used. F1 is the usual score 
combining precision and recall.  
Table 3 shows the results in terms of F1 score 
for the different methods and PoS for feature as-
signment. From these data, we concluded that the 
probabilistic information inferred from the lexical 
typology defined in our grammar is a good source 
of knowledge for lexical acquisition.  
 
 
PoS noun adj 
Z 0.88 0.87 
DT 0.89 0.9 
Table 3. F1 for different methods and PoS. 
 
Table 4 shows more details of the results compar-
ing between DT and Z for Spanish adjectives. 
 
 SF = no SF = yes 
 Z DT Z DT 
prep_a 0.98 0.97 0.72 0.44 
prep_en 0.98 0.99 0.27 0 
prep_con 0.99 0.99 0.60 0 
prep_para 0.98 0.99 0.51 0.53 
prep_de 0.88 0.97 0.34 0.42 
postN 0 0 0.99 0.99 
preN 0.75 0.83 0.44 0.80 
Pred 0.50 0.41 0.59 0.82 
G 0.85 0.80 0.75 0.72 
Sent 0.97 0.97 0.55 0.44 
Table 4. F1 for Spanish adjectival features. 
 
Finally, Table 5 shows the results for 50 Spanish 
nouns with only one occurrence in the corpus. 
These results show that grammatical features can 
be used for lexical acquisition of low frequency 
lexical items, providing a good hypothesis for en-
suring grammar robustness and adding no over-
generation to parsing results.  
 
 DT Z 
 prec. rec. F prec. rec. F 
MASS 0.50 0.16 0.25 0.66 0.25 0.36 
COUNT 0.97 1.00 0.98 1.00 0.96 0.98 
TRANS 0.75 0.46 0.57 0.68 0.73 0.71 
INTRANS 0.85 0.95 0.89 0.89 0.76 0.82 
PCOMP 0 0 0 0.14 0.20 0.16 
Table 5. Results of 50 unseen nouns with a sin-
gle occurrence. 
4 Future Work 
We have presented work on the development of an 
HPSG grammar for Spanish; in particular, we have 
described our approach for pre-processing and on-
going research on automatic lexical acquisition. 
Besides extending the coverage of the SRG and 
continuing research on lexical acquisition, the spe-
cific aims of our future work on the SRG are: 
? Treebank development. 
110
? To extend the shallow/deep architecture 
and integrate the structures generated by 
partial parsing, to provide robust techniques 
for infrequent structural constructions. The 
coverage of these linguistic structures by 
means of structure rules would increase both 
processing time and ambiguity.  
? To use ML methods for disambiguation; 
i.e. for ranking possible parsings according 
to relevant linguistic features, thus enabling 
the setting of a threshold to select the n-best 
analyses. 
? The development of error mining tech-
niques (van Noord, 2004) to identify errone-
ous and incomplete information in the lin-
guistic resources which cause the grammar 
to fail.  
References 
J. Atserias, B. Casas, E. Comelles, M. Gonz?lez, L. Pa-
dr? and M. Padr?. 2006. FreeLing 1.3: Syntactic and 
semantic services in an open-source NLP library. 5th 
International Conference on Language Resources 
and Evaluation. Genoa, Italy. 
T. Baldwin. 2005. Bootstrapping Deep Lexical Re-
sources: Resources for Courses, ACL-SIGLEX 2005. 
Workshop on Deep Lexical Acquisition. Ann Arbor, 
Michigan.  
N. Bel, S. Espeja, M. Marimon. 2007. Automatic Ac-
quisition of Grammatical Types for Nouns. Human 
Language Technologies: The Annual Conference of 
the North American Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics. Rochester, NY, USA, 
E.M. Bender, D. Flickinger and S. Oepen. 2002. The 
grammar Matrix. An open-source starter-kit for the 
rapid development of cress-linguistically consistent 
broad-coverage precision grammar. Workshop on 
Grammar Engineering and Evaluation, 19th Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics. 
Taipei, Taiwan.  
P. Blunsom and T. Baldwin. 2006. Multilingual Deep 
Lexical Acquisition for HPSGs via Supertagging. 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing. Sydney, Australia. 
T. Brants. 2000. TnT: A statistical part-of-speech tag-
ger. 6th Conference on Applied Natural Language 
Processing. Seattle, USA. 
T. Cabr? and C. Bach, 2004. El corpus t?cnic de 
l?IULA: corpus textual especializado pluriling?e. 
Panacea, V. 16, pages 173-176. 
U. Callmeier. 2000. Pet ? a platform for experimenta-
tion with efficient HPSG processing. Journal of 
Natural Language Engineering 6(1): Special Issue 
on Efficient Processing with HPSG: Methods, Sys-
tem, Evaluation, pages 99-108. 
A. Copestake, D. Flickinger, C. Pollard and I.A. Sag. 
2006. Minimal Recursion Semantics: An Introduc-
tion. Research on Language and Computation 
3.4:281-332. 
A. Copestake. 2002. Implementing Typed Features 
Structure Grammars. CSLI Publications.  
A. Korhonen. 2002. ?Subcategorization acquisition?. As 
Technical Report UCAM-CL-TR-530, University of 
Cambridge, UK. 
M. Marimon. 2002. Integrating Shallow Linguistic 
Processing into a Unification-based Spanish Gram-
mar. 9th International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics. Taipei, Taiwan.  
M. Marimon and N. Bel. 2004. Lexical Entry Templates 
for Robust Deep Parsing. 4th International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation. Lis-
bon, Portugal. 
S. Oepen and J. Carroll. 2000. Performance Profiling for 
Parser Engineering. Journal of Natural Language 
Engineering 6(1): Special Issue on Efficient Process-
ing with HPSG: Methods, System, Evaluation, pages 
81-97. 
C.J. Pollard and I.A. Sag. 1994. Head-driven Phrase 
Structure Grammar. The University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago.  
R.J. Quinlan 1993. C4.5: Programs for Machine Learn-
ing. Series in Machine Learning. Morgan Kaufman, 
San Mateo, CA. 
C. Samuelson. 1993. Morphological tagging based en-
tirely on Bayesian inference. 9th Nordic Conference 
on Computational Linguistics. Stockholm, Sweden.  
I.H. Witten and E. Frank. 2005. Data Mining: Practical 
machine learning tools and techniques. Morgan 
Kaufmann, San Francisco. 
G. van Noord. 2004. Error mining for wide-coverage 
grammar engineering. 42th Annual Meeting of the 
ACL. Barcelona, Spain. 
Y. Zhang and V. Kordoni. 2006. Automated deep lexi-
cal acquisition for robust open text processing. 5th 
International Conference on Language Resources 
and Evaluation. Genoa, Italy. 
111
