NLP serving the cause of language learning 
Fr?d?rique Segond 
Xerox Research Centre Europe 
6, chemin de Mauperthuis 
F-38240 Meylan - FRANCE 
segond@xrce.xerox.com  
Thibault Parmentier 
Xerox Research Centre Europe 
6, chemin de Mauperthuis 
F-38240 Meylan - FRANCE 
parmentier@xrce.xerox.com 
 
 
Abstract 
E-learning paves the way to a new type of 
course, more student centred, granulized, on 
demand, and highly interactive. Natural 
Language Processing (NLP) technologies 
associated with other multimedia technologies 
can help to address the major issues raised by 
this new type of courses: interaction, 
personalization and reliable information 
access. This paper presents Exills, a true e-
learning solution which integrates natural 
language processing tools and virtual reality1. 
Exills is unique in that,, unlike most of the 
language learning systems, it focuses on 
improving learners? performance rather than 
learners? competence.  
Introduction 
This paper is not a theoretical paper. It 
describes a true e-learning system that concentrates 
on improving users? performance in a foreign 
language and integrates natural language 
processing technologies. 
 
The system, Exills (www.exills.com) represents an 
innovative way of integrating Natural Language 
technologies and multimedia technologies in order 
to provide a visionary e-learning tool for learning 
foreign languages.  
Exills is the result of a close collaboration 
between language teachers, specialists in virtual 
reality, linguists and computer scientists. While 
retaining ?traditional content? such as language 
exercises, grammar worksheets and speech acts, 
Exills takes advantage of new technologies for 
interaction (asynchronous and synchronous), game 
aspect and course scenarization.  
Exills has been conceived with the constant 
concern for pedagogical quality and for 
differentiating itself from both CDROMs and face 
to face language courses. We have been careful to 
                                                     
1
 The software we use for Virtual reality comes from 
Blaxxun (http://www.blaxxun.com/en/site/index.html). 
renounce using technologies, even innovative ones, 
if they did not serve the cause of a pedagogical e-
learning system. The focus has been to improve 
learner?s performance rather than to insist on 
improving learner?s competence2. Indeed, 
experimenting with different available language 
learning solutions focusing on competence (via 
vocabulary exercises and grammar) led us to the 
conclusion that these types of activities do not 
insure that learners are then able to interact in a 
foreign language. While they might acquire the 
conceptual knowledge of the language they are not 
necessarily able to use it in practical contexts. In 
the case of Exills, learners are put into practical 
situations. The situations are represented via 
different scenarios. In most cases the scenario 
corresponds to everyday work situations. 
Exills focuses on the interaction aspect of 
language learning driven by the use of the Internet, 
in particular, on interaction and information access.  
Interaction within Exills includes language 
understanding through reading and listening. It 
also improves language production in writing. As 
we will see in the conclusion adding speech 
technologies to Exills will enable users to also 
improve on language oral production.  
In the demonstration scenarios that are 
accessible online, targeted users are professionals 
with an intermediate level in English or French. 
These scenarios put users in typical work situations 
such as introducing themselves, reading emails, 
searching for and understanding information, 
writing and making a presentation, ordering their 
meal, interacting with their colleagues and 
customers. Part of the scenario is dedicated to the 
discovery of cultural aspects.  
                                                     
2
 Competence and performance as defined by 
Chomsky (Chomsky, 1965): Competence is 
the speaker-hearer's knowledge of his 
language. Performance is the speaker-
hearer's actual use of his language in 
concrete situations  
 
In what follows, after presenting our view of e-
learning, we describe Exills and its different 
technical components. We then conclude by 
suggesting other linguistic technologies that could 
serve the cause of language e-learning. 
How e-learning affects our way of learning 
Learning through the Internet, or e-learning, paves 
the way for a new type of course which, most of 
the time, complements the face-to-face course 
(blended learning), but can also be substituted for 
the face-to-face courses. While traditional and 
Computer-Based training is targeted to a group of 
students, e-learning is often referred to as 
?my-learning? as it is highly personalized, 
granulized, on demand and highly interactive. The 
characteristics of e-learning are that it provides 
learners with the possibility to learn exactly what 
they need, from anywhere and at any time 
E-learning completely changes both the 
teaching and the learning processes. Teachers 
become tutors that support students? work. 
Students take more responsibility in the learning 
process as they know what they need to learn to be 
efficient. This is especially true in a life long 
training context. They become actors in their 
learning process by choosing their course topics, 
elaborating their learning paths, exchanging with 
other students as well as with tutors. 
E-learning is definitively a new way of learning 
that can take advantage of new Internet 
technologies.  
However, despite the explosion of e-learning 
platforms also called LMS for learning 
management system (see thot.cursus.edu) there are 
very few systems which take real advantage of the 
functionalities the Internet offers such as: 
interaction, personalization and huge information 
access (for both students and tutors). Indeed, most 
of the current e-learning solutions are LMS that are 
former Knowledge Management Systems 
customized for learning. Because they have not 
firstly been designed for a learning purpose they 
often miss the pedagogical dimension. Other 
solutions are a simple web link to already existing 
CD-ROM content. This solution usually offers a 
simple type of interaction such as emails with the 
tutors and, sometimes, forums with other students. 
Within the e-learning domain, language 
learning is one of the most successful market 
segments as it comes second only to IT and 
marketing. This is probably due to the fact that for 
many years it has been possible to learn a language 
using electronic media (CD-ROM). Medium to 
large publishers have been successful in 
developing language training multimedia content 
of good quality. Still, the majority of so-called e-
language learning solutions that are on the market 
today are CD-ROM content transferred onto the 
web rather that real online solutions.  
The reason is probably that most of the 
publishers in this area are specialists in producing 
good quality pedagogical content but are not 
specialists of the Internet, nor do they have the 
technological resources necessary to transfer their 
content onto the Web. Offering on-line content on 
the web is very different from offering content on a 
CD-ROM. These media organize content in a 
completely different way and this has a strong 
impact on the basic pedagogical principles. This 
shows up at different levels. For instance, studies 
have shown that users will spend at the most 15 
minutes on an Internet learning session versus 45 
minutes on a CD-ROM. learning. Besides, there is 
the issue of how to organize learning material so 
that navigation among short learning modules is 
possible without affecting the learning pedagogical 
process. Finally, record keeping, tracking, tracing 
and flexibility are all essential functions for 
making an on line course successful as well as for 
keeping user motivation high. These are just a few 
of the issues that need to be addressed when 
creating high quality content on the Internet for 
language learning. 
Exills is a true e-learning solution, that on the 
technological part, integrates virtual reality with 
linguistic and collaborative technologies as well as 
with a smart search engine. 
 
Exills? general features  
In very general terms, Exills could be described as 
a hybrid between an authoring tool and a delivery 
platform particularly well suited to building and 
distributing language learning applications. 
Exills user interface provides interactive access 
to the most up-to-date Internet technologies. 
The user interface is composed of: 
? a 3D scene to put the user in a cognitive 
context in line with the topic of the course;  
? a chat frame to allow students, robots and 
tutors to interact via text (written 
production); 
? a frame to provide learners with any 
information they might need as well as with 
activities to do. 
? a toolbar to provide learners with easy 
access to specific functionalities such as: a 
linguistic toolbox (contextual dictionary 
look up, phonetic spell checker, conjugation 
engine), a notepad to take notes, a history of 
their work to review it at any time, as well 
as shortcuts, through maps, to navigate 
inside 3D scenes. They can also get help 
from tutors, access their profile and a list of 
personalized exercises, grammar 
worksheets, and speech acts. 
Each course is associated with a scenario. These 
scenarios are usually associated with a mission to 
accomplish. This mission integrates learning 
activities, game aspects and competition between 
students. In order to achieve the mission, learners 
need to interact with each other, with the tutor as 
well as with the virtual environment. Thanks to the 
virtual reality this interaction takes place like in 
video games. Learners play a video game in a 
foreign language.  
In its current incarnation Exills has the 
following underlying features. 
 
Learner 
Linguistic Services 
Collaborative and 
Community 
Management Tools 
Smart Search Engine 
 
Figure 1: Technologies involved 
Virtual reality 
While virtual reality presents real advantages 
for learning, this technology is not yet strongly 
used for this purpose.  
In Exills, virtual reality is used both for interaction 
and for personalization. Personalization, because 
when they are in virtual reality, learners can 
choose a representation of themselves, also known 
as an avatar, and can move around the virtual 
places like in the real world. For instance, learners 
can meet with other avatars/learners, interact with 
them and access the Internet.  
The virtual reality induces a type of 
interaction that completely differs from email, 
forum or face to face. Part of this difference is due 
to the fact that people hide themselves behind an 
avatar but also because of the game aspect 
permitted by the virtual reality.  
First experiments showed that in virtual 
reality, as in games, people behave completely 
differently and tend to interact much more. For 
instance, we have noticed that while in a face to 
face or in a video course, most of the time, only the 
most confident students speak up; in a virtual 
environment, everyone dares more to express 
himself/herself. This definitively helps the tutor in 
evaluating students? ability.  
To ease and push learners? interaction, it is 
important to provide them with an interaction 
topic. This is where the notion of scenario comes 
in and where, again, virtual reality turns out to be 
an important technology. The scenario is there to 
help students to interact among themselves but also 
to immerse them directly into ?prototypical 
situations?. For instance, if students need to learn a 
language for work reasons, a scenario will be built 
around their everyday life at work, including the 
physical work place and this induces reaction and 
discussion correlated to the 3D scenes. Because it 
provides learners with a reason to interact, like in 
role playing games, the scenario makes interaction 
more effective than in traditional chat and forums.  
  
 
 
Figure 2: Set the student in a cognitive context 
using the 3D. 
What is more natural than clicking on a 
computer screen to access emails, than clicking on 
a CD to hear music, than visiting a library to read 
books or than being invited to chat with the 
receptionist when arriving at the reception desk? 
Because it mimics the real world, students can 
enter quickly into the virtual reality environment. 
Students usually just need a few hours? training to 
easily manipulate the mouse in order to move from 
one virtual place to another. 
Linguistic technologies 
Exills adds other technologies to enhanced virtual 
reality in such a way that the resulting learning 
system makes real use of the potential of the 
Internet. 
In its current incarnation, Exills offers learners 
contextual bilingual dictionaries, morphological 
analyzers and syntactic taggers, a language 
identifier and phonetic spell checkers. These 
technologies are there to help students express 
themselves or understand a foreign language. 
Linguistic technologies associated with virtual 
reality retain the personalized aspect of individual 
courses while being immersed in the collective 
course. 
Within the chat, Exills offers a comprehension 
help service which uses the context to first retrieve 
the most appropriate translation of a word 
(syntactic and semantic disambiguation). As a 
result, the students? comprehension is sped up and 
interaction becomes smoother. 
The same contextual dictionary look up could 
be used for providing the student with a list of 
sentences where the word they don?t understand 
appears with the same meaning. In that case, the 
pedagogical process is different: instead of 
providing the student directly with the translation, 
the system provides him/her with other contextual 
uses of the same word  
 
 
Figure 3: Understanding assistance. 
If we now consider the linguistic analysis of 
student production (chat/forum contribution, 
exercise, writing, etc.), linguistic technologies 
provide students with customizable services which 
allow them to parse and tag their own production 
in order to check its correctness. Here again the 
goal is not to provide them with the correct answer, 
this is left to the tutor, but rather to help them 
detect their own mistakes.  
 
 
Figure 4: Through linguistic services, students can 
analyze and correct their written production. 
Along the same lines as ?learning by example?, 
linguistic tools can be used to highlight specific 
language constructions such as functional relations, 
terminology or idiomatic expressions. 
Derivational morphology can be used to discover 
the words of a same family and improve students? 
vocabulary. 
A simple morphological analyzer gives students 
access to verb conjugations or noun declensions. 
 
Figure 5: Access to the conjugation of a verb 
Exills also includes a language identifier to 
force students to interact only in the language they 
are learning. This integration relieves the tutor of 
checking on each student, and pushes students to 
express themselves more in that language.  
The language identifier is integrated into the 
chat. This module identifies the language used by a 
student and if different from the one the student is 
supposed to learn, the system blocks any type of 
interaction. Students then receive a message saying 
that they are not using the appropriate language.  
The language identifier can also be plugged into 
mail or forum services between students or even 
between students and tutor. 
 
 
Figure 6: Automatic control of the language used 
in the chat. 
A phonetic spell checker is also available to 
students to help them to learn the correct spelling 
of words. 
Linguistic technologies can be used to reinforce 
the personalization aspect of e-learning. Indeed, 
linguistic technologies open the way to learning on 
any text that is of interest for the course and for 
each individual learner. For instance, professionals 
can work on their everyday technical 
documentation and can learn their professional 
terminology in a foreign language. In particular, 
linguistic technologies can automatically extract 
technical terminology for them. 
 
Smart search engines 
Exills uses smart search engines in order to 
strengthen the personalization and interactive 
aspects. Indeed, having a smart search engine that 
can take into account students? needs and interest 
through a detailed user profile and can retrieve 
personalized content from the web clearly 
improves the personalization aspect and course 
efficiency. Tutors and students can use the Internet 
as an infinite source of information to enrich 
course content. This is where collaborative 
technologies play a crucial role. Information on the 
Internet varies in quality, and it is especially 
important in a course context to be able to separate 
the wheat from the chaff. 
 
Smart search engines strengthen the 
personalization aspect of e-learning. They can 
retrieve documents that match the user?s profile. 
This user profile encompasses student-specific 
difficulties in the courses as well as the student?s 
personal interest, be it for work reasons or in life in 
general. An example of this is a student who is 
interested in American politics and has difficulties 
with the use of idiomatic expressions in French. A 
smart search engine uses morpho-syntactic 
analysis of the retrieved text as well as an ontology 
to provide the student with texts about American 
politics that contain idioms. Using smart meta-
search engines permits a search on the Intranet as 
well as on student emails. This is especially useful 
in a context of professional language learning 
courses. In that case, the search can be performed 
on technical texts from the company. 
 
WWW 
DB 
Local Files 
Mails 
Smart Search 
Engine 
Requests 
Results Aggregated Results 
Request 
Community 
Management Tool 
Interesting  
results 
Community 
databases 
Request 
  Results 
 
Figure 7: Correlated use of a content aggregation 
engine and of a community manager tools. 
Collaborative technologies  
Within Exills, collaborative technologies are used 
to filter information found on the web by 
commenting and interacting on it. At the end of the 
interaction process, the tutor will decide which 
documents will be retained to enrich the content of 
the course.  
Using collaborative technologies impacts the two 
kinds of users in several ways. 
? First, the students. Using this tool and 
contributing to its content allows the student 
community to have access to a very 
qualified and annotated text database. 
? Second, the tutors. Tutors can use the 
community repository in two different ways: 
first, to get specific and adequate content in 
order to generate new exercises or activities; 
second, to evaluate the level and the 
understanding of the students by analyzing 
their comments on the different documents 
posted. 
Infinite number of possible scenarios 
The Exills scenario that is currently available on 
the Internet relates to professionals working for a 
printing company. It is just one of many possible 
scenarios. In fact, Exills permits the construction 
of an infinite number of scenarios. This possibility 
also points out the high pedagogical adaptability of 
Exills which leaves to the tutor the possibility to 
decide about scenario, content and activities. In the 
next sections we give some examples of other 
possible scenarios that could use Exills as an 
underlying framework. 
Schools 
In an academic context, it is possible to organize 
virtual travel for students, similar to language 
exchanges that already exist. In that, case pupils 
from two different countries connect at the same 
time and organize a virtual tour of their school, 
their district, their city, they describe their cultural 
habits. In this type of experiment one class plays 
the role of the tutor and corrects the language of 
the other class.  
This kind of experimentation is known as 
?Tandem? in the pedagogical domain. According to 
several studies, this way of learning languages is 
more efficient as pupils are more motivated.  
 
Life long training 
One important pedagogical consequence of the 
notion of scenario is that it allows users to learn 
both a work process and a foreign language. 
Another scenario, we are currently working on, 
is targeted to people working at hotels reception 
desk. This scenario is developed in the framework 
of an eContent European project, Thetis 
(http://www.thetis-project.org/), which groups 
together a language publisher (Q group3), a 
training company specialized in tourism (Grupo 
                                                     
3
 http://www.qgroupplc.com/ 
GDT4) and a research center (Xerox Research 
Centre Europe5). 
 
To summarize, while using linguistic technologies, 
students can process online texts on the fly and can 
work on their own documents. This strengthens the 
personalization aspect of the solution. Going 
forward, using Exills in a professional context 
allows students to work on the documents of their 
own company. 
Evaluation 
Exills has been tested in different contexts. We 
tested the current scenario (professional working 
for a printing company) in language schools as 
well as in companies. In all cases we have spent 
two hours beforehand with the tutors to train them 
with the concept as well as with virtual reality. 
Between the training of the tutor and the real test 
we allowed one week so that tutors can get familiar 
with the environment. We attended the testing just 
to help in case of technical problems. We 
distributed a questionnaire at the end so that users 
can immediately provide us with feedback. The 
feedback was globally highly positive. Users like 
the game aspect, although sometime they would 
prefer a non professional scenario. Because of this 
game dimension they tend to use the linguistic 
technologies more than usual and in particular the 
contextual bilingual dictionary look-up. This 
demonstrates that the wish to interact combined 
with the impossibility of speaking any other 
languages, because of the language identifier, push 
them to use linguistic technologies to progress. 
Teachers like the language identifier as it 
relieves them of checking on the language students 
use. They report on the fact that correcting on the 
fly is sometimes difficult because the chat is so 
quick between participants. In any case they do 
have the possibility of correcting any student 
production afterwards as everything is stored on 
the server.  
The other context where we tested Exills is 
within classrooms. In that case users were 
teenagers from age 13 to 14. This type of 
population is obviously very comfortable with 
virtual reality and the game aspect. Again they 
enjoy very much the fact that they learn a language 
while playing a game, and again they made 
extensive use of the linguistic technologies to be 
able to write sentences. School teachers were 
impressed by the fact that their students stayed 
attentive for the entire course. This should 
                                                     
4
 http://www.grupogdt.com/superior.html 
5
 http://www.xrce.xerox.com/ 
probably be balanced by the novelty aspect of the 
system. 
One thing we have not yet been able to test, but 
which would be very interesting to evaluate, is the 
difference in users performance in language after 
having used Exills. 
We are now working with a research team of 
specialists in pedagogical issue to define a 
methodology that could measure this performance. 
Conclusion 
To summarize, Exills integrates virtual reality, 
linguistic, collaborative and smart search 
technologies into a true e-learning solution that can 
be used both synchronously and asynchronously. 
Thanks to this technology integration Exills 
allows: 
? Students to benefit from the interest?s 
potential for interaction, , to have a 
controlled and efficient access to the 
information on the Internet, to learn by 
themselves at their own rhythm. 
? Tutors to get support in supervising their 
students. 
? Learning companies to offer courses based 
on a new concept (virtual reality and 
linguistic technologies) instead of just 
putting classical lessons on the web. 
? End-user companies to have a course 
completely customized to their needs, their 
working environment and their terminology. 
Exills is a true e-learning solution created to take 
advantage of the web. By taking advantage of the 
interaction, Exills escapes the drawbacks of many 
e-learning solutions such as: the strenuousness of 
reading notices, the impression for students of 
being left to their own devices, or the temptation to 
give up the course. This is made possible because: 
? Virtual reality induces a cognitive context 
for the students and pushes them to interact. 
? Smart search technologies allow one get 
information, texts and documents from the 
Internet or specialized databases related to a 
specific subject matching the language level 
of the student. 
? Collaborative technologies allow the sharing 
of information gathered on the Internet 
between students and the provision of 
adequate content to the tutor to create new 
exercises or lessons almost on the fly. 
? Linguistic tools provide autonomy to 
students by showing them concepts, give 
them assistance to understand word 
meanings or different senses within a 
particular context by presenting various 
examples, to provide feedback for their 
production (in the chat as well as during 
exercises or even free activities). 
Clearly Exills would benefit from adding new 
technologies and in particular speech technologies. 
With speech technologies, students would be able 
to interact via voice, to record themselves and to 
compare their own oral production to a model.  
Finally, the linguistic technologies 
presented in this paper could also be used to 
provide more functionality. For instance, 
morphology and tagging could be used in order to 
automatically create online filling-in-the-blank 
type of exercise from any text found on the 
Internet: The process is quite similar to the 
exercises generator framework but the 
functionalities provided to the student are fewer: 
given a text and an exercise pattern, the exercise is 
generated just for her/him. This exercise is then 
corrected automatically using pattern matching, 
morphology or spellchecker. 
Part of these ideas, especially the speech 
components6, will now be implemented in the 
framework of Thetis, the on-going European 
project mentioned before. 
References 
Chomsky N., . Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. 
Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1965. 
Baudit, Apprendre ? deux. ?tudes psychosociales de 
situations dyadiques, PUF, 1998. Paris. 
Bayer V., Farah J., Apprentissage des langues en 
Tandem sur Internet, ELA, n?113, pp.73-78, 1999. 
Bergholz A., Experiences with the knowledge Pump, 
ISIC 2002: Information Needs, Seeking & Use, 
September 2002, Lisbon. 
Brun C., Parmentier T., Sandor A., Segond F., Les 
outils de TAL au service de la e-formation in 
Multilinguisme et le traitement de l'information, 
Fr?d?rique Segond Ed., Herm?s 2002, pp. 223-251  
Chidlovskii B., Glance N., Grasso A., Collaborative Re-
ranking of Search Results, Proc. AAAI-2000 
Workshop on AI for Web Search, July 2000, Austin. 
Kashny M., Les usages des Technologies d'Information 
et de Communication par des enseignants dans un 
dispositif de formation tutor?e en langues vivantes 
?trang?res. Une approche ergonomique. Th?se 
Universit? Pierre Mend?s France, 2001, Grenoble. 
                                                     
6
 This will be done using the Wimba technology  
http://www.wimba.com/index.php 
Kindley, R., Scenario-Based E-Learning: A Step 
Beyond Traditional E-Learning, 
http://www.learningcircuits.com/2002/may2002/kind
ley.html 
Leacok C., Chodorow M., Miller G., ?Using corpus 
statistics and WordNet relations for sense 
identification, Computational Linguistics, 24(1):147-
-166, Mars 1998.  
Paulsen, J. (2001-section 4). "Authentic Online Target 
Language Reference Resources." New Era Trends 
and  Technologies in Foreign Language Learning: An 
Annotated Bibliography - Interactive Multimedia 
Electronic Journal of  Computer-Enhanced 
Learning, April 2001, Wake Forest University. 
Puren, C. Histoire des m?thodologies de l'enseignement 
des langues, , Cl? International, Nathan, 1988, Paris. 
 
Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Building Educational Applications Using NLP,
pages 85?92, Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?Association for Computational Linguistics, 2005
Situational language training for hotel receptionists 
 
Fr?d?rique Segond, Thibault Parmentier Roberta Stock, Ran Rosner 
Xerox Research Centre Europe The Marathon Group 
Meylan, 38240, France  Tel Aviv, Israel 
segond@xrce.xerox.com rstock@marathon-group.net 
 
Mariola Usteran Muela 
Grupo gdt. 
Sevilla, Spain 
mustaran@grupogdt.com 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents the lessons learned in 
experimenting with Thetis1, an EC project 
focusing on the creation and localization 
of enhanced on-line pedagogical content 
for language learning in tourism industry. 
It is based on a general innovative ap-
proach to language learning that allows 
employees to acquire practical oral and 
written skills while navigating a relevant 
professional scenario. The approach is en-
abled by an underlying platform 
(EXILLS) that integrates virtual reality 
with a set of linguistic, technologies to 
create a new form of dynamic, extensible, 
goal-directed e-content. 
1 Credits 
The work described in this paper has been sup-
ported by the European Commission in the frame 
of the eContent program2. 
2 Introduction 
Thetis focuses on the creation and localization of 
enhanced on-line pedagogical content for language 
learning in tourism industry. It is based on a gen-
eral approach to language learning that allows em-
ployees to acquire practical oral and written skills 
                                                           
1
 THETIS ? Training for hotel employees to interact in situa-
tions (EDC- 42052). www.thetis-project.org. 
2
 http://www.cordis.lu/econtent/ 
while navigating a relevant professional scenario. 
The approach is enabled by an underlying platform 
(EXILLS3) that integrates virtual reality with a set 
of linguistic technologies to create a new form of 
dynamic, extensible, goal-directed e-content 
Thetis has two aims: 
? Test the value of linguistic technologies 
for on-line language learning.  
? Localize and repurpose existing e-content 
for English and vocational blended train-
ing material that was first designed for 
CDROM in order to offer it on-line. The 
material is meant to develop oral compre-
hension and reading skills in order to en-
able end-users to communicate with 
English speaking customers. It will be 
used for the continuous vocational training 
of professionals in this sector through the 
Internet as well as on-site.  
In the following sections we present the following:  
? The Thetis scenario and the technologies 
applied 
? Aspects of content adaptation  
? the results of the users? evaluation  
? the lessons we have learned both regarding 
the value of the technologies (including the 
linguistics technologies), and the peda-
                                                           
3
 See  www.exills.com 
85
gogical value of such an innovative ap-
proach to language learning 
3 Thetis : scenario and linguistic tech-
nologies 
As the general technical architecture behind Thetis 
has already been described in details in (Segond 
and Parmentier 2004) (Brun et Al. 2002) we just 
give an overview of the entire system and concen-
trate below on the description of the Thetis sce-
nario and on the linguistic technologies that have 
been integrated into the system.  
Thetis integrates virtual reality and linguistic tech-
nologies in a web application in order to propose a 
truly e-learning solution that can be used both syn-
chronously and asynchronously. Our motivations 
for applying these two components are the follow-
ing: 
? Virtual reality offers a cognitive context 
and promotes interaction. 
? Linguistic technologies offer autonomy to 
the students by showing them concepts, 
giving them assistance to understand word 
meanings within particular contexts by 
presenting various examples, providing 
feedback on their skills (during chat ses-
sions as well as through exercises or even 
free activities). 
The notion of scenario is central to Thetis. The 
scenario allows the users to act in typical work 
situations such as introducing themselves, reading 
emails, searching for and understanding informa-
tion, ordering a meal, and interacting with col-
leagues and customers. The lessons include  
traditional contents such as grammar rules, exer-
cises, and speech acts.  The users interact either via 
chatting or during the different activities proposed. 
The Thetis scenario has been explicitly designed 
for people working at hotels? reception desks. 
 
3.1 Scenario 
Students and tutors enter a virtual reality scene 
either all together at the same time (synchronously) 
or whenever they want (asynchronously). They are 
then in a virtual hotel where they are given roles 
that correspond to the different prototypical hotel 
situations listed above. All students have to play 
their everyday job, hotel desk receptionist. They 
interact with customers. The tutors can choose the 
role they play: customers, fellow students or tutors. 
The resulting system can be used either individu-
ally from any place with access to the Internet or 
collectively, all or some students being in the same 
location (open class, hotel etc.) 
The customers are robots and the students are ava-
tars that work at the reception desk. 
The robots are 3D-human representations that have 
been programmed in advance. They can invite us-
ers to chat, react to certain stimuli such as prede-
fined lists of words or movements of others in the 
3D-scene. 
The avatars are non-programmed 3D-human repre-
sentations of users. The users can decide where to 
go in the virtual scene, with whom they want to 
interact, what to say. 
The application is composed of several virtual 
rooms. Each of these rooms corresponds to a dif-
ferent scenario related to the receptionists work 
tasks. 
The students? avatars interact either with the robot-
customers, or among themselves. The language of 
the interactions is exclusively the language being 
learned i.e. English, (which is automatically 
checked by the system). In order to encourage in-
teractions among the students and to strengthen the 
playful aspect of the course, the students are asked 
to work in groups of two or three. Each group of 
two or three students enter rooms at the same time, 
and interact individually with different robot cus-
tomers. Since they are in the same room they are 
also able to communicate among themselves, in the 
language they learn, when they have difficulties. 
The tutor can also be present. There is a common 
back room where all the students can go any time 
to interact with the rest of the student group, be it 
because they need help or because the tutor asks 
for a meeting. 
In order to call for interaction students and tutors 
can either type text in the chat window or, in some 
86
specific cases (previously defined in the scenario) 
record their answer and send the speech file to the 
tutor.  
The figure below is a snapshot of the different ac-
tivities in the different virtual rooms. Traditional 
linguistic exercises, cards with grammar or speech 
act hints are associated to the activities of each 
room. 
 
 
In the Virtual World students always have access 
to a phone, a fax, a reservation book, computers, 
documents internal to the hotel (regulations, menu, 
price lists, tourist information etc.). 
During the different activities, the students interact 
with robots that play different roles (customers, 
travel agents, taxi driver etc.). Dialogues between 
students and robots work as follows: the students 
type some text in the chat box, and the robots reply 
orally. Robot participations to dialogues are pre-
recorded sound files. The robots are configured to 
reply to stimuli like a new learner arriving in a 
scene asking for a private chat, etc. For instance, 
when a student asks a question, the robot can 
automatically select the most appropriate answer or 
action based on the dialog?s steps or based on 
keywords found in students? written production. 
Examples:  
?Could you show/give me your identity card?? 
would produce the action of displaying a win-
dow with the image of an identity card. 
?How long will you stay?? would produce an 
answer like ?three nights?. 
When robots ask questions, the students? answers 
can be used (or not) to select the next move in the 
dialogue. 
Examples:  
Robot: ?Do all the rooms have an Internet con-
nection?? Student: ?No? would imply a specific 
notice on the reservation fax to require an Inter-
net connection. 
3.2 Linguistic Technologies 
In terms of tools and resources available in the vir-
tual world, the students have access to real hotel 
documents (including a list of hotel services, prices 
and regulations, real identity documents from dif-
ferent countries, etc.)as well as to linguistic tech-
nologies. 
The linguistic tools include the following: 
 
? A comprehension help that 
provides students with the 
most appropriate contextual 
translation of any word or ex-
pression. Comprehension help 
is crucial in speeding up both 
the students? comprehension 
and written production. 
 
? A linguistic tool box that pro-
vides the students with cus-
tomizable services which 
allow them to parse and to tag 
their own production in order 
to check its correctness. 
 
? A morphological analyzer that 
gives the students access to 
conjugations or declinations. 
 
? A language guesser that auto-
matically prevents students 
87
from interacting in another 
language than the one they 
learn i.e. English. 
 
4 Good quality content  
The other interest of Thetis is to create and adapt e-
content to offer it on-line rather than on CD-ROM. 
One of the most difficult issues that e-learning  
faces is global delivery, especially with the chal-
lenges of localization and repackaging content for 
different audiences. Europe has been active in cre-
ating high quality pedagogical content for years 
and is genuinely concerned about languages.  
Over the past few years, multimedia publishers 
have developed electronic content for language 
learning of very high pedagogical value and very 
good quality. With the arrival of e-learning, they 
see their work changing and do not always have 
the necessary expertise and resources to take the 
e-learning route.  
Indeed e-learning revolutionizes the training do-
main as it provides personalized, real-time training 
and communications programs, rather than a ?one 
size fits all? approach. To take advantage of the 
potential of e-learning, multimedia publishers need 
to develop expertise in Internet technologies in 
general. To be able to put their content on-line they 
need to work in partnership with companies that 
have Internet expertise and document processing 
technologies. On the other hand, technology pro-
viders in the area of e-learning have given very 
little attention to the quality of the content that will 
be offered, to the pedagogical aspect of e-learning 
as well as to the question of what needs to be 
changed in order to use the Internet to train people. 
Most of the e-learning companies have tried to sell 
platforms to content providers rather than trying to 
work in partnership with them in order to create 
good-quality e-learning solutions. It is certainly not 
enough to integrate content that has been built for 
another purpose (to teach in face to face meetings 
for example, or even for CD-ROM distribution) 
with technologies to make a good training module. 
Pedagogical aspects must be considered and tech-
nologies should support pedagogy rather than be-
ing the main objective. 
 
4.1 eContent adaptation 
Thetis particularly concentrated on defining the 
virtual environment and the content of the training, 
adapted to the needs of the employees in a hotel 
reception. 
The main functions of receptionists are presenting 
a positive image of the hotel and assisting with all 
aspects of guest service; they act as buffers be-
tween the customers and management of the hotel. 
The training needed to take into account their main 
duties, including the following: 
Answering enquiries regarding hotel services 
and registration by letter, telephone and in per-
son 
Making room reservations 
Registering arriving guest and assigning rooms 
Responding to guests? enquiries, requests and 
complaints 
Using computerized or manual systems to 
compile and check daily record sheets, guest 
accounts, receipts and vouchers 
Presenting statements of charges to departing 
guests and receiving payment 
Additional duties, which may be required by 
small hotels. 
It was also important to consider the skills needed 
by these kinds of workers, even when they need to 
communicate with customers in languages differ-
ent from theirs.  
Good communication skills and a neat appearance 
are essential for hotel receptionists. They need ba-
sic analytical skills and experience with word 
processing equipment and computers. Good judg-
ment is necessary, as well as ability to solve prob-
lems in a bold way and with determination, since 
they may have to deal with difficult people, as well 
as with emergency and security problems.  
88
But one of the best assets is the knowledge of, at 
least one, second language. To communicate flu-
ently with customers in a foreign language, solve 
problems and deal with complaints, turn them into 
opportunities is the aim of this project, together 
with the development of key competences for em-
ployees working at hotel reception desks, such as 
efficiency, courtesy, initiative, capability of work-
ing in team and communication skills, among oth-
ers. 
What is different in Thetis, compared to ?tradi-
tional CD-ROM content? building are the scenar-
ios through which the courses will be delivered to 
hotel receptionists. So the content had to be appro-
priate to the scenarios so that it is adapted to the 
learning context, and it had to be localized follow-
ing the target region of the training. 
The pedagogical content is realized on different 
media like texts, audio support, and videotapes. 
For each medium different activities are available 
in order that the students can practice a specific 
grammar point, an idiomatic structure or phrase. 
There are several kinds of exercises each corre-
sponding to a lexical area and/or speech act. This 
means that a student is immersed in a work situa-
tion associated with specific difficulties in gram-
mar and vocabulary and (s)he is provided with 
exercises helping to develop her/his competencies.  
The objective is not to find a typical situation in 
order to learn a specific grammar point or an idio-
matic structure. The process is rather first to list the 
typical work situations the hotel receptionists are 
confronted with and afterwards to identify the lan-
guage difficulties associated with each situation 
and, in a third time, to select the media, the con-
tent, the type of activity that is the best suited to 
help the students to deal with the work situation. 
One other difficulty is to propose a sequence of 
working activities that also match with the lan-
guage and vocabulary level of the student. 
Besides the scenario, the students are also provided 
with some classical content in order to help them 
to meet the needs they could be confronted with 
outside typical training situations. Such classical 
content is listed in the points below: 
? a grammar book containing a list of all 
the sentence patterns and forms that are 
used in the program with explanations 
of their use and form; 
? a lexicon with English headwords, ex-
amples of usage and explanation or 
translation into native language. Stu-
dents also have the option of hearing 
the pronunciation of new items; 
? student records which allow students to 
monitor their own progress, 
? technical help in order to present the 
characteristics of the delivery web ap-
plication. 
This existing content has been adapted to the tour-
ism industry  
Although the basic content will be the same for all 
target audiences, the addition of elements that ap-
peal directly to each target user group makes the 
product attractive and motivating.  
In terms of language practice, it is also possible to 
place an emphasis on those items that cause par-
ticular problems to specific language groups. 
As far as already existing content related to tour-
ism scenarios is concerned, they had to be adapted 
to our purposes: some pedagogical activities had to 
be reversed because they had been developed in 
order to help a customer, a tourist in our case, to 
interact with other people i.e. receptionists, wait-
ers/waitresses, passers-by. The main task was to 
propose mainly the same activities but for training 
receptionists. 
5 Users? tests  
The content of the course focuses on teaching Eng-
lish to hotel receptionists. Therefore, the users 
were faced with real situations that occur in hotels 
within the context of their everyday work envi-
ronment. The objective then was to test the course 
within this target group in order to analyse its po-
tential use, and possible adaptation to any socio-
professional domain, as well as extension to any 
language.  
The main elements of THETIS that needed to be 
tested are the following: 
? Technical issues: linguistic tools, virtual 
reality 
89
? Pedagogical effectiveness: quality of con-
tent, game aspects, etc. 
? Work related competencies: hotel envi-
ronment and situations, level of interest, 
relevance, etc. 
There were two major groups of users involved in 
these tests: 
? Students 
? Teachers or tutors. 
All students involved (18) are currently students of 
a Hotel Management vocational training program 
organised by the Andalusian Entrepreneurial Con-
federation (CEA).  
The profile of the group was the following: 80% 
were between 20 and 24 years old, 20% were be-
tween 25 and 30 years old. All of them have a uni-
versity degree in Tourism. 80% had previous work 
experience in hotels or tourism related jobs. 50% 
had an intermediate competency level in English, 
17% low intermediate and 33% high intermediate. 
A team of 3 teachers was also involved in this test; 
one of them was present at the location of the test 
activities and the other two were doing participated 
from another country, which shows the flexibility 
that distance learning offers. 
Each session followed the same structure: 
? Presentation of the three partners. 
? Presentation of the THETIS project. 
? Goals and objectives of the session. 
? Explanation of the different elements of 
THETIS: 
o Chat 
o Virtual Reality 
o Dictionary 
o Verb conjugation 
o History 
o Notes 
o Grammar  
o Exercises 
After the initial explanations, the session continued 
by proposing different activities in which the stu-
dents had to do the following: 
? Chatting among students - learning 
games. A reservation form had to be filled 
out. Each form contained some informa-
tion of different customers. We assigned 
one specific guest to each student, so they 
had to discuss and ask each other about the 
missing data. 
? Chatting with the teacher - role playing 
exercises. The teacher acted as a customer 
and started different dialogs with the stu-
dents based on typical hotel situations such 
as making reservations or asking for direc-
tions.  
? Exercises. The students were given time to 
practise four categories of exercises: read-
ing comprehension, grammar, listening 
and vocabulary.  
? Interacting with the robots. The students 
had to take part of the pre-set dialogs with 
the customer-robots at the virtual reality 
scenario and choose the right answer in 
every situation.   
Once the testing activities described were finished, 
the students were asked to write their comments by 
answering a complete questionnaire 
Most of the students agreed that using this program 
continuously as part of complete language training 
would be very beneficial. Some students appreci-
ated most that it helped remember expressions and 
vocabulary they had learnt before, so it was good 
practice. Most of them acknowledged the acquisi-
tion of the specific language used in hotels and the 
expressions needed in situations that occur at the 
front desk.  
Regarding the scenario itself all students consid-
ered that what happens in a hotel and the daily 
functions that a receptionist must carry out are very 
90
well represented. Some typical appreciations are 
the following: 
?It is a very creative way to reflect the different 
situations happening in a hotel? 
?Doing different things at the same time is very 
common at hotels and getting to learn English by 
having the same experience is crucial? 
?It is good that we get to see the nice things that 
normally happen but also the not so nice ones, like 
dealing with upset customers? 
Basically, the main advantages of THETIS appear 
to be how realistic the situations are, the entertain-
ing and fun part of learning and the interaction 
with the teacher and the other students.  
As for the weaknesses, these appear to be related to 
the fact that Thetis is still a pilot product and some 
technical and content details have yet to be final-
ized.  
Regarding the elements the testers found most use-
ful during the learning process, we found a broad 
range of answers and every tool was named. Re-
garding the linguistic technologies students men-
tioned the contextual dictionary look-up as the one 
they made the most use of. However, the elements 
that received a higher appreciation were the inter-
action with robots (virtual reality) and with the 
teacher (chat), because of the entertaining aspect 
they both bring, the realistic feature they portray as 
well as their practical application.  
In order to have a complete and enriched informa-
tion report, we asked for the teachers? opinion as 
well.  
It was perceived that through this program students 
are given different ways to consolidate what they 
learn which makes it quite efficient. It is also im-
portant to say that there is a clear need to have 
teacher-student interactions to make it more suc-
cessful pedagogically, since this element gives the 
students the opportunity to use free and authentic 
language and to be corrected in real time. 
Since interactions between the teacher and the stu-
dents are allowed through chat - which is some-
thing the students enjoyed a lot - it was remarked 
that the teacher needs to have the possibility to cor-
rect mistakes. So for this tool to be more useful 
and not damaging the role-playing situation, there 
is a need to find a way to send the students that 
feedback, for example, by making it appear in an-
other color. 
It is also important to prepare different possible 
scenarios/exercises for the teachers to develop 
through the chat. Therefore, it appears important to 
prepare a teacher?s guide. 
6 Conclusion: lessons learned  
In general, we found that the creation of content 
for a Thetis like type of concept was not a trivial 
and easy task. Indeed Thetis provides a solution 
that is strongly web oriented in the sense that it 
insists on interaction on the web, personalization 
and information access. As a consequence the type 
of content that fits these requirements is radically 
different from ones that already exist for other sup-
ports such as, for instance, CD-ROMs. We did not 
expect this adaptation to be so time consuming. It 
turns out that while a ?traditional? type of CD-
ROM content can be integrated in the form of ex-
ercises within the Thetis solution, it is necessary to 
build new types of content in the form of scenarios. 
Indeed the notion of a scenario, which is central to 
Thetis as well as its strong point, means one that 
covers both learning a language and learning a 
work practice. This scenario should also be attrac-
tive and evolving enough so that it retains students? 
interest and motivation. The borderline is some-
times difficult: we need to be careful not only to 
propose games where students learn how to do 
their work but not so much how to speak a lan-
guage. Moreover, the scenarios, since they take 
place on the web and in a virtual world, cannot be 
like the ones that are proposed in a face to face 
course. Interaction is different. Robots plays a cen-
tral role in pushing people to interact with each 
other, and so does the tutor. How to make the best 
pedagogical use of these two aspects? What is the 
type of dialogues that work better in terms of 
pedagogical purposes?  
During the testing we had had various comments 
on the specific features offered by the system as 
well as suggestions for improving it; all of them 
would need to be further tested. These suggestions 
91
come from different perspectives: from the tutors 
and from the students. 
As far as the tutors are concerned, while they find 
the idea really interesting pedagogically, they also 
generally consider it difficult to interact with sev-
eral students at the same time. For instance correct-
ing several students in the chat is almost 
impossible. Therefore they ask for tools to help 
them in this process. These tools would be like the 
ones that already exist in current management sys-
tems courses, and they would have to be enriched 
with some specific functions to deal with on-line 
interaction. Teachers usually liked a lot the lan-
guage guesser module as it forces students to inter-
act in the language they learn and relieve them 
from checking that students do not interact in their 
own language. 
On the opposite side, the students liked and used a 
lot the contextual on-line dictionary because they 
really want to play and interact and are forced to 
do so in the foreign language. The students defini-
tively liked the virtual reality and the game aspect. 
The strongest point of Thetis is undoubtedly the 
interactions based on a virtual reality scenario as 
compared to e-mail interactions, chats or forums. 
Probably owing to the virtual world shy people 
tend to participate much more than usual. This is 
also the feedback that we got from tutors concern-
ing their students.  
While students enjoyed the game very much, this 
would need to be tested on the long run as Thetis 
certainly benefits from the ?novelty effect?. 
Both teachers and students would like to be able to 
speak rather than just to write. However, it is not 
clear how this type of interaction would be possi-
ble in virtual reality with 15 people not being able 
to see each other. During the project, we identified 
strong points as well as difficulties and gaps. The 
main difficulty is in the type of content that fits 
Thetis? philosophy. Indeed, building such content 
requires more time than we first expected. While 
part of the content can be just repurposed and lo-
calized from already existing materials, a com-
pletely new type of content needs also to be 
created from scratch. Users made interesting sug-
gestions regarding the integration of new technolo-
gies such as speech processing or tools for the 
tutors. These would require further testing.  
References  
Brun C., Parmentier T., Sandor A., Segond F., 2002, 
Les outils de TAL au service de la e-formation in 
Multilinguisme et le traitement de l'information, Fr?-
d?rique Segond Ed., Herm?s, pp. 223-251  
Frase, L., R. Almond, J. Burstein, K. Kukich, R. 
Mislevy, K. Sheehan, L. Steinberg, and K. Singley 
and M. Chodorow. (2002). In H. O'Neill and R. Perez 
(Eds.) Technology Applications In Education: A 
Learning View. Lawrence Erlbaum 
Kashny M., Les usages des Technologies d'Information 
et de Communication par des enseignants dans un 
dispositif de formation tutor?e en langues vivantes 
?trang?res. Une approche ergonomique. Th?se Uni-
versit? Pierre Mend?s France, 2001, Grenoble. 
Kearns M., Satinder Singh C., Litman D., and Howe.J. 
CobotDS, 2002: A Spoken Dialogue System for 
Chat. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth National 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-2002), 
Edmonton, Canada. 
Kindley, R., Scenario-Based E-Learning: A Step Be-
yond Traditional E-Learning, 
http://www.learningcircuits.com/2002/may2002/kind
ley.html 
 
Kukich, K , 1992, Technique for automatically correct-
ing words in text, ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 
Volume 24 ,  Issue 4,  ( 377 ? 439) 
Paulsen, J. (2001-section 4). "Authentic Online Target 
Language Reference Resources." New Era Trends 
and  Technologies in Foreign Language Learning: An 
Annotated Bibliography - Interactive Multimedia 
Electronic Journal of  Computer-Enhanced Learn-
ing, April 2001, Wake Forest University. 
Puren, C. Histoire des m?thodologies de l'enseignement 
des langues , Cl? International, Nathan, 1988, Paris. 
 
Segond F, Parmentier T, 2004 NLP serving the cause of 
language learning Proceeding of International Work-
shop on eLearning for Computational Linguistics 
and Computational Linguistics for eLearning 
COLING , Geneva 
92
Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 87?91,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Query log analysis with GALATEAS LangLog
Marco Trevisan and Luca Dini
CELI
trevisan@celi.it
dini@celi.it
Eduard Barbu
Universita` di Trento
eduard.barbu@unitn.it
Igor Barsanti
Gonetwork
i.barsanti@gonetwork.it
Nikolaos Lagos
Xerox Research Centre Europe
Nikolaos.Lagos@xrce.xerox.com
Fre?de?rique Segond and Mathieu Rhulmann
Objet Direct
fsegond@objetdirect.com
mruhlmann@objetdirect.com
Ed Vald
Bridgeman Art Library
ed.vald@bridgemanart.co.uk
Abstract
This article describes GALATEAS
LangLog, a system performing Search Log
Analysis. LangLog illustrates how NLP
technologies can be a powerful support
tool for market research even when the
source of information is a collection of
queries each one consisting of few words.
We push the standard Search Log Analysis
forward taking into account the semantics
of the queries. The main innovation of
LangLog is the implementation of two
highly customizable components that
cluster and classify the queries in the log.
1 Introduction
Transaction logs become increasingly important
for studying the user interaction with systems
likeWeb Searching Engines, Digital Libraries, In-
tranet Servers and others (Jansen, 2006). Var-
ious service providers keep log files recording
the user interaction with the searching engines.
Transaction logs are useful to understand the user
search strategy but also to improve query sugges-
tions (Wen and Zhang, 2003) and to enhance
the retrieval quality of search engines (Joachims,
2002). The process of analyzing the transaction
logs to understand the user behaviour and to as-
sess the system performance is known as Transac-
tion Log Analysis (TLA). Transaction Log Anal-
ysis is concerned with the analysis of both brows-
ing and searching activity inside a website. The
analysis of transaction logs that focuses on search
activity only is known as Search Log Analysis
(SLA). According to Jansen (2008) both TLA
and SLA have three stages: data collection, data
preparation and data analysis. In the data collec-
tion stage one collects data describing the user
interaction with the system. Data preparation is
the process of loading the collected data in a re-
lational database. The data loaded in the database
gives a transaction log representation independent
of the particular log syntax. In the final stage
the data prepared at the previous step is analyzed.
One may notice that the traditional three levels
log analyses give a syntactic view of the infor-
mation in the logs. Counting terms, measuring
the logical complexity of queries or the simple
procedures that associate queries with the ses-
sions in no way accesses the semantics of queries.
LangLog system addreses the semantic problem
performing clustering and classification for real
query logs. Clustering the queries in the logs al-
lows the identification of meaningful groups of
queries. Classifying the queries according to a
relevant list of categories permits the assessment
of how well the searching engine meets the user
needs. In addition the LangLog system address
problems like automatic language identification,
Name Entity Recognition, and automatic query
translation. The rest of the paper is organized
as follows: the next section briefly reviews some
systems performing SLA. Then we present the
data sources the architecture and the analysis pro-
cess of the LangLog system. The conclusion sec-
tion concludes the article summarizing the work
and presenting some new possible enhancements
of the LangLog.
87
2 Related work
The information in the log files is useful in many
ways, but its extraction raises many challenges
and issues. Facca and Lanzi (2005) offer a sur-
vey of the topic. There are several commercial
systems to extract and analyze this information,
such as Adobe web analytics1, SAS Web Analyt-
ics2, Infor Epiphany3, IBM SPSS4. These prod-
ucts are often part of a customer relation manage-
ment (CRM) system. None of those showcases
include any form of linguistic processing. On the
other hand, Web queries have been the subject
of linguistic analysis, to improve the performance
of information retrieval systems. For example, a
study (Monz and de Rijke, 2002) experimented
with shallow morphological analysis, another (Li
et al 2006) analyzed queries to remove spelling
mistakes. These works encourage our belief that
linguistic analysis could be beneficial for Web log
analysis systems.
3 Data sources
LangLog requires the following information from
the Web logs: the time of the interaction, the
query, click-through information and possibly
more. LangLog processes log files which con-
form to the W3C extended log format. No other
formats are supported. The system prototype is
based on query logs spanning one month of inter-
actions recorded at the Bridgeman Art Library5.
Bridgeman Art library contains a large repository
of images coming from 8000 collections and rep-
resenting more than 29.000 artists.
4 Analyses
LangLog organizes the search log data into units
called queries and hits. In a typical search-
ing scenario a user submits a query to the con-
tent provider?s site-searching engine and clicks
on some (or none) of the search results. From
now on we will refer to a clicked item as a hit,
and we will refer to the text typed by the user as
the query. This information alone is valuable to
the content provider because it allows to discover
1http://www.omniture.com/en/products/analytics
2http://www.sas.com/solutions/webanalytics/index.html
3http://www.infor.com
4http://www-01.ibm.com/software/analytics/spss/
5http://www.bridgemanart.com
which queries were served with results that satis-
fied the user, and which queries were not.
LangLog extracts queries and hits from the log
files, and performs the following analyses on the
queries:
? language identification
? tokenization and lemmatization
? named entity recognition
? classification
? cluster analysis
Language information may help the content
provider decide whether to translate the content
into new languages.
Lemmatization is especially important in lan-
guages like German and Italian that have a rich
morphology. Frequency statistics of keywords
help understand what users want, but they are bi-
ased towards items associated with words with
lesser ortographic and morpho-syntactic varia-
tion. For example, two thousand queries for
?trousers?, one thousand queries for ?handbag?
and another thousand queries for ?handbags?
means that handbags are twice as popular as
trousers, although statistics based on raw words
would say otherwise.
Named entities extraction helps the content
provider for the same reasons lemmatization does.
Named entities are especially important because
they identify real-world items that the content
provider can relate to, while lemmas less often do
so. The name entities and the most important con-
cepts can be linked afterwards with resources like
Wikipedia which offer a rich specification of their
properties.
Both classification and clustering allow the
content provider to understand what kind of the
users look for and how this information is targeted
by means of queries.
Classification consists of classifying queries
into categories drawn from a classification
schema. When the schema used to classify
is different from the schema used in the con-
tent provider?s website, classification may provide
hints as to what kind of queries are not matched
by items in the website. In a similar way, cluster
analysis can be used to identify new market seg-
ments or new trends in the user?s behaviour. Clus-
88
ter analysis provide more flexybility than classifi-
cation, but the information it produces is less pre-
cise. Many trials and errors may be necessary be-
fore finding interesting results. One hopes that the
final clustering solution will give insights into the
patterns of users? searches. For example an on-
line book store may discover that one cluster con-
tains many software-related terms, altough none
of those terms is popular enough to be noticeable
in the statistics.
5 Architecture
LangLog consists of three subsystems: log ac-
quisition, log analysis, log disclosure. Periodi-
cally the log acquisition subsystem gathers new
data which it passes to the log analyses compo-
nent. The results of the analyses are then available
through the log disclosure subsystem.
Log acquisition deals with the acquisition and
normalization and anonymization of the data con-
tained in the content provider?s log files. The
data flows from the content provider?s servers to
LangLog?s central database. This process is car-
ried out by a series of Pentaho Data Integration6
procedures.
Log analysis deals with the anaysis of the data.
The analyses proper are executed by NLP systems
provided by third parties and accessible as Web
services. LangLog uses NLP Web services for
language identification, morpho-syntactic analy-
sis, named entity recognition, classification and
clustering. The analyses are stored in the database
along with the original data.
Log disclosure is actually a collection of inde-
pendent systems that allow the content providers
to access their information and the analyses. Log
disclosure systems are also concerned with access
control and protection of privacy. The content
provider can access the output of LangLog using
AWStats, QlikView, or JPivot.
? AWStats7 is a widely used log analysis sys-
tem for websites. The logs gathered from the
websites are parsed by AWStats, which gen-
erates a complete report about visitors, vis-
its duration, visitor?s countries and other data
to disclose useful information about the visi-
tor?s behavior.
6http://kettle.pentaho.com
7http://awstats.sourceforge.net
? QlikView8 is a business intelligence (BI)
platform. A BI platform provides histori-
cal, current, and predictive views of busi-
ness operations. Usually such tools are used
by companies to have a clear view of their
business over time. In LangLog, QlickView
does not display sales or costs evolution over
time. Instead, it displays queries on the con-
tent provider?s website over time. A dash-
board with many elements (input selections,
tables, charts, etc.) provides a wide range of
tools to visualize the data.
? JPivot9 is a front-end for Mondrian. Mon-
drian10 is an Online Analytical Processing
(OLAP) engine, a system capable of han-
dling and analyzing large quantities of data.
JPivot allows the user to explore the output
of LangLog, by slicing the data along many
dimensions. JPivot allows the user to display
charts, export results to Microsoft Excel or
CSV, and use custom OLAP MDX queries.
Log analysis deals with the anaysis of the data.
The analyses proper are executed by NLP systems
provided by third parties and accessible as Web
services. LangLog uses NLP Web services for
language identification, morpho-syntactic analy-
sis, named entity recognition, classification and
clustering. The analyses are stored in the database
along with the original data.
5.1 Language Identification
The system uses a language identification sys-
tem (Bosca and Dini, 2010) which offers language
identification for English, French, Italian, Span-
ish, Polish and German. The system uses four
different strategies:
? N-gram character models: uses the distance
between the character based models of the
input and of a reference corpus for the lan-
guage (Wikipedia).
? Word frequency: looks up the frequency of
the words in the query with respect to a ref-
erence corpus for the language.
? Function words: searches for particles
highly connoting a specific language (such
as prepositions, conjunctions).
8http://www.qlikview.com
9http://jpivot.sourceforge.net
10http://mondrian.pentaho.com
89
? Prior knowledge: provides a default guess
based on a set of hypothesis and heuristics
like region/browser language.
5.2 Lemmatization
To perform lemmatization, Langlog uses general-
purpose morpho-syntactic analysers based on the
Xerox Incremental Parser (XIP), a deep robust
syntactic parser (Ait-Mokhtar et al 2002). The
system has been adapted with domain-specific
part of speech disambiguation grammar rules, ac-
cording to the results a linguistic study of the de-
velopment corpus.
5.3 Named entity recognition
LangLog uses the Xerox named entity recogni-
tion web service (Brun and Ehrmann, 2009) for
English and French. XIP includes also a named
entity detection component, based on a combina-
tion of lexical information and hand-crafted con-
textual rules. For example, the named entity
recognition system was adapted to handle titles
of portraits, which were frequent in our dataset.
While for other NLP tasks LangLog uses the same
system for every content provider, named entity
recognition is a task that produces better analyses
when it is tailored to the domain of the content.
Because LangLog uses a NER Web service, it is
easy to replace the default NER system with a dif-
ferent one. So if the content provider is interested
in the development of a NER system tailored for
a specific domain, LangLog can accomodate this.
5.4 Clustering
We developed two clustering systems: one per-
forms hierarchical clustering, another performs
soft clustering.
? CLUTO: the hierarchical clustering system
relies on CLUTO411, a clustering toolkit.
To understand the main ideas CLUTO is
based on one might consult Zhao and
Karypis (2002). The clustering process pro-
ceeds as follows. First, the set of queries to
be clustered is partitioned in k groups where
k is the number of desired clusters. To do
so, the system uses a partitional clustering
algorithm which finds the k-way clustering
solution making repeated bisections. Then
11http://glaros.dtc.umn.edu/gkhome/views/cluto
the system arranges the clusters in a hierar-
chy by successively merging the most similar
clusters in a tree.
? MALLET: the soft clustering system we
developed relies on MALLET (McCallum,
2002), a Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
toolkit (Steyvers and Griffiths, 2007).
Our MALLET-based system considers that
each query is a document and builds a topic
model describing the documents. The result-
ing topics are the clusters. Each query is as-
sociated with each topic according to a cer-
tain strenght. Unlike the system based on
CLUTO, this system produces soft clusters,
i.e. each query may belong to more than one
cluster.
5.5 Classification
LangLog allows the same query to be classified
many times using different classification schemas
and different classification strategies. The result
of the classification of an input query is always a
map that assigns each category a weight, where
the higher the weight, the more likely the query
belongs to the category. If NER performs bet-
ter when tailored to a specific domain, classifi-
cation is a task that is hardly useful without any
customization. We need a different classification
schema for each content provider. We developed
two classification system: an unsupervised sys-
tem and a supervised one.
? Unsupervised: this system does not require
any training data nor any domain-specific
corpus. The output weight of each category
is computed as the cosine similarity between
the vector models of the most representa-
tive Wikipedia article for the category and
the collection of Wikipedia articles most rel-
evant to the input query. Our evaluation in
the KDD-Cup 2005 dataset results in 19.14
precision and 22.22 F-measure. For com-
parison, the state of the art in the competi-
tion achieved a 46.1 F-measure. Our system
could not achieve a similar score because it
is unsupervised, and therefore it cannot make
use of the KDD-Cup training dataset. In ad-
dition, it uses only the query to perform clas-
sification, whereas KDD-Cup systems were
also able to access the result sets associated
to the queries.
90
? Supervised: this system is based on the
Weka framework. Therefore it can use any
machine learning algorithm implemented in
Weka. It uses features derived from the
queries and from Bridgeman metadata. We
trained a Naive Bayes classifier on a set of
15.000 queries annotated with 55 categories
and hits and obtained a F-measure of 0.26.
The results obtained for the classification
are encouraging but not yet at the level of
the state of the art. The main reason for
this is the use of only in-house meta-data in
the feature computation. In the future we
will improve both components by providing
them with features from large resources like
Wikipedia or exploiting the results returned
by Web Searching engines.
6 Demonstration
Our demonstration presents:
? The setting of our case study: the Bridgeman
Art Library website, a typical user search,
and what is recorded in the log file.
? The conceptual model of the results of the
analyses: search episodes, queries, lemmas,
named entities, classification, clustering.
? The data flow across the parts of the system,
from content provider?s servers to the front-
end through databases, NLP Web services
and data marts.
? The result of the analyses via QlikView.
7 Conclusion
In this paper we presented the LangLog system,
a customizable system for analyzing query logs.
The LangLog performs language identification,
lemmatization, NER, classification and clustering
for query logs. We tested the LangLog system on
queries in Bridgeman Library Art. In the future
we will test the system on query logs in differ-
ent domains (e.g. pharmaceutical, hardware and
software, etc.) thus increasing the coverage and
the significance of the results. Moreover we will
incorporate in our system the session information
which should increase the precision of both clus-
tering and classification components.
References
Salah Ait-Mokhtar, Jean-Pierre Chanod and Claude
Roux 2002. Robustness Beyond Shallowness: In-
cremental Deep Parsing. Journal of Natural Lan-
guage Engineering 8, 2-3, 121-144.
Alessio Bosca and Luca Dini. 2010. Language Identi-
fication Strategies for Cross Language Information
Retrieval. CLEF 2010 Working Notes.
C. Brun and M. Ehrmann. 2007. Adaptation of
a Named Entity Recognition System for the ES-
TER 2 Evaluation Campaign. In proceedings of
the IEEE International Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing and Knowledge Engineering.
F. M. Facca and P. L. Lanzi. 2005. Mining interesting
knowledge from weblogs: a survey. Data Knowl.
Eng. 53(3):225241.
Jansen, B. J. 2006. Search log analysis: What is it;
what?s been done; how to do it. Library and Infor-
mation Science Research 28(3):407-432.
Jansen, B. J. 2008. The methodology of search log
analysis. In B. J. Jansen, A. Spink and I. Taksa (eds)
Handbook of Web log analysis 100-123. Hershey,
PA: IGI.
Joachims T. 2002. Optimizing search engines us-
ing clickthrough data. In proceedings of the 8th
ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowl-
edge discovery and data mining 133-142.
M. Li, Y. Zhang, M. Zhu, and M. Zhou. 2006. Ex-
ploring distributional similarity based models for
query spelling correction. In proceedings of In ACL
06: the 21st International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics and the 44th annual meeting of
the ACL 10251032, 2006.
Andrew Kachites McCallum. 2002. MAL-
LET: A Machine Learning for Language Toolkit.
http://mallet.cs.umass.edu.
C. Monz and M. de Rijke. 2002. Shallow Morpholog-
ical Analysis in Monolingual Information Retrieval
for Dutch, German and Italian. In Proceedings of
CLEF 2001. Springer
M. Steyvers and T. Griffiths. 2007. Probabilistic
Topic Models. In T. Landauer, D McNamara, S.
Dennis and W. Kintsch (eds), Handbook of Latent
Semantic Analysis, Psychology Press.
J. R. Wen and H.J. Zhang 2003. Query Clustering
in the Web Context. In Wu, Xiong and Shekhar
(eds) Information Retrieval and Clustering 195-
226. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Y. Zhao and G. Karypis. 2002. Evaluation of hierar-
chical clustering algorithms for document datasets.
In proceedings of the ACM Conference on Informa-
tion and Knowledge Management.
91
