Mining MEDLINE: Postulating a Beneficial Role for Curcumin Longa in
Retinal Diseases
Padmini Srinivasan
School of Library
& Information Science
The University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242
padmini-srinivasan@uiowa.edu
Bisharah Libbus
National Library of Medicine
Bethesda, MD 20852
libbus@nlm.nih.gov
Aditya Kumar Sehgal
Computer Science
The University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242
sehgal@cs.uiowa.edu
Abstract
Text mining tools are designed to assist users
with the important step of hypothesis genera-
tion. In this research we apply an open discov-
ery process to the problem of identifying novel
disease or problem contexts in which a sub-
stance may have therapeutic potential. We il-
lustrate this discovery process by executing our
open discovery algorithm with turmeric (Cur-
cumin Longa) as the substance being investi-
gated. The top ranking entry suggested by the
algorithm is retinal diseases. Further analysis
of the literature yields evidence supporting the
suggested connection between curcumin and
retinal diseases. In particular, curcumin influ-
ences the activation of genes such as COX-2,
TNF-alpha, JNK, ERK and NF-kappaB. These
genes are in turn involved in retinal diseases
such as diabetic retinopathies, ocular inflam-
mation and glaucoma. Moreover, the evidence
suggests that curcumin may have a beneficial
and therapeutic role in the context of these dis-
eases.
1 Introduction
Consider a bioscientist who is studying a particular dis-
ease. Assume that she is already well familiar with
the pathophysiology and accepted therapeutic options for
treating this condition and wishes to determine if there
are other, yet unrecognized, substances that may have
therapeutic potential. She begins by searching for doc-
uments on the disease mechanism(s) and related disor-
ders. Very soon she finds herself immersed in a morass
of pathways and possible directions that need to be fur-
ther explored. It will come as no surprise if even our most
determined user quickly becomes overwhelmed and dis-
couraged. The challenge of searching for a novel thera-
peutic substance is at best like looking for the proverbial
?needle in a haystack?. However, in reality the challenge
is greater since there is no assurance that there indeed is
a needle in the haystack. Consequently, the goal of text
mining (also known as literature mining) systems and al-
gorithms is to assist users find such needles, if these exist
at all in the literature ?haystacks? (Hearst 1999).
In general, as shown in Figure 1, a user may start with
any type of topic (A), be it a disease, a pharmacological
substance, or a specific gene. As he navigates the lit-
erature and follows connections through appropriate in-
termediate topics (B1, B2 etc.), the user hopes to reach
terminal topics (C1, C2 etc.) that are both relevant and
novel, in the sense of shedding new information on topic
(A). This text mining approach commonly referred to as
?open? discovery was pioneered by Swanson in the mid
80s. A classic example discovery is one where start-
ing with Raynaud?s disease (A) Swanson identified fish
oils (C) as a substance that may have therapeutic po-
tential (Swanson, 1986). Intermediate connections (B)
such as ?blood viscosity?, ?platelet aggregation? were ob-
served. Swanson also proposed a variation called ?closed?
discovery wherein starting with a pair of topics (A and
C) one explores possible connections (B links) between
them that are not yet recognized. In collaboration with
Smalheiser, Swanson used his open and closed discov-
ery methods on MEDLINE and proposed a number of
hypotheses (eg. Swanson, 1990; Smalheiser & Swan-
son1996a; Smalheiser & Swanson1996b; Smalheiser &
Swanson1998). The hypotheses they proposed were sub-
sequently corroborated in clinical studies.
The text mining framework established by Swanson
and Smalheiser has attracted the attention of several re-
searchers (Gordon and Lindsay, 1996; Lindsay and Gor-
don, 1999; Weeber et al, 2001) besides us (Srinivasan,
2004). A key goal in these follow-up efforts has been to
reduce the amount of manual effort and intervention re-
quired during the discovery process. In previous work
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                   Linking Biological Literature, Ontologies and Databases, pp. 33-40.
                                                HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Biolink 2004,
Figure 1: Open Discovery: The General Model
using algorithms for MEDLINE which we developed, we
replicated the eight open and closed discoveries made by
Swanson and Smalheiser. In comparison with other repli-
cation studies these algorithms were the most effective
(Srinivasan, 2004). They also require the least amount of
manual input and analyses. For example, in open discov-
ery, our methods expect the user to specify only the type
of B terms of interest. Following this our algorithm se-
lects B terms automatically. In contrast the other methods
rely more on user input for selecting B terms. Our cur-
rent research demonstrates that our open discovery algo-
rithm can be used to generate new hypotheses for disease
treatment that could be tested. In particular, we apply
our open discovery procedure to explore the therapeutic
potential of curcumin/turmeric (Curcumin Longa) a di-
etary substance commonly used in Asia. We show that
our automatic discovery algorithm identifies retinal dis-
eases as the novel context for research on curcumin. We
review genetic and biochemical evidence to indicate that
curcumin may be beneficial for treating retinal diseases.
We first describe our open discovery algorithm. Next
we show its application with curcumin as the starting
point (topic A). We then present an analysis of the cur-
cumin - retinal diseases connection. The next section is
on related research. The final section presents our con-
clusions and plans for the next phase of this research.
2 Open Discovery
Our open discovery approach is founded on the notion of
topic profiles. A topic is any subject of interest such as
treatment of hypertension or ATM gene. A profile is es-
sentially a representation of a topic that is derived from
the text collection being mined. For MEDLINE our topic
profiles are vectors of weighted Medical Subject Head-
ings (MeSH). These terms belong to a controlled vocab-
ulary and are manually assigned to each MEDLINE doc-
ument by trained indexers. Given a topic of interest, our
algorithm first retrieves relevant MEDLINE documents.
MeSH terms are then extracted from these documents and
their weights are calculated. These weighted terms form
the profile vector for the topic. We discuss the method for
calculating weights shortly.
We also exploit the fact that MeSH terms have been
classified using 134 UMLS (Unified Medical Language
System)1 semantic types as for example Cell Function,
Sign or Symptom. Each MeSH term is assigned one
or more semantic types. For example, interferon type
II falls within both Immunologic Factor and Pharmaco-
logic Substance semantic types. More generally, seman-
tic types represent ?categories? that have been used to
classify the MeSH metadata. Semantic types are useful
because depending on the nature of the discovery goals
we may adopt a particular view, i.e., we may restrict the
discovery process to consider only MeSH terms that be-
long to certain semantic types. In these cases the topic
profiles are restricted to MeSH terms belonging to seman-
tic types specified by the view.
We calculate term weights for the MeSH terms. Term
weights are a slight modification of the commonly used
TF*IDF scores. Since a MeSH term typically occurs once
in a MEDLINE record, here TFi (term frequency) equals
the number of documents in which the MeSH term ti oc-
curs within the retrieved document set. IDFi (inverse
document frequency) is log(N/TFi). N is the number
of documents retrieved for the topic. Weights are normal-
ized as shown below for term ti. This vector of weighted
MeSH terms forms the topic profile.
weight(ti) = vi/
?
v21 + v
2
2 + ... + v2r , (1)
where vi = TFi ? log(N/TFi) and there are r terms in
the profile.
Algorithm: Figure 2 outlines our open discovery
algorithm which follows the framework shown in Fig-
ure 1. We begin by building the A topic profile restricted
to ST-B semantic types. Note that all MEDLINE
searches are conducted automatically via the PubMed
interface2. We then automatically select M MeSH
terms for each ST-B semantic type from this A profile
and call these the B terms. Next profiles are built for
each of these B terms limited to another selected set
of semantic types ST-C. These B profiles are analysed
in combination to select an initial pool of candidate
C terms. These candidate terms are then checked for
novelty in the context of the starting A topic. When the
algorithm terminates the user is provided a final list of
ranked, novel C terms. The higher the rank the greater
1http://umlsks.nlm.nih.gov
2http://www.nlm.nih.gov
the estimated confidence in the potential connection with
the A topic.
At this point the rest of the process depends almost en-
tirely on the user. (This is also the case in other imple-
mentations of the open discovery process (eg. Lindsay &
Gordon 1999; Weeber et al, 2001)). It is up to the user to
select A - C pairs of interest and explore the literature for
supporting evidence.
The role of ST-B and ST-C in the algorithm is to apply
reasonable constraints to the problem and shape the path
of the discovery process. Similarly, parameter M may
be used to focus the discovery process. The higher this
number the bigger the scope through which one looks for
novel C topics. Obviously it takes experience to come
up with reasonable values for these parameters. But
we already see some patterns emerge in the MEDLINE
mining literature. For example when looking for sub-
stances likely to influence a disease several researchers
have used functional semantic types such as Cell Func-
tion and Molecular Dysfunction for selecting intermedi-
ate pathways (eg. Weeber et al, 2001). Experiments
varying these semantic types have been described in our
previous work (Srinivasan, 2004). Unique aspects of our
algorithm in comparison to open discovery methods ex-
plored by others, include for example, the fact that our
weighting scheme identifies interesting and relevant B
terms at high ranks. Also, C terms are assessed by com-
bining the evidence on their connection to the different
intermediate B terms.
3 Open Discovery with Turmeric
Our interest in curcumin was sparked by the fact that this
spice is widely used in Asia and is highly regarded for its
curative and analgesic properties. These include the treat-
ment of burns, stomach ulcers and ailments, and for var-
ious skin diseases. Curcumin is also used as an antisep-
tic, in alleviating symptoms of the common cold as well
as a depilatory. A number of MEDLINE records have
reported on the anti-cancer and anti-inflammatory prop-
erties of curcumin (12680238, 12678737, 126760443).
Our open discovery goal is aimed at determining whether
there are novel disease contexts in which curcumin could
prove beneficial, and to propose evidence-based hypothe-
ses that can be experimentally verified.
We executed our open discovery algorithm with cur-
cumin as the starting topic (A). The specific PubMed
search conducted was turmeric OR curcumin OR cur-
cuma (done on November 15, 2003). A total of 1,175
PubMed documents were retrieved. As Figure 3 shows
the majority of these publications (1,043, 89%) are rela-
3Numbers within parantheses such as these refer to PubMed
record ids. The reader may enter these directly into the PubMed
interface to retrieve the corresponding records.
Input from user: (1) an A topic of interest, (2) a
set of UMLS semantic types (ST-B) for selecting
B terms and a set (ST-C) for selecting C terms.
Parameter: M
? Step 1: Conduct an appropriate PubMed
search for topic A, and build its MeSH pro-
file limited to the semantic types in ST-B.
Call this profile AP.
? Step 2: For each semantic type in ST-B, se-
lect theM top ranking MeSH terms from AP.
Remove duplicate terms if any. These are
designated the B terms (B1, B2, B3, etc.).
? Step 3: Conduct an independent PubMed
search for each B term and build its pro-
file limited to the semantic types ST-C. Call
these profiles BP1, BP2, BP3, etc.
? Step 4: Compute a final combined profile
where the combined weight of a MeSH term
is the sum of its weights in BP1, BP2, BP3,
etc. Call this initial profile CP.
? Step 5: For each term t in CP if a MEDLINE
search on topic A AND t returns non zero
results, eliminate t from CP.
Output: For each semantic type in ST-C, output the
MeSH terms in CP ranked by combined weight.
These are the C terms organized by semantic type
and ranked by estimated potential.
Figure 2: Open Discovery Algorithm: Outline of Steps.
Figure 3: Temporal Distribution of Curcumin Documents
tively recent, being published in 1990 or later. This in-
dicates a surge in scientific interest in the health effects
of this spice, which has long been valued in Asia for its
medicinal properties.
We limited ST-B to the three semantic types Gene or
Genome; Enzyme; and Amino Acid, Peptide or Protein.
We restricted ST-C to Disease or Syndrome and Neo-
plastic Process4 and set M (the parameter specifying the
number of B terms to select) to 10. These semantic types
are appropriate since we are looking for biochemical and
genetic connections between turmeric and novel diseases.
Table 1 shows the top 10 selected MeSH terms from
each ST-B type (step 2). We can observe from the table
that some of the terms appear in more than one semantic
type. (This is possible since a term may be assigned to
more than 1 semantic type in the UMLS). However, we
remove duplicates in step 2. Also, some terms are very
specific such as Protein Kinase C while others are broad
representing families such as DNA-Binding Proteins and
Isoenzymes. At present we do not distinguish between B
terms using specificity. Our plan is to examine this aspect
in future research.
The B terms listed in Table 1 are the top ten terms that
were retrieved from a search of the literature for the se-
mantic types Genes or Genomes, Enzymes, and Amino
Acid, Peptide or Proteins. The biochemical effects of cur-
cumin become apparent upon conducting a search of the
literature for curcumin and any of these terms. Curcumin,
for example, has a strong down-regulatory effect on c-
Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) (14627502, 12859962,
11370761, 12097302) resulting in the arrest of cell pro-
liferation (14627502) in prostate tumor cells (12853969)
and induction of apoptosis (12859962). Curcumin in-
hibits NF-kappaB (12714587) leading to the suppres-
sion of cell proliferation and the induction of apoptosis
4Neoplastic Process includes MeSH terms referring to can-
cers.
Semantic Type
Intermediate B MeSH Terms G E A
Genes, jun 1
Genes, fos 2
Genes, APC 3
Genes, Reporter 4
Genes, Dominant 5
Genes, ras 6
Genes, rel 7
Genes, bcl-2 8
Nucleolus Organizer Region 9
Genes, myc 10
MAPK 1 3
Glutathione Transferase 2 5
Protein Kinase C 3 9
Prostaglandin-Endoperoxide
Synthase 4 10
Isoenzymes 5
Protein-Tyrosine Kinase 6
Caspases 7
Nitric-Oxide Synthase 8
Ornithine Decarboxylase 9
MAP Kinase Signaling System 10
NF-kappa B 1
Transcription Factor AP-1 2
Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-jun 4
Tumor Necrosis Factor 6
Glutathione 7
DNA-Binding Proteins 8
Table 1: Intermediate B Terms. G: Gene or Genome, E:
Enzyme, AAPP: Amino Acid, Peptide or Protein. Num-
bers indicate ranks.
Terminal C MeSH Terms Rank
Retina 1
Spinal cord 2
Testes 3
Thyroid Neoplasms 4
Ischemic Attack Transient 5
Table 2: Top Five Novel C Terms.
in multiple myeloma (12393461) and ovary cancer cells
(12520734). TGF-beta1 induced IL-6 which has been im-
plicated in the malignant progression of prostate cancers
was severely impeded by curcumin through inhibition of
c-Jun (matches with Genes, jun in the table) JNK (an in-
stance of MAPK in the table) or AP-1 (12853969).
The curcumin open discovery process terminated with
a ranked list of diseases. Table 2 shows the top 5 entries5.
One observation made at this point was that the type of
automated search conducted in step 5 of the algorithm to
check for novelty is insufficient. At present, the search
involves only the particular MeSH term intersected with
the A topic. We do not yet automatically consider syn-
onyms of the MeSH term. For example for the last entry
in the table, although Ischemic Attack Transient AND
(turmeric OR curcumin OR curcuma) retrieved 0 docu-
ments, the search Ischemia AND (turmeric OR curcumin
OR curcuma) retrieves 17 documents. Hence this entry is
unlikely to be immediately interesting to the user. How-
ever, the top two entries did not retrieve any document
even after searching with different synonyms. Testes is
also unlikely to be interesting since a curcumin search in-
tersected with sperm retrieved many documents. Consid-
ering retrieval set size alone is insufficient. For instance,
curcumin intersected with thyroid retrieved 5 documents.
However, these appear to be peripheral to curcumin?s ef-
fect on thyroid neoplasms focusing more on aspects such
as hypothyroidism and toxicity. Automating query ex-
pansion using synonyms will be the subject of further re-
search.
At this point the user may select entries and peruse the
appropriate literature further to (a) determine the nature
of the relationship between curcumin and the diseases (as
the substance under study could be beneficial or harmful)
and (b) assess the quality of the background knowledge
that may be used to guide further study of curcumin and
the disease. This manual phase may be guided by the
specific B term-based pathways connecting the selected
5Although the main semantic type for a term such as Spinal
Cord is Body Part, Organ, or Organ Component, in the UMLS
Spinal Cord is listed for at least one vocabulary as a synonym
for Spinal Cord Diseases. It is thus also assigned the semantic
type of Disease or Syndrome. Similar observations hold for
terms Retina and Testes
MeSH Term
Genes, fos
Genes, Reporter
Genes, Dominant
MAPK
Glutathione Transferase
Protein Kinase C
Isoenzymes
Protein-Tyrosine Kinase
Caspases
Nitric-Oxide Synthase
Ornithine Decarboxylase
Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-jun
Tumor Necrosis Factor
Glutathione
DNA-Binding Proteins
Table 3: B Terms Connecting Turmeric and Retina.
disease with curcumin. Table 3 lists the B terms that
were automatically identified as connecting curcumin and
?Retina?.
In the next section we present such an analysis for
?Retina?. That is, we (the second author) examine the
literature to determine if retinal diseases may be a good
context in which a bioscientist may study curcumin. Our
analysis indicates that indeed there is good evidence sup-
porting the hypothesis of a beneficial role for turmeric in
the context of diabetic retinopathies, ocular inflammation
and glaucoma. Analysis of the other highly-ranked dis-
eases is left for future work.
4 Turmeric - Retinal Diseases Connection
The procedure followed up to this point is ?term-centric?.
That is, we automatically identify statistically interesting
B terms and then generate a ranked list of C terms. We
now present further analysis on the connection between
retinal diseases and curcumin. In some cases reading the
title and abstracts of select records provided sufficient in-
formation. In addition the full text of the document was
available. Our strategy was to examine publications for
biochemical or molecular biology mechanisms. In par-
ticular, we were interested in ascertaining whether any of
the genes noted earlier were also involved in the patho-
physiology of these retinal disorders. We focused on the
genes as the critical links that connect the agent curcumin
to the disorders.
Analysis: The user?s goal is to identify biochemical
pathways potentially connecting retinal diseases and cur-
cumin. Retinal diseases could result from complications
due to diabetes, or of infection and inflammation of the
retina.
Diabetic retinopathy is a leading cause of blindness.
An early sign of the disease is the adhesion of leukocytes
to the vessels of the retina, endothelial cell injury, and the
breakdown of the blood-retina barrier (12000720). Even
acute intensive insulin therapy constitutes an additional
risk factor for diabetic retinopathy, due to insulin-induced
hypoxia and an associated acceleration in the blood-retina
barrier breakdown (11901189). Glaucoma is the second
most common cause of blindness in the world (8695555)
and is caused by mutations in a number of genes on chro-
mosomes 1 and 10 as well as in other loci on chromo-
somes 2, 3, 8, and 7. While several diseases have one
or a few genetic loci that control disease progression and
familial transmission, it is often the case that a variety of
genes may be involved in their pathophysiology. Follow-
ing is a brief survey of some of the genes that may be
involved in the process of tissue injury or inflammation
and regulation of cell division. Control of the immune
process and of the inflammatory response is important in
combating infection and autoimmune diseases. Regula-
tion of cell division, particularly programmed cell death,
is critical in diverse diseases such as cancer and tissue re-
generation, e.g. retinal injury and diseases. Regulation
of the activity of such genes could provide strategies for
therapeutic intervention using curcumin.
In diabetes and during inflammation, periods of hy-
poxia, i.e. low oxygen concentration, occur in various
tissues and organs. At such times an early cellular re-
sponse results in the elevated expression of interleukin-
1beta (IL-1 beta) and cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) genes
(11527948, 14507857, 11821258) which in turn stim-
ulate new blood vessel growth leading to retinopathy
(12821538, 12601017). Similarly, the expression of
COX-2 was associated with the development of glau-
coma (9441697). Treatment with COX-2 inhibitors sup-
pressed blood-retinal barrier breakdown and had an an-
tiangiogenic effect, i.e. they prevented the growth of new
blood vessels and thus had a protective effect on the retina
(12821538, 11980873).
Another gene, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-
alpha), was elevated during the early stages of diabetic
retinopathy and inflammation (11821258, 12706995,
11161842). Anti-TNF-alpha treatment reduced leukocyte
adhesion to blood vessels of the eye and vascular leakage
(12714660) indicating a potential therapeutic effect for
such a treatment to reduce ocular inflammation. Activa-
tion of TNF-alpha and other genes may also lead to the
pathophysiology of glaucoma (10975909, 10815159).
The family of mitogen-activated protein kinases
(MAPK) is another group of genes that has an important
role in retinal disease. These include extracellular signal-
regulated kinases (ERK), c-Jun amino(N)-terminal ki-
nase (JNK), and p38. One of these, ERK, was induced
in glaucoma (12824248). Often inflammatory responses
include the induction of apoptosis, or programmed cell
death. The involvement of JNK in inducing apop-
tosis was demonstrated in prostate cancer (12859962,
12663665) and retinal cells (12270637). There is also a
link to TNF-alpha (discussed above) which was shown to
activate phosphorylation of ERKs, p38, and JNK MAPK
in human chondrocytes (12878172).
IL-1beta activation, induced by the presence of reti-
nal holes, a key feature of diabetic retinopathy, is also
reported to result in the activation of a number of the
MAPK genes ERK, JNK, and p38 (12824248). These
conditions in turn exacerbate the disease process in that
they result in proliferative and migratory cells accumu-
lating in the wounded retina (12500176). Inhibitors of
MAPK and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3) inhibited
retinal pigment epithelial cell proliferation (12782163).
The breakdown in the blood-retina barrier is also sup-
pressed by inhibitors of p38 MAPK and PI3 (11901189).
Changes in the levels of the gene NF-kappaB is an
early cellular response to inflammation. Activation of
TNF-alpha (discussed above) is followed by increased
transcription of NF-kappaB which in turn stimulates
ERK, p38, and JNK MAPK (12878172). Also activa-
tion of NF-kappaB subsequently stimulated COX-2 and
matrix metalloproteinase-9 expression (12807725).
Curcumin was shown to be effective in inhibiting
cell proliferation of tumorigenic and non-tumorigenic
breast cancer cells (12527329) and other tumor cells
(12680238). As described previously the gene COX-
2 is involved in early inflammatory diabetic retinopathy
(11821258). Curcumin was able to suppress COX-2 in
a dose-related manner (12844482) and neutralized the
effect of IL-1 beta, possibly through its effect on p38
and COX-2 and JNK (12957788). Curcumin is also a
known inhibitor of JNK (12957788,12854631,12582006,
12130649, 12105223, 9674701) and a suppresser of
NF-kappaB activation (11753638, 11506818, 12878172,
12825130). For example, it suppressed the induction of
NF-kappaB and its dependent genes by cigarette smoke
(12807725), in alcoholic liver disease (12388178) and in
cultured endothelial cells (12368225).
Having shown that these genes, in particular, IL-1beta,
COX-2, TNF-alpha, JNK, ERK, NF-kappaB, etc., are
involved in retinopathy and in regulating cell prolifer-
ation and leukocyte attachment and the breakdown of
the blood-retina barrier, and having established that cur-
cumin is capable of inhibiting the activity of these genes
we hypothesize that curcumin may have therapeutic value
in preventing or ameliorating a number of retinal patholo-
gies.
Our approach has focused on specific genes, in partic-
ular to provide clues regarding the relevant biochemical
pathways. In some cases the evidence is gathered in the
context of other diseases such as alcoholic liver disease
with the idea that similar evidence may be found for reti-
nal diseases. In summary it seems likely that curcumin,
taken in the diet or applied topically, could prove benefi-
cial in cases of diabetic retinopathies, retinal injury, ocu-
lar inflammation and glaucoma.
5 Related Research
Text mining, i.e., uncovering information that may lead
to hypotheses, has attracted the attention of many re-
searchers (eg. Andrade & Valencia, 1998; Gordon
& Lindsay, 1996; Masys et al, 2001; Smalheiser &
Swanson, 1996a; Smalheiser & Swanson, 1996b; Srini-
vasan & Wedemeyer 2003; Srinivasan, 2004; Swanson,
1986; Swanson, 1988; Swanson et al, 2001; Weeber,
2000). Examples of recent text mining applications in-
clude automatically identifying viruses that may be used
as bioweapons (Swanson et al, 2001), proposing ther-
apeutic uses for thalidomide (Weeber, 2003) and find-
ing functional connections between genes (Chaussabel &
Sher, 2002; Shatkay et al, 2000).
A major emphasis in text mining research has been
to directly exploit co-occurrence relationships in MED-
LINE. For example, Jenssen et al, (2001) generate a
co-occurrence based gene network called PubGene from
MEDLINE for 13, 712 named human genes. Each of
PubGene?s 139,756 links is weighted by the number
of times the genes co-occur. Wilkinson and Huber-
man6 identify communities of genes. Starting with a
co-occurrence based gene network for a particular dis-
ease domain, communities are identified by repeatedly re-
moving edges of highest betweeness (number of shortest
paths traversing the edge). Applying this to the domain
of colorectal cancer, they are able to identify interesting
hypotheses linking genes that were for example, in the
same community but had no edge between them.
Our research is based on the open discovery framework
proposed by Swanson. As indicated before, Swanson
and Smalheiser made several discoveries using their open
and closed discovery methods (Swanson, 1986; Swan-
son, 1988; Swanson et al, 2001; Smalheiser & Swan-
son, 1996a; Smalheiser & Swanson, 1996b), that were
later validated by bioscientists. These discoveries to-
gether offer a testbed of examples that are being used
by other researchers to develop their own discovery al-
gorithms (Gordon & Lindsay, 1996; Lindsay & Gordon,
1999; Srinivasan, 2004; Weeber et al, 2001).
One characteristic that may be useful in distinguish-
ing between text mining efforts is the extent to which
they are problem or sub domain specific. For example,
PubGene is directly targeted towards bioinformatics re-
6Wilkinson, D., & Huberman, B. A. A
method for finding communities of related genes.
http://citeseer.nj.nec.com/546592.html.
searchers. In contrast, implementations such as ours that
derive from the open discovery framework are not prob-
lem specific. These may be used for a variety of goals, as
for example by geneticists involved in understanding the
results of microarray experiments and by epidemiologists
searching for links between viruses and specific popula-
tions. We believe that the next generation of text mining
systems will be judged not only by their effectiveness but
also by their flexibility in application.
6 Conclusions
We applied our implementation of Swanson?s open dis-
covery algorithm to the problem of identifying novel dis-
ease or problem contexts in which substances might have
a therapeutic role. We used our methods to investigate the
potential of turmeric or Curcumin Longa. Our analysis
identifies a ranked list of problems for which treatment
with curcumin may be beneficial with the top ranked en-
try pointing to retinal diseases. Guided by our algorithm,
further analysis of the literature by our expert user (a ge-
neticist) yielded good evidence in support of the hypoth-
esis that curcumin, taken in the diet or applied topically,
could prove beneficial in cases of diabetic retinopathies,
ocular inflammation and glaucoma.
In future work we will analyze the other suggestions
made by our open discovery methods. For example, the
second suggestion is problems related to the spinal cord.
The analysis will again focus on genetic mechanisms that
could potentially connect curcumin with the problems.
We will also explore methods to automate query expan-
sion for the search in step 5 of the algorithm. One lim-
itation of the discovery process concerns the evidence
gathering phase when analyzing individual C terms. This
process is manual and involves significant investment of
time and intellect toward sifting through the literature and
collecting evidence relevant to the hypothesized connec-
tions. In the next phase of our work we plan to study
methods to assist in this phase.
Acknowledgments
This research was partly accomplished while the first au-
thor was a visiting faculty scholar at the National Library
of Medicine, Bethesda, Maryland. She thanks the Univer-
sity of Iowa for the Faculty Scholar Award and NLM for
their hospitality. This work was also funded in part by
NSF grant no. IIS-0312356 awarded to the first author.
The authors thank the anonymous reviewers for their in-
sightful comments.
References
Andrade A, & Valencia A. 1998. Automatic extraction
of keywords from scientific text: application to the
knowledge domain of protein families. Bioinformatics,
14(7):600-607.
Chaussabel D. & Sher A. (2002). Mining microarray ex-
pression data by literature profiling. Genome Biology,
3(10):research0055.1-0055.16.
Gordon M.D & Lindsay R.K. 1996. Toward discovery
support systems: A replication, re-examination, and
extension of Swanson?s work on literature-based dis-
covery of a connection between Raynaud?s and fish oil.
Journal of the American Society for Information Sci-
ence, 47:116-128.
Hearst M. Untangling text data mining. (1999). In: Pro-
ceedings of ACL, Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (invited talk), Univer-
sity of Maryland, Maryland, June 20-26, 1999.
Jenssen, T-K., Laegreid, A., Komorowski, J., & Hovig,
E. 2001. A literature network of human genes for high-
throughput analysis of gene expression. Nature Genet-
ics, 28:21-28.
Lindsay, R.K, & Gordon, M.D. (1999). Literature-based
discovery by lexical statistics. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science, 50(7):574-587.
Masys, D.R., Welsh, J.B,, Fink, J.L., Gribskov, M., Kla-
cansky, I., & Corbeil, J. 2001. Use of keyword hier-
archies to interpret gene expression patterns. Bioinfor-
matics, 17(4):319-326.
Shatkay, H., Edwards, S., Wilbur, W.J., & Boguski, M.
2000. Genes, Themes and Microarrays. Using infor-
mation retrieval for large-scale gene analysis. In: Pro-
ceedings of Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology,
La Jolla, California, 317-328.
Smalheiser, N.R., & Swanson, D.R. 1996a. Indomethacin
and Alzheimer?s disease. Neurology, 46:583.
Smalheiser, N.R., & Swanson, D.R. 1996b. Linking es-
trogen to Alzheimer?s disease: An informatics ap-
proach. Neurology, 47, 809-810.
Smalheiser, N.R, & Swanson, D.R. 1998. Calcium-
independent phospholipase A2 and Schizophrenia.
Archives of General Psychiatry. 55(8), 752-753.
Srinivasan, P. To appear 2004. Text Mining: Generating
Hypotheses from MEDLINE. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science.
Srinivasan, P., & Wedemeyer, M. (2003). Mining Con-
cept Profiles with the Vector Model or Where on Earth
are Diseases being Studied? In: Proceedings of Text
Mining Workshop. Third SIAM International Confer-
ence on Data Mining. San Francisco, CA.
Swanson, DR. 1986. Fish oil, Raynaud?s syndrome, and
undiscovered public knowledge. Perspectives in Biol-
ogy and Medicine, 30: 7-18.
Swanson, D.R. 1988. Migraine and Magnesium: Eleven
neglected connections. Perspectives in Biology and
Medicine, 31:526-557.
Swanson, D.R. (1990). Somatomedin C and Arginine:
Implicit connections between mutually isolated lit-
eratures. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 33
(2):157-179.
Swanson, D.R., Smalheiser, N.R., & Bookstein, A.
(2001). Information discovery from complementary
literatures: categorizing viruses as potential weapons.
Journal of the American Society for Information Sci-
ence, 52(10): 797-812.
Weeber, M., Klein, H., Aronson, A.R., Mork, J.G., Jong-
van den Berg, L., & Vos, R. (2000). Text-based dis-
covery in biomedicine: the architecture of the DAD-
system. In: Proceedings of AMIA, the Annual Con-
ference of the American Medical Informatics Associa-
tion, November 4-8, 2000, 903-907.
Weeber, M., Klein, H., Berg, L., & Vos, R. 2001.
Using concepts in literature-based discovery: Sim-
ulating Swanson?s Raynaud-Fish Oil and Migraine-
Magnesium discoveries. Journal of the American So-
ciety for Information Science, 52(7):548-557.
Weeber, M., Vos, R., Klein, H., de Jong-Van den Berg,
L.T.W., Aronson, A & Molema, G. 2003. Generating
hypotheses by discovering implicit associations in the
literature: A case report for new potential therapeutic
uses for Thalidomide. Journal of the American Medi-
cal Informatics Association, 10(3): 252-259.
