Word Sense Induction:
Triplet-Based Clustering and Automatic Evaluation
Stefan Bordag
Natural Language Processing Department
University of Leipzig
Germany
sbordag@informatik.uni-leipzig.de
Abstract
In this paper a novel solution to auto-
matic and unsupervised word sense induc-
tion (WSI) is introduced. It represents an
instantiation of the ?one sense per colloca-
tion? observation (Gale et al, 1992). Like
most existing approaches it utilizes clus-
tering of word co-occurrences. This ap-
proach differs from other approaches to
WSI in that it enhances the effect of the
one sense per collocation observation by
using triplets of words instead of pairs.
The combination with a two-step cluster-
ing process using sentence co-occurrences
as features allows for accurate results. Ad-
ditionally, a novel and likewise automatic
and unsupervised evaluation method in-
spired by Schu?tze?s (1992) idea of evalu-
ation of word sense disambiguation algo-
rithms is employed. Offering advantages
like reproducability and independency of
a given biased gold standard it also en-
ables automatic parameter optimization of
the WSI algorithm.
1 Introduction
The aim of word sense induction1 (WSI) is to find
senses of a given target word (Yarowski, 1995)
automatically and if possible in an unsupervised
manner. WSI is akin to word sense disambiguation
(WSD) both in methods employed and in prob-
lems encountered, such as vagueness of sense dis-
tinctions (Kilgarriff, 1997). The input to a WSI al-
gorithm is a target word to be disambiguated, e.g.
1Sometimes called word sense discovery (Dorow and
Widdows, 2003) or word sense discrimination (Purandare,
2004; Velldal, 2005)
space, and the output is a number of word sets rep-
resenting the various senses, e.g. (3-dimensional,
expanse, locate) and (office, building, square).
Such results can be at the very least used as empir-
ically grounded suggestions for lexicographers or
as input for WSD algorithms. Other possible uses
include automatic thesaurus or ontology construc-
tion, machine translation or information retrieval.
But the usefulness of WSI in real-world applica-
tions has yet to be tested and proved.
2 Related work
A substantial number of different approaches to
WSI has been proposed so far. They are all based
on co-occurrence statistics, albeit using differ-
ent context representations such as co-occurrence
of words within phrases (Pantel and Lin, 2002;
Dorow and Widdows, 2003; Velldal, 2005), bi-
grams (Schu?tze, 1998; Neill, 2002; Udani et al,
2005), small windows around a word (Gauch and
Futrelle, 1993), or larger contexts such as sen-
tences (Bordag, 2003; Rapp, 2004) or large win-
dows of up to 20 words (Ferret, 2004). Moreover
they all employ clustering methods to partition the
co-occurring words into sets describing concepts
or senses. Some algorithms aim for a global clus-
tering of words into concepts (Yarowski, 1995;
Pantel and Lin, 2002; Velldal, 2005). But the ma-
jority of algorithms are based on a local cluster-
ing: Words co-occurring with the target word are
grouped into the various senses the target word
has. It is not immediately clear which approach
to favor, however aiming at global senses has the
inherent property to produce a uniform granular-
ity of distinctions between senses that might not
be desired (Rapp, 2004).
Graph-based algorithms differ from the ma-
jority of algorithms in several aspects. Words
137
can be taken as nodes and co-occurrence of two
words defines an edge between the two respec-
tive nodes. Activation spreading on the resulting
graph can be employed (Barth, 2004) in order to
obtain most distinctly activated areas in the vicin-
ity of the target word. It is also possible to use
graph-based clustering techniques to obtain sense
representations based on sub-graph density mea-
sures (Dorow and Widdows, 2003; Bordag, 2003).
However, it is not yet clear, whether this kind of
approach differs qualitatively from the standard
clustering approaches. Generally though, the no-
tion of sub-graph density seems to be more intu-
itive compared to the more abstract clustering.
There are different types of polysemy, the
most significant distinction probably being be-
tween syntactic classes of the word (e.g. to plant
vs. a plant) and conceptually different senses (e.g.
power plant vs. green plant). As known from
work on unsupervised part-of-speech tagging (Ro-
hwer and Freitag, 2004; Rapp, 2005), the size of
the window in which words will be found simi-
lar to the target word plays a decisive role. Us-
ing most significant direct neighbours as context
representations to compare words results in pre-
dominantly syntactical similarity to be found. On
the other hand, using most significant sentence co-
occurrences results in mostly semantical similarity
(Curran, 2003). However, whereas various context
representations, similarity measures and cluster-
ing methods have already been compared against
each other (Purandare, 2004), there is no evidence
so far, whether the various window sizes or other
parameters have influence on the type of ambigu-
ity found, see also (Manning and Schu?tze, 1999,
p. 259).
Pantel & Lin (2002) introduced an evalua-
tion method based on comparisons of the ob-
tained word senses with senses provided in Word-
Net. This method has been successfully used by
other authors as well (Purandare, 2004; Ferret,
2004) because it is straightforward and produces
intuitive numbers that help to directly estimate
whether the output of a WSI algorithm is mean-
ingful. On the other hand, any gold standard such
asWordNet is biased and hence also lacks domain-
specific sense definitions while providing an abun-
dance of sense definitions that occur too rarely in
most corpora. For example in the British National
Corpus (BNC), the sense #2 of MALE ([n] the
capital of Maldives) from WordNet is represented
by a single sentence only. Furthermore, compar-
ing results of an algorithm to WordNet automat-
ically implies another algorithm that matches the
found senses with the senses in WordNet. This is
very similar to the task of WSD and therefore can
be assumed to be similarly error prone. These rea-
sons have led some researchers to opt for a man-
ual evaluation of their algorithms (Neill, 2002;
Rapp, 2004; Udani et al, 2005). Manual evalu-
ation, however, has its own disadvantages, most
notably the poor reproducability of results. In this
work a pseudoword based evaluation method simi-
lar to Schu?tze?s (1992) pseudoword method is em-
ployed. It is automatic, easy to reproduce and
adapts well to domain specificity of a given cor-
pus.
3 Triplet-based algorithm
The algorithm proposed in this work is based on
the one sense per collocation observation (Gale
et al, 1992). That essentially means that when-
ever a pair of words co-occurs significantly of-
ten in a corpus (hence a collocation), the con-
cept referenced by that pair is unambiguous, e.g.
growing plant vs. power plant. However, as
also pointed out by Yarowsky (1995), this ob-
servation does not hold uniformly over all possi-
ble co-occurrences of two words. It is stronger
for adjacent co-occurrences or for word pairs in a
predicate-argument relationship than for arbitrary
associations at equivalent distance, e.g. a plant
is much less clear-cut. To alleviate this problem,
the first step of the presented algorithm is to build
triplets of words (target word and two of it?s co-
occurrences) instead of pairs (target word and one
co-occurrence). This means that a plant is further
restricted by another word and even a stop word
such as on rules several possibilities of interpreta-
tion of a plant out or at least makes them a lot less
improbable.
The algorithm was applied to two types of co-
occurrence data. In order to show the influence of
window size, both the most significant sentence-
wide co-occurrences and direct neighbour co-
occurrences were computed for each word. The
significance values are obtained using the log-
likelihood measure assuming a binomial distrib-
ution for the unrelatedness hypothesis (Dunning,
1993). For each word, only the 200 most signifi-
cant co-occurrences were kept. This threshold and
all others to follow were chosen after experiment-
138
ing with the algorithm. However, as will be shown
in section 4, the exact set-up of these numbers
does not matter. The presented evaluation method
enables to find the optimal configuration of para-
meters automatically using a genetic algorithm.
The core assumption of the triplet-based al-
gorithm is, that any three (or more) words ei-
ther uniquely identify a topic, concept or sense.
Using the previously acquired most significant
co-occurrences (of both types), the lists of co-
occurrences for all three words of a triplet are
intersected to retain words contained in all three
lists. If the three words cover a topic, e.g. space,
NASA, Mars, then the intersection will not be
empty, e.g. launch, probe, cosmonaut, .... If the
three words do not identify a meaningful topic,
e.g. space, NASA, cupboard, then the intersection
will most likely contain few to no words at all. In-
tersections of triplets built from function words are
very likely to contain many co-occurrences even
if they do not identify a unique topic. These so-
called ?stop words? are thus removed both from the
co-occurrences from which triplets are built and
from the co-occurrences which are used as fea-
tures.
It is straightforward then to create all possible
triplets of the co-occurrences of the target word
w and to compute the intersection of their co-
occurrence lists. Using these intersections as fea-
tures of the triplets, it is possible to group triplets
of words together that have similar features by
means of any standard clustering algorithm. How-
ever, in order to ?tie? the referenced meanings of
the triplets to the target word w, the resulting
set of triplets can be restricted only to those that
also contain the target word. This has the useful
side-effect that it reduces the number of triplets
to cluster. To further reduce the remaining num-
ber of
(200
2
)
= 19900 items to be clustered, an
iterative incremental windowing mechanism has
been added. Instead of clustering all triplets in
one step, 30 co-occurrences beginning from the
most significant ones are taken in each step to
build
(30
2
)
= 435 triplets and their intersections.
The resulting elements (triplets and intersections
of their respective co-occurrences as features) are
then clustered with the clusters remaining from the
previous step.
In each step of the clustering algorithm, the
words from the triplets and the features are
merged, if the overlap factor similarity measure
(Curran, 2003) found them to be similar enough
(over 80% overlapping words out of 200). Thus, if
the element (space, NASA, Mars) : (orbital, satel-
lite, astronauts,...) and (space, launch, Mars) :
(orbit, satellite, astronaut, ...) were found to be
similar, they are merged to (space=2, NASA=1,
Mars=1, launch=1) : (orbital=1, satellite=2, as-
tronauts=1, orbit=1, astronaut=1, ...). Since the
measure utilizes only the features for comparisons,
the result can contain two or more clusters having
almost identical key sets (which result from merg-
ing triplets). A post-clustering step is therefore
applied in order to compare clusters by the for-
merly triplet words and merge spurious sense dis-
tinctions. After having thus established the final
clusters, the words that remain unclustered can be
classified to the resulting clusters. Classification
is performed by comparing the co-occurrences of
each remaining word to the agglomerated feature
words of each sense. If the overlap similarity to
the most similar sense is below 0.8 the given word
is not classified. The entire cluster algorithm can
then be summarized as follows:
? Target word is w
? for each step take the next 30 co-occurrences
of w
? Build all possible pairs of the 30 co-
occurrences and add w to each to make
them triplets
? Compute intersections of co-
occurrences of each triplet
? Cluster the triplets using their intersec-
tions as features together with clusters
remaining from previous step
? Whenever two clusters are found
to belong together, both the words
from the triplets and the features
are merged together, increasing their
counts
? Cluster results of the loop by using the
merged words of the triplets as features
? Classify unused words to the resulting clus-
ters if possible
In order to reduce noise, for example introduced
by triplets of unrelated words still containing a few
words, there is a threshold of minimum intersec-
tion size which was set to 4. Another parameter
139
worth mentioning is that after the last clustering
step all clusters are removed which contain less
than 8 words. Keeping track of how many times
a given word has ?hit? a certain cluster (in each
merging step) enables to add a post-processing
step. In this step a word is removed from a clus-
ter if it has ?hit? another cluster significantly more
often.
There are several issues and open questions that
arise from this entire approach. Most obviously,
why to use a particular similarity measure, a par-
ticular clustering method or why to merge the vec-
tors instead of creating proper centroids. It is pos-
sible that another combination of decisions of this
kind would produce better results. However, the
overall observation is that the results are fairly sta-
ble with respect to such decisions whereas para-
meters such as frequency of the target word, size
of the corpus, balance of the various senses and
others have a much greater impact.
4 Evaluation
Schu?tze (1992) introduced a pseudoword-based
evaluation method for WSD algorithms. The idea
is to take two arbitrarily chosen words like ba-
nana and door and replace all occurrences of ei-
ther word by the new pseudoword bananadoor.
Then WSD is applied to each sentence and the
amount of correctly disambiguated sentences is
measured. A disambiguation in this case is cor-
rect, if the sentence like I ate the banana is as-
signed to sense #1 (banana) instead of #2 (door).
In other words all sentences where one of the two
words occurs are viewed as one set and the WSD
algorithm is then supposed to sort them correctly
apart. This, in fact, is very similar to the WSI
task, which is supposed to sort the set of words
apart that co-occur with the target word and refer
to its different meanings. Thus, again it is possible
to take two words, view their co-occurrences as
one set and let the WSI algorithm sort them apart.
For example, the word banana might have co-
occurrences such as apple, fruit, coconut, ... and
the word door co-occurrences such as open, front,
locked, .... The WSI algorithm would therefore
have to disambiguate the pseudoword bananadoor
with the co-occurrences apple, open, fruit, front,
locked, ....
In short, the method merges the co-occurrences
of two words into one set of words. Then, the WSI
algorithm is applied to that set of co-occurrences
and the evaluation measures the result by compar-
ing it to the original co-occurrence sets. In order to
find out whether a given sense has been correctly
identified by the WSI algorithm, its retrieval pre-
cision (rP ) - the similarity of the found sense
with the original sense using the overlap measure
- can be computed. In the present evaluations, the
threshold of 0.6 was chosen, which means that at
least 60% of words of the found sense must over-
lap with the original sense in order to be counted as
a correctly found sense. The average numbers of
similarity are much higher, ranging between 85%
and 95%.
It is further informative to measure retrieval re-
call (rR) - the amount of words that have been
correctly retrieved into the correct sense. If, e.g.,
two words are merged into a pseudoword and the
meaning of each of these two words is represented
by 200 co-occurring words, then it could happen
that one of the senses has been correctly found by
the WSI algorithm containing 110 words with an
overlap similarity of 0.91. That means that only
100 words representing the original sense were re-
trieved, resulting in a 50% retrieval recall. This
retrieval recall also has an upper bound for two
reasons. The average overlap ratio of the co-
occurrences of the word pairs used for the evalua-
tion was 3.6%. Another factor lowering the upper
bound by an unknown amount is the fact that some
of the words are ambiguous. If the algorithm cor-
rectly finds different senses of one of the two orig-
inal words, then only one of the found senses will
be chosen to represent the original ?meaning? of
the original word. All words assigned to the other
sense are lost to the other sense.
Using terms from information retrieval makes
sense because this task can be reformulated as fol-
lows: Given a set of 400 words and one out of sev-
eral word senses, try to retrieve all words belong-
ing to that sense (retrieval recall) without retriev-
ing any wrong ones (retrieval precision). A sense
is then defined as correctly found by the WSI al-
gorithm, if its retrieval precision is above 60% and
retrieval recall above 25%. The latter number im-
plies that at least 50 words have to be retrieved
correctly since the initial co-occurrence sets con-
tained 200 words. This also assumes that 50 words
would be sufficient to characterize a sense if the
WSI algorithm is not only used to evaluate itself.
The reason to set the minimum retrieval precision
to any value above 50% is to avoid a too strong
140
baseline, see below.
Using these prerequisites it is possible to define
precision and recall (based on retrieval precision
and retrieval recall) which will be used to measure
the quality of the WSI algorithm.
Precision (P ) is defined as the number of times
the original co-occurrence sets are properly re-
stored divided by the number of different sets
found. Precision has therefore an unknown upper
bound below 100%, because any two words cho-
sen could be ambiguous themselves. Thus, if the
algorithm finds three meanings of the pseudoword
that might be because one of the two words was
ambiguous and had two meanings, and hence pre-
cision will only be 66%, although the algorithm
operated flawlessly.
Recall (R) is defined as the number of senses
found divided by the number of words merged to
create the pseudoword. For example, recall is 60%
if five words are used to create the pseudoword,
but only three senses were found correctly (ac-
cording to retrieval precision and retrieval recall).
There is at least one possible baseline for the
four introduced measures. One is an algorithm
that does nothing, resulting in a single set of 400
co-occurrences of the pseudo-word. This set has
a retrieval Precision rP of 50% compared to ei-
ther of the two original ?senses? because for any of
the two senses only half of the ?retrieved? words
match. This is below the allowed 60% and thus
does not count as a correctly found sense. This
means that also retrieval Recall rR, Recall R are
both 0% and Precision P in such a case (noth-
ing correctly retrieved, but also nothing wrong re-
trieved) is defined to be 100%.
As mentioned in the previous sections, there are
several parameters that have a strong impact on
the quality of a WSI algorithm. One interesting
question is, whether the quality of disambigua-
tion depends on the type of ambiguity: Would
the WSI based on sentence co-occurrences (and
hence on the bag-of-words model) produce bet-
ter results for two syntactically different senses or
for two senses differing by topic (as predicted by
Schu?tze (1992)). This can be simulated by choos-
ing two words of different word classes to create
the pseudoword, such as the (dominantly) noun
committee and the (dominantly) verb accept.
Another interesting question concerns the influ-
ence of frequency of either the word itself or the
sense to be found. The latter, for example, can
be simulated by choosing one high-frequent word
and one low-frequent word, thus representing a
well-represented vs. a poorly represented sense.
The aim of the evaluation is to test the described
parameters and produce an overall average of pre-
cision and recall and at the same time make it com-
pletely reproducable by third parties. Therefore
the raw BNCwithout baseform reduction (because
lemmatization introduces additional ambiguity) or
POS-tags was used and nine groups each contain-
ing five words were picked semi-randomly (avoid-
ing extremely ambiguous words, with respect to
WordNet, if possible):
? high frequent nouns (Nh): picture, average,
blood, committee, economy
? medium frequent nouns (Nm): disintegra-
tion, substrate, emigration, thirst, saucepan
? low frequent nouns (Nl): paratuberculosis,
gravitation, pharmacology, papillomavirus,
sceptre
? high frequent verbs (Vh): avoid, accept, walk,
agree, write
? medium frequent verbs (Vm): rend, confine,
uphold, evoke, varnish
? low frequent verbs (Vl): immerse, disengage,
memorize, typify, depute
? high frequent adjectives (Ah): useful, deep,
effective, considerable, traditional
? medium frequent adjectives (Am): ferocious,
normative, phenomenal, vibrant, inactive
? low frequent adjectives (Al): astrological,
crispy, unrepresented, homoclinic, bitchy
These nine groups were used to design fours
tests, each focussing on a different variable. The
high frequent nouns are around 9000 occurrences,
medium frequent around 300 and low frequent
around 50.
4.1 Influence of word class and frequency
In the first run of all four tests, sentence co-
occurrences were used as features. In the first
test, all words of equal word class were viewed
as one set of 15 words. This results in
(15
2
)
= 105
possibilities to combine two of these words into
141
a pseudoword and test the results of the WSI al-
gorithm. The purpose of this test is to examine
whether there is a tendency for senses of certain
word classes to be easier induced. As can be seen
from Table 1, sense induction of verbs using sen-
tence co-occurrences performs worse compared to
nouns. This could be explained by the fact that
verbs are less semantically specific and need more
syntactic cues or generalizations - both hardly cov-
ered by the underlying bag-of-words model - in
order to be disambiguated properly. At the same
time, nouns and adjectives are much better dis-
tinguishable by topical key words. These results
seem to be in unison with the prediction made by
Schu?tze (1992).
P R rP rR
Nhml 86.97% 86.67% 90.94% 64.21%
Vhml 78.32% 64.29% 80.23% 55.20%
Ahml 88.57% 70.95% 87.96% 65.38%
Table 1: Influence of the syntactic class of the in-
put word in Test 1. Showing precision P and re-
call R, as well as average retrieval precision rP
and recall rR.
In the second test, all three types of possible
combinations of the word classes are tested, i.e.
pseudowords consisting of a noun and a verb, a
nouns and an adjective and a verb with an adjec-
tive. For each combination there are 15 ? 15 = 225
possibilities of combining a word from one word
class with a word from another word class. The
purpose of this test was to demonstrate possible
differences between WSI of different word class
combinations. This corresponds to cases when one
word form can be both a nound and a verb, e.g. a
walk and to walk or a noun and an adjective, for
example a nice color and color TV. However, the
results in Table 2 show no clear tendencies other
than perhaps that WSI of adjectival senses from
verb senses seems to be slightly more difficult.
P R rP rR
N/V 86.58% 77.11% 90.51% 61.87%
N/A 90.87% 78.00% 90.36% 66.75%
V/A 80.84% 63.56% 81.98% 60.89%
Table 2: Influence of the syntactic classes of the
senses to be found in Test 2.
The third test was designed to show the in-
fluence of frequency of the input word. All
words of equal frequency are taken as one group
with
(15
2
)
= 105 possible combinations. The re-
sults in Table 3 show a clear tendency for higher-
frequent word combinations to achieve a better
quality of WSI over lower frequency words. The
steep performance drop in recall becomes imme-
diately clear when looking at the retrieval recall
of the found senses. This is not surprising, since
with the low frequency words, each occuring only
about 50 times in the BNC, the algorithm runs into
the data sparseness problem that has already been
pointed out as problematic for WSI (Ferret, 2004).
P R rP rR
high 93.65% 78.10% 90.25% 80.70%
med. 84.59% 85.24% 89.91% 54.55%
low 74.76% 49.52% 71.01% 41.66%
Table 3: Influence of frequency of the input word
in Test 3.
The fourth test finally shows which influence
the overrepresentation of one sense over another
has on WSI. For this purpose, three possible com-
binations of frequency classes, high-frequent
with middle, high with low and middle with low-
frequent words were created with 15 ? 15 = 225
possible word pairs. Table 4 demonstrates a steep
drop in recall whenever a low-frequent word is
part of the pseudoword. This reflects the fact that
it is more difficult for the algorithm to find the
sense that was represented by the less frequent
word. The unusually high precision value for the
high/low combination can be explained by the fact
that in this case mostly only one sense was found
(the one of the frequent word). Therefore recall is
close to 50% whereas precision is closer to 100%.
P R rP rR
h/m 86.43% 79.56% 92.72% 72.08%
h/l 91.19% 67.78% 90.85% 74.52%
m/l 82.33% 74.00% 85.29% 49.87%
Table 4: Influence of different representation of
senses based on frequency of the two constituents
of the pseudoword in Test 4.
Finally it is possible to provide the averages for
the entire test runs comprising 1980 tests. The
macro averages over all tests are P = 85.42%,
R = 72.90%, rP = 86.83% and rR = 62.30%,
the micro averages are almost the same. Using the
same thresholds but only pairs instead of triplets
142
results in P = 91.00%, R = 60.40%, rP =
83.94% and rR = 62.58%. Or in other words,
more often only one sense is retrieved and the F-
measures of F = 78.66% for triplets compared to
F = 72.61% for pairs confirm an improvement by
6% by using triplets.
4.2 Window size
The second run of all four tests using direct neigh-
bors as features failed due to the data sparse-
ness problem. There were 17.5 million word
pairs co-occurring significantly within sentences
in the BNC according to the log-likelihood mea-
sure used. Even there, words with low frequency
showed a strong performance loss as compared to
the high-frequent words. Compared to that there
were only 2.3 million word pairs co-occurring di-
rectly next to each other. The overall results of
the second run with macro averages P = 56.01%,
R = 40.64%, rP = 54.28% and rR = 26.79%
will not be reiterated here in detail because they
are highly inconclusive due to the data sparseness.
The inconclusiveness derives from the fact that
contrary to the results of the first run, the results
here vary strongly for various parameter settings
and cannot be considered as stable.
Although these results are insufficient to show
the influence of context representations on the type
of induced senses as they were supposed to, they
allow several other insights. Firstly, corpus size
does obviously matter for WSI as more data would
probably have alleviated the sparseness problem.
Secondly, while perhaps one context representa-
tion might be theoretically superior to another
(such as neighbor co-occurrences vs. sentence
co-occurrences), the effect various representations
have on the data richness were by far stronger in
the presented tests.
4.3 Examples
In the light of rather abstract, pseudoword-based
evaluations some real examples sometimes help
to reduce the abstractness of the presented results.
Three words, sheet, line and space were chosen ar-
bitrarily and some words representing the induced
senses are listed below.
? sheet
? beneath, blank, blanket, blotting, bot-
tom, canvas, cardboard
? accounts, amount, amounts, asset, as-
sets, attributable, balance
? line
? angle, argument, assembly, axis, bot-
tom, boundary, cell, circle, column
? lines, link, locomotive, locomotives,
loop, metres, mouth, north, parallel
? space
? astronaut, launch, launched, manned,
mission, orbit, rocket, satellite
? air, allocated, atmosphere, blank,
breathing, buildings, ceiling, confined
These examples show that the found differentia-
tions between senses of words indeed are intuitive.
They also show that the found senses are only the
most distinguishable ones and many futher senses
are missing even though they do appear in the
BNC, some of them even frequently. It seems
that for finer grained distinctions the bag-of-words
model is not appropriate, although it might prove
to be sufficient for other applications such as In-
formation Retrieval. Varying contextual represen-
tations might prove to be complementary to the ap-
proach presented here and enable the detection of
syntactic differences or collocational usages of a
word.
5 Conclusions
It has been shown that the approach presented in
this work enables automatic and knowledge-free
word sense induction on a given corpus with high
precision and sufficient recall values. The induced
senses of the words are inherently domain-specific
to the corpus used. Furthermore, the induced
senses are only the most apparent ones while the
type of ambiguity matters less than expected. But
there is a clear preference for topical distinctions
over syntactic ambiguities. The latter effect is
due to the underlying bag-of-words model, hence
alternative contextual representations might yield
different (as opposed to better/worse) results. This
bag-of-words limitation also implies some senses
to be found that would be considered as spurious
in other circumstances. For example, the word
challenger induces 5 senses, three of them de-
scribing the opponent in a game. The differences
found are strong, however, as the senses distin-
guished are between a chess-challenger, a Grand
Prix challenger and a challenger in boxing, each
have a large set of specific words distinguishing
the senses.
143
There are several questions that remain open.
As the frequency of a word has a great impact
on the possibility to disambiguate it correctly us-
ing the presented methods, the question is to what
extent corpus size plays a role in this equation as
compared to balancedness of the corpus and there-
fore the senses to be found. Another question is
connected to the limitation of the presented algo-
rithm which requires that any sense to be induced
has to be representable by a rather large amount of
words. The question then is, whether this (or any
other similar) algorithm can be improved to dis-
cern ?small? senses from random noise. A com-
bination with algorithms finding collocational us-
ages of words probably offers a feasible solution.
The evaluation method employed can be used
for automatic optimization of the algorithm?s own
parameters using genetic algorithms. Moreover, it
would be interesting to employ genetic program-
ming in order to let an optimal word sense induc-
tion algorithm design itself.
References
Michael Barth. 2004. Extraktion von Textele-
menten mittels ?spreading activation? fu?r indikative
Textzusammenfassungen. Master?s thesis, Univer-
sity of Leipzig.
Stefan Bordag. 2003. Sentence co-occurrences as
small-world-graphs: A solution to automatic lexi-
cal disambiguation. In Proceedings of CICling-03,
LNCS 2588, pages 329?333. Springer.
James Richard Curran. 2003. From Distributional to
Semantic Similarity. Ph.D. thesis, Institute for Com-
municating and Collaborative Systems, School of
Informatics. University of Edinburgh.
Beate Dorow and Dominic Widdows. 2003. Discover-
ing corpus-specific word senses. In Proceedings of
EACL 2003, pages 79?82, Budapest, Hungary.
Ted E. Dunning. 1993. Accurate methods for the sta-
tistics of surprise and coincidence. Computational
Linguistics, 19(1):61?74.
Olivier Ferret. 2004. Discovering word senses from
a network of lexical cooccurrences. In Proceedings
of Coling 2004, pages 1326?1332, Geneva, Switzer-
land, August.
William Gale, Kenneth Ward Church, and David
Yarowsky. 1992. Work on statistical methods for
word sense disambiguation. Intelligent Probabilis-
tic Approaches to Natural Language, Fall Sympo-
sium Series(FS-92-04):54?60, March.
Susan Gauch and Robert P. Futrelle. 1993. Experi-
ments in automatic word class and word sense iden-
tification for information retrieval. In Proceedings
of 3rd Annual Symposium on Document Analysis
and Information Retrieval, pages 425?434.
Adam Kilgarriff. 1997. I don?t believe in word senses.
Computers and the Humanities, 31(2):91?113.
Christopher D. Manning and Hinrich Schu?tze. 1999.
Foundations of Statistical Natural Language
Processing. MIT Press.
Daniel B. Neill. 2002. Fully automatic word sense
induction by semantic clustering. Master?s thesis,
Cambridge University.
Patrick Pantel and Dekang Lin. 2002. Discovering
word senses from text. In Proceedings of ACM
SIGKDD, pages 613?619, Edmonton.
Amruta Purandare. 2004. Word sense discrimina-
tion by clustering similarity contexts. Master?s the-
sis, Department of Computer Science, University of
Minnesota, Duluth.
Reinhard Rapp. 2004. Mining text for word senses
using independent component analysis. In Pro-
ceedings of SIAM International Conference on Data
Mining 2004.
Reinhard Rapp. 2005. A practical solution to the prob-
lem of automatic part-of-speech induction from text.
In Proceedings of the ACL Interactive Poster and
Demonstration Sessions, pages 77?80, Ann Arbor,
June. ACL.
Richard Rohwer and Dayne Freitag. 2004. Towards
full automation of lexicon construction. In Proceed-
ings of HLT-NAACL 04: Computational Lexical Se-
mantics Workshop, Boston, MA.
Hinrich Schu?tze. 1992. Context space. In Working
Notes of the AAAI Fall Symposium on Probabilistic
Approaches to Natural Language, pages 113?120,
Menlo Park, CA. AAAI Press.
Hinrich Schu?tze. 1998. Automatic word sense dis-
crimination. Computational Linguistics, 24:97?124.
Goldee Udani, Shachi Dave, Anthony Davis, and Tim
Sibley. 2005. Noun sense induction using web
search results. In Proceedings of 28th ACM SIGIR,
pages 657?658, Salvador, Brazil.
Erik Velldal. 2005. A fuzzy clustering approach to
word sense discrimination. In Proceedings of the
7th International conference on Terminology and
Knowledge Engineering, Copenhagen, Denmark.
David Yarowski. 1995. Unsupervised word sense
disambiguation rivaling supervised methods. ACL,
33:189?196.
144
