You'll Take the High Road and I'll Take the Low Road: 
Using a Third Language to hnprove Bilingual Word Alignment 
Lars Borin 
Department of Linguistics, Uppsala University 
Box 527 
SE-751 20 Uppsala, Sweden 
Lars.Borin@ling.uu.se 
Abstract 
While language-independent selztence align- 
ment programs typically achieve a recall in the 
90 percent range, tile same cannot be said about 
word alignment systems, where normal recall 
figures tend to fall somewhere between 20 and 
40 percent, in tile language-indepeudent case. 
As words (and phrases) for wlrious reasons 
are more interesting to align than sentences, 
we need methods to increase word alignment 
recall, preferably without sacrificing precision. 
This paper reports on a series of experiments 
with pivot aligtunent, which is tile use of one or 
more additional hmguages to improve bilingual 
word aligment. Tile conclusion is that in a 
multilingual parallel corpus, pivot alignment is 
a safe way to iucrcase word alignment recall 
without lowering the precision. 
1 Introduction 
For about a decade and a half now, researchers 
in Natural language processing (NLP) and 
general and applied linguistics have been 
working with parallel corpora, i.e., in the 
prototypical case corpora consisting of original 
texts in some soume language (SL) together 
with their translations into one oi" more target 
hmguages (TL). In general linguistics, they 
are used--in tile same fashion as monolingual 
corpora--as handy sources of authentic 
language. In computational linguistics and 
hmguage engineering, various methods for 
(semi-)automatic extraction from such corpora 
of, among others, translation equiwdents, have 
been explored. 
2 Why is word alignment more 
interesting and why is it difficult? 
Alignment--tile explicit linking of items in the 
SL and TL texts judged to correspond to each 
other~is a prerequisite for the extraction of 
translation cquiwdents fi'om parallel corpora, 
and tile granularity of tile alignment naturally 
determines what kind of translation units you 
can get out of these resources. With sentence 
aligmnent, you get data which can be used 
in, e.g., translation memories. If you want 
to build bi- or multilingual lexica for machine 
translation systems (or for people), however, 
you want to be able to align parallel texts on 
the word (and phrase) level. This is because, 
in the last two decades, NLP grammars 
havc become increasingly lexicalized, and 
granlnlars 1'o1" machine translation--as opposed 
to translation melnories, or example-based 
machine translation, neither of which uses 
a grammar in any interesting sense of tile 
word--forna no exception in this regard. 
The entries of tile lexicon, which is the 
major repository of linguistic knowledge in 
a lexicalized gramnlar, are mainly made up 
of units oil tile linguistic levels of words and 
phrases. 
The problem here is that sentence alignment 
is a fairly well-understood problem, but 
word alignment is much less so. This means 
that while language-independent sentence 
alignment programs typically achieve a recall 
in the 90 percent range, the same cannot be said 
about word alignment systems, where nornml 
recall ligures tend to fall somewhere between 
20 and 40 percent, in the language-independent 
case. Thus, we need methods to increase word 
alignment recall, preferably without sacrificing 
97 
precision. 
There are many conceivable reasons for word 
alignment being less 'effective' than sentence 
alignment. Different language structures 
ensure that words comparatively more seldom 
stand in a one-to-one relationship between the 
languages in a parallel text, because, e.g., 
? SL function words may correspond to 
TL grammatical structural features, i.e. 
morphology or syntax, or even to nothing 
at all, if the TL happens not to express 
the feature in question. At the same 
time, function words tend to display a 
high type frequency, both because of high 
functional oad (i.e., they are needed all 
over the place) and because they tend to 
be uninflected (i.e. each function word 
is typically represented by one text word 
type, while content words tend to appear 
in several inflectional variants). This of 
course means that function words will 
account for a relatively large share of 
the differences in recall figures between 
sentence and word alignment; 
? orthographic conventions may disagree on 
where word divisions should be written, 
as when compounds are written as several 
words in English, but as single words 
in German or Swedish, the extreme case 
being that some orthographies get alng 
entirely without word divisions; 
? word alignment must by necessity 
(because word orders differ between 
languages) work with word types rather 
than with word tokens, while sentence 
I Alignment recall is here understood as the number 
of units aligned by the alignment program divided by 
the total number of correct alignments (established by 
independent means, normally by human annotation). 
Precisiolz is the number of correct alignments (again 
established by independent means) divided by the 
number o1' units aligned by the alignment program (i.e., 
the numerator in the recall calculation). We will not in 
this paper go into a discussion of null alignments ( ource 
language units having no correspondence in the target 
language xpression) or partial alignments (part, but not 
all, of a phrase aligned), as we believe that he results we 
present here are not dependent on a particular treatment 
of thcse--admiuedly troublesome--phenomena. 
alignment always works with sentence 
tokens, 2 i.e., it relies on linear order. 
This means that polysemy (one type 
in the SL corresponding to several 
types in the TL), homonymy (several 
types in the SL corresponding to one 
type in the TL), and combinations of 
polysemy and homonymy will disrupt he 
correspondence even between structurally 
similar languages; 
Thus, the circumstance that linear order 
cannot be used to constrain word alignment 
- -beyond the restriction that putative word 
alignments must appear in one and the 
same sentence alignment unit--together with 
the other factors .just mentioned, conspire 
to make word alignment a much harder 
problem than sentence alignment in the 
language-independent case. 3 
3 Improving word alignment by 
combining knowledge sources 
The project in which the research reported 
here has been carried out, the ETAP project 
(see section 8, below), is a parallel translation 
corpus project, the aim of which is to create 
an annotated--understood as part-of-speech 
(POS) tagged and aligned--multi l ingual 
translation corpus, which will be used as the 
basis for the development of methods and 
tools for the automatic extraction of translation 
equivalents. 
Lately, we have been concentrating on 
finding good ways to improve word alignment. 
Tile word alignment system we currently use 
(which was developed in a sister project 
in our depamnent, the PLUG project; see 
Sfigvall Hein (to appear)) works itel'atively 
with many kinds of information sources, and 
it seems that this is a good way to proceed. 
Distributional parallelism, coocurrence, string 
2In parallel corpus alignment, hat is, but not e.g. in 
searching intranslation memories. 
3We must stress that we are talking about the 
la,guage-i, dependellt case here. For any particular 
language pair, language-specific linguistic (and possibly 
other) information can be used to improve both sentence 
and word alignment, although the former will probably 
still stay ahead of the latter in terms of perfor,nance. 
98 
similarity (both between and within languages), 
and part of speech are some of the information 
sources used, and also (heuristically based) 
stemming to increase type frequencies for the 
distributional measures (see, e.g. Tiedemann 
(to appear a), Tiedemann (to appear b); 
Molamed (1995), Melamed (1998)). 111 OUl" 
work in the ETAP proiect we are looking for 
additional such information sources, and so far 
we have coricoiltratod our ell:errs ori oxploririg 
linguistically rich information, such as word 
similarity (Berth, 1998) and the combination 
Of word alignlllent and POS taggillg (Borill, to 
appear a). 
There must certainly exist other sources of 
information, in addition t:o those mentioned 
above, lhat carl be used to ilnprovo word 
alignlnent. This paper discusses one particular 
such source, namely the use of a third hlnguage 
in the aligmnent process. Apart fronl an earlier 
presentation by the present author (Berth, to 
appear b), I have not seen any mention in 
the literature of the possibility of using a 
third language in this way for improving word 
alignmorit. Simard (1999) describes how the 
use of a third language can be brought to 
bear upon the simpler problem of senlence 
alignment, but he does not consider the harder 
problem of word alignmenl. Perhaps it has 
not being thought of for the silnplc reason that 
it is possible only with ###ulUlingual parallel 
corpora, and--for obvious reasons--not with 
b/lingual corpora, which has been the kind of 
parallel corpus that has received nlost attention 
from researchers in the field. 
4 Pivot alignment 
Since the third language acts as, as it were, 
a pivot for the alignment of the two other 
languages, we refer to the method as pivot 
alignment, and it works as follows, with three 
languages, e.g. Swedish (SE), Polish (PL) 
and Serbian-Bosnian-Croatian (SBC), where 
the aim is to align Swedish with the other two 
languages on the word level. 
. 
. 
. 
Perform the pairwise alignments SE-~PL, 
SE-->SBC, PL--->SBC, and SBC-oPL; 
Check whether there exist aligned 
words on the indirect 'alignment path '4 
SE-oSFJC-oPL, which are not on the 
direct path SE--->PL. If there are, add them 
to the SE-oPL alignnaents. 
Do the same for the indirect path 
SE-->PL-oSBC and the direct path 
SE-oSBC 
In order lor this procedure to work, we must 
believe that 
1. there will be differences in tile SE-+PL 
and SE--bSBC alignments, and 
2. that these dilTerenees will 'survive' the 
PI,---bSBC and SBC-->PL aligments. 5 
Hypothesis (1) seems plausible, since the 
word alignment system used (Tiedemann (to 
appear a), Tiedenlann (to appear b)) actually 
aheady utilizes several kinds of information 
to align the words in the two texts. In 
particuhu, it uses distributional information, 
cooccurrence statistics, iterative size reduction, 
'naive' stemming, and string simihuity to 
select arid rank word alignment carididates 
(but #*el linear order; cf. also section 3 
above). Thus it is fully conceiwtble, e.g., 
that distributional information will provide 
one o t' the links and word similarity the 
other in a three-language path, such as 
SE-->PL--->SBC, 6while synonymy or polysemy 
( i .e . ,  distributional differences; see above) will 
4It is this metaphor of the alignments going by 
different 'paths' or 'roads' to lhe salne goal which has 
inspired nle lo borrow the firsl part of the title of this 
paper frolll tile chorus of tile song "Loeb LolllOlld". 
5Incidentally, the indirect path could be extended 
with lilt)re lallgtlaoes, e.g. Swedish--> Polish--+ 
E,lglish-o Spanish, etc., but we have not investigated this 
possibility, although we explore the possibility of using 
several additional languages in parallel, below. 
6This is perhaps intuitively the most likely 
situation in this particular case, since Polish and 
Scrbian-Bosnian-Croatian are fairly closely rchlted 
Slavic languages lhat share many easily recognizable 
cognates, while both ~.ll'e lllHch lllOrc reinoiely related to 
Swedish 
99 
languages 
aligned 
se-sbc 
+ se-pl-sbc 
se-pl 
+ se-sbc-pl 
SO-OS 
+ se-en-es 
se-Oll 
+ se -os -0n  
found 
links 
82 
1 
83 
57 
4 
61 
87 
8 
95 
95 
4 
99 
links in recall 
standard 
429 19.11% 
19.35% 
370 15.41% 
16.49% 
454 19.16% 
20.92% 
442 21.49% 
22.40% 
correct partly not 
(C) con: (PC) con: 
57 17 8 
1 
58 17 8 
37 14 6 
4 
41 14 6 
65 14 8 
7 1 
72 14 9 
70 14 11 
2 2 
72 14 13 
precision, precision 
correct C + PC 
69.51% 90.24% 
69.88% 90.36% 
64.91% 89.47% 
67.21% 90.16% 
74.71% 90.80% 
75.79% 90.53% 
73.68% 88.42% 
72.73% 86.87% 
Table 1." First pivot alignment experiment results (null links in standard not counted) \[From Borin (to appear b)\] 
prevent he first link to be made on the direct 
path SE-+SBC. 
5 An experiment with pivot 
alignment 
In recent work (Borin, to appear b), we reported 
on a small preliminary experiment to test the 
feasibility of the method. We proceeded as 
follows: 
1. The ETAP IVTI corpus was used for 
the experiment. This is a five-language 
parallel translation corpus of text from 
the Swedish newspaper for immigrants 
(Invandrartidningen; the English version 
is called News and Views). Swedish 
is the source language, and the other 
four languages are English (EN), Polish, 
Serbian-Bosnian-Croatian and Spanish 
(ES). The IVTI corpus has roughly 
100,000 words of text in each language; 
2. The PLUG link annotator (Merkel (1999), 
Merkel et al (to appear )) was 
used to produce evaluation standards 
("gold standards") for the following 
alignment directions: SE-+PL, SE-+SBC, 
PL--+SBC, SBC---,'PL in one group, and 
SE-+EN, SE-+ES, EN--+ES, ES-+EN in 
the other. 500 words were sampled 
randomly fl'om the Swedish source text, 
and the standards with Swedish as the 
source were made manually by me from 
this sample. The target units of these 
. 
. 
standards were then used as the basis for 
the manual establishment (again by me) 
of the various target language alignment 
evaluation standards. Because of null 
links, misaligned or differently aligned 
sentences, etc., the size of the evaluation 
standards varied fi'om 366 to 500 words; 
In addition to the already word aligned 
SE--+{EN,ES,PL, SBC}, we aligned the 
other language pairs necessary for the 
experiment; 
The evaluation function in the aligmnent 
system was used to calculate recall and 
precision for each word alignment. In 
addition to this, we manually extracted 
the additional inks, if any, that would 
be found on the indirect path through the 
third language. 
The null links mentioned in (2) above were 
largely due to the sampling procedure choosing 
many function words, which often (also in this 
case) are troublesome in the context of finding 
good translation equivalents, since they may 
not correspond to words in the TL (see section 
2 above). 
The results of the preliminary experiment are 
shown in Table 1. 
We see that only a few units survived the 
trip through two languages, but out of those 
that did, most contributed positively to the 
total result. SE-+ES and SE-+PL were the 
alignments which benefitted most from pivot 
100 
languages 
aligned (standard) 
sc-pl (501 )
+ se-en-pl 
+ se-es-pl 
+ se-sbc-pl 
sc-cs (501) 
+ Se-OIl-CS 
+ se-i~l-es 
so-on (501) 
+ SC-eS-Cll 
+ se-pl-en 
se-sbc (501) 
+ sc-pl-sbc 
COI'I'{~Cg 
lillks 
112 
2 
2 
6 
167 
9 
6 
139 
7 
2 
137 
2 
Hot 
COITeCt 
11 
13 
I 
1 
12 
1 
accumttlated recall precision 
convct 
+2 
+2 
+5 
+9 
+9 
+3 
+12 
24.55% 
24.95% 
24.95% 
25.75% 
26.35% 
35.93% 
37.92 
37.13% 
38.52% 
91.06% 
91.20% 
91.20% 
91.47% 
91.67% 
92.78% 
92.63% 
93.01% 
92.75% 
30.14% 92.05% 
+7 31.74% 91.82% 
+1 30.54% 92.16% 
+8 31 .94% 91 .87% 
28.94% 94.48% 
+2 29.34% 94.56% 
Table 2." New pivot aligmnent experiment results 
(null links i J1 stamlard not counted," 
correct and partly correct lillk.s" counted together) 
alignment (through EN and SBC, respectively), 
while the result wets insignificant for SE-+SBC 
and perhaps even detrimental in the case of 
SE--+EN. 
We saw these results as suggestive, rather 
than conclusive. It certainly seemed that 
the closer genetic relatedness of the two 
Shtvic languages worked to our advantage, 
but we concluded that we needed to do 
more experiments, bolh with more language 
combinations and with a modilied sampling 
procedure. In pmticular, we wanted to get rid 
o1' the problematic function words (see above). 
Since the recall is faMy low to start with, 
even a few correct additional alignments mean 
a great deal for the overall performance of the 
word alignment system. Thus, we thought hat 
this approach would be worth pursuing t'urther. 
6 A new experiment with pivot 
alignment 
To coufirm these results, we redesigned slightly 
and extended our experimental procedure, in 
tile following way. A new sampling o1' the same 
corpus was performed, but this time we lirst 
constructed a stop word list consisting of the 50 
most frequent word types in the Swedish part 
of the IVT 1 corpus, as a language-independent 
way of approximating the set o1' function words 
in the language. Thus, we had a new sample, 
with more content words, to compare with the 
previous one, tile hyt~othesis being that a larger 
percentage of content words would be able to 
contribute more links in the pivot alignment 
process. 
We also added some new hmguage 
combinatious, so that we now would be 
able to whether there is a difference in using 
Spanish as a pivot in aligning Swedish and 
English, as opposed to using Polish. We also 
investigated what the result would be of using 
more than one additional language in parallel. 
The new pivot alignment paths investigated 
(in addition to the ones investigated in the lirst 
experiment) are represented by the following 
'language triads': 
? SE-->EN-~PL 
? SE--~ES-+PL 
? SE-->PL-+EN 
? SE-->PL-+ES 
The hypothesis wets that the new setup 
would make the possible effect of close genetic 
relatedness more discernible, which indeed 
seems to be the case (see below). 
The results of the new experiment are shown 
in Table 2. We see that 
101 
? initial (non-pivot alignment) recall has 
gone up quite a bit, presumably because 
function words have been avoided in the 
standard; 
? initial alignment precision still remains at 
the same high level as before; 
? all but two of the alignments added by 
pivot alignment are correct, i.e. recall is 
raised without a decrease in precision; 
? difl~rent pivot languages add different 
alignments, i.e. there seems to be a 
cunmlative positive effect fiom adding 
more languages; 
? the degree of relatedness of the languages 
in a triad seems to play a role for how 
well pivot alignment will work for the 
particular triad. 
7 Discussion and conclusions 
With the new experimental setup, we conlirmed 
the results fiom the earlier experiment, i.e., 
recall increases, but precision does not suffer. 
This tendency is even more marked in the 
new series of experiments, in addition, there 
seems to be a clear division along genetic 
lines; Polish is the best pivot language for 
Swedish-Serbian-Bosnian-Croatian alig ment, 
and vice versa, while Spanish works better 
together with English. Another subcorpus in 
the ETAP project contains a Finnish part, and 
we aim at investigating the effects of using this 
non-Indo-European language (all the languages 
are Indo-European in the two experiments 
described here) as one of the languages in a 
similar experiment 
It seemed that the choice of content words (or 
rather: lower-frequency words) over function 
words did lead to a better esult, but this should 
be t'urther investigated. 
We also see that the more languages we add, 
the better the results become, i.e., different 
additional anguages complement each other. 
In general, there was little overlap in the 
contributions that each language added to the 
final result. 
It should be mentioned at this point, that 
the sampling and annotation procedure used 
did not allow us to check up on incorrect 
alignments which may have propagated 
through the pivot language. The sampling 
procedure would have to be redesigned for this 
to be possible, 7 which we plan to do in the 
future. 
For the same reason, we do not have all 
the data needed to calculate the significance 
of the results. Thus, the results will have to 
remain suggestive for the time being, although 
the suggestion is strong that pivot alignment 
works the way it was hypothesized to work. 
In sc.:nmary, the results are encouraging, in
that the links added through pivot alignment 
were largely correct links, i.e. pivot alignment 
could be expected to make a positive and safe 
contribution--i.e, increasing recall without 
lowering precision--in a word alignment 
system as one of many independent knowledge 
sources. 
8 Acknowledgements 
The research reported here was carried out 
within the ETAP project (Borin, to appear 
c), supported by the Bank of Sweden 
Tercentenary Foundation as part of the research 
programme Translation and Interpreting--a 
Meeting between Languages and Cultures. See 
http://www.translation.su.se/ 
Leif-J6ran Olsson, who is responsible for 
systems development in the ETAP project, 
wrote most of the software which made the 
experiment reported here possible. 
I wish to thank the members of the PLUG 
project for generously letting us use the Uplug 
system and the PLUG link annotator. 
7To do this, you would sample sentences instead of 
sampling words randomly throt, ghout he corpus, which 
is the way it is done at present. Actually, the sampling 
and annotation software was devised for strictly bilingual 
word alignment evaluation, and not t"o1" the purpose 
which it has been pressed into serving here. 
102 
References 
Lars Borin. 1998. Linguistics isn't always the 
answer: Word comparison in computational 
linguistics. In The l lth Nordic Confereuce 
on Computatioual Linguistics. NODALIDA 
'98 Proceedings, pages 140-151. Center 
for Sprogteknologi and Dept. of General 
and Applied Linguistics, University of 
Copenhagen. 
Lars Borin. to appear a. Alignment and 
tagging. In Parallel Corpora, Parallel 
Worlds. Dept. of Linguistics, Uppsaht 
University. 
Lars Borin. to appear b. Pivot alignment. In 
Proceedings of the 12th Nordic Conference 
ou Compulatiomtl Liuguislics (Nodalida99). 
Lars Borin. to appear c. The ETAP 
project - -  a presentation and status report. 
ETAP research report etap-rr-01, Dept. of 
Linguistics, Uppsala University. 
I. Dan Mehtmed. 1995. Automatic ewfluation 
and uniform filter cascades for inducing 
N-best translation lexicons. In l'roceediugs 
q\[" the Thi;zl Worksho I) ou Ve O, Large 
Cmpora. 
i. Dan Melamed. 1998. Word-to-word models 
of translational equiwflence. Technical 
Report IRCS Technical Report -#98-08, 
Department of Computer and Information 
Science, University of Pennsylwmia. 
Magnus Merkel. 1999.  Undelwlauding 
am/ Enhanciug Trauslatiou I) 3, Parallel 
Text Processing. Dept. of Computer and 
Information Science, Link6ping University. 
Magnus Merkei, Mikael Andersson, and Lars 
Ahrenbmg. to appear. The PLUG Link 
Annotator - interactive construction of data  
froln parallel corpora. In PcuMlel Corpolzt, 
Parallel Worlds. Dept. of Linguistics, 
Uppsala University. 
Anna Sagvall Hein. to appear. The PLUG 
project: Parallel corpora in Link(Sping, 
Uppsala, G~3teborg: Aims and achievements. 
In Parallel Corpora, Parallel Worlds. Dept. 
of  Linguistics, Uppsala University. 
Michel Simard. 1999. Three languages are 
better than two. In Proceediugs of the 1999 
Joint SIGI)AT Conference on Eml)irical 
Methods iu Natural Lauguage P~vcessing 
and Ve O, Large Cowora, pages 2-11. 
J6rg Tiedemann. to appear a. Uplug - a 
modular corpus tool for parallel corpora. In 
Parallel Corpora, l'alz~llel Worlds. Dept. of 
Linguistics, Uppsala University. 
J6rg Tiedemann. to appear b. Word alignment 
step by step. In Proceediugs q/' the 
12th Nordic Confereuce ou Compulalioual 
Liuguis'tics (Nodalida99). 
103 
Proceedings of the Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage Data (LaTeCH 2007), pages 1?8,
Prague, 28 June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Naming the Past: Named Entity and Animacy Recognition            
in 19th Century Swedish Literature 
Lars Borin, Dimitrios Kokkinakis, Leif-J?ran Olsson 
Litteraturbanken and Spr?kdata/Spr?kbanken 
Department of Swedish Language, G?teborg University 
Sweden 
{first.last}@svenska.gu.se 
 
Abstract 
This paper provides a description and 
evaluation of a generic named-entity rec-
ognition (NER) system for Swedish applied 
to electronic versions of Swedish literary 
classics from the 19th century. We discuss 
the challenges posed by these texts and the 
necessary adaptations introduced into the 
NER system in order to achieve accurate 
results, useful both for metadata genera-
tion, but also for the enhancement of the 
searching and browsing capabilities of Lit-
teraturbanken, the Swedish Literature 
Bank, an ongoing cultural heritage project 
which aims to digitize significant works of 
Swedish literature. 
1 Introduction 
In this paper we investigate generic named entity 
recognition (NER) technology and the necessary 
adaptation required in order to automatically anno-
tate electronic versions of a number of Swedish 
literary works of fiction from the 19th century. 
Both the genre and language variety are markedly 
different from the text types that our NER system 
was originally developed to annotate. This presents 
a challenge, posing both specific and more generic 
problems that need to be dealt with. 
In section 2 we present briefly the background 
and motivation for the present work, and section 3 
gives some information on related work. In section 
4 we provide a description of the named entity rec-
ognition system used in this work, its entity taxon-
omy, including the animacy recognition compo-
nent and the labeled consistency approach that is 
explored. Problems faced in the literary texts and 
the kinds of adaptations performed in the recogni-
tion system as well as evaluation and error analysis 
are given in section 5. Finally, section 6 summa-
rizes the work and provides some thoughts for fu-
ture work. 
2 Background 
Litteraturbanken <http://litteraturbanken.se/> (the 
Swedish Literature Bank) is a cultural heritage pro-
ject financed by the Swedish Academy1. Littera-
turbanken has as its aim to make available online 
the full text of significant works of Swedish litera-
ture, old and new, in critical editions suitable for 
literary research and for the teaching of literature. 
There is also abundant ancillary material on the 
website, such as author presentations, bibliogra-
phies, thematic essays about authorships, genres or 
periods, written by experts in each field.  
Similarly to many other literature digitization 
initiatives, most of the works in Litteraturbanken 
are such for which copyright has expired (i.e., at 
least 70 years have passed since the death of the 
author); at present the bulk of the texts are from the 
18th, 19th and early 20th century. However, there 
is also an agreement with the organizations repre-
senting authors? intellectual property rights, allow-
ing the inclusion of modern works according to a 
uniform royalty payment scheme. At present, Lit-
teraturbanken holds about 150 works ? mainly 
novels ? by about 50 different authors. The text 
collection is slated to grow by 80?100 novel-length 
works (appr. 4?6 million words) annually. 
                                                 
1 The present permanent version of Litteraturbanken was pre-
ceded by a two-year pilot project by the same name, funded by 
the Bank of Sweden Tercentenary Foundation. 
1
Even at outset of the Litteraturbanken project, it 
was decided to design the technical solutions with 
language technology in mind. The rationale for this 
was that we saw these literary texts not only as rep-
resenting Sweden?s literary heritage, but also as 
high-grade empirical data for linguistic investiga-
tions, i.e. as corpus components. Hence, we wanted 
to build an infrastructure for Litteraturbanken 
which would allow this intended dual purpose of 
the material to be realized to the fullest.2 However, 
we soon started to think about how the kinds of 
annotations that language technology could pro-
vide could be of use to others than linguists, e.g. 
literary scholars, historians and researchers in other 
fields in the humanities and social sciences.  
Here, we will focus on one of these annotation 
types, namely NER and entity annotation. Com-
bined with suitable interfaces for displaying, 
searching, selecting, correlating and browsing 
named entities, we believe that the recognition and 
annotation of named entities in Litteraturbanken 
will facilitate more advanced research on literature 
(particularly in the field of literary onomastics; see 
Dalen-Oskam and Zundert, 2004), but also, e.g., 
historians could find this facility useful, insofar as 
these fictional narratives also contain, e.g. descrip-
tions of real locations, characterizations of real 
contemporary public figures, etc. Flanders et al 
(1998: 285) argue that references to people in his-
torical sources are of intrinsic interest since they 
may reveal ?networks of friendship, enmity, and 
collaboration; familial relationships; and political 
alliances [?] class position, intellectual affilia-
tions, and literary bent of the author?. 
3 Related Work 
The presented work is naturally related to research 
on NER, particularly as applied to dia-
chronic/historical corpora. The technology itself 
has been applied to various domains and genres 
over the last couple of decades such as financial 
news and biomedicine, with performance rates dif-
ficult to compare since the task is usually tied to 
particular domains/genres and applications. For a 
concise overview of the technology see Borthwick, 
                                                 
                                                
2 This precluded the use of ready-made digital library or CMS 
solutions, as we wanted to be compatible with emerging stan-
dards for language resources and tools, e.g. TEI/(X)CES and 
ISO TC37/SC07, which to our knowledge has never been a 
consideration in the design of digital library or CM systems. 
(1999). Even though this technology is widely used 
in a number of domains, studies dealing with his-
torical corpora are mostly comparatively recent 
(see for instance the recent workshop on historical 
text mining; 
<http://ucrel.lancs.ac.uk/events/htm06/>).  
Shoemaker (2005) reports on how the Old Bai-
ley Proceedings, which contain accounts of trials 
that took place at the Old Bailey, the primary 
criminal court in London, between 1674 and 1834, 
was marked up for a number of semantic catego-
ries, including the crime date and location, the de-
fendant?s gender, the victim?s name etc. Most of 
the work was done manually while support was 
provided for automatic person name3 identification 
(cf. Bontcheva et al, 2002). The author mentions 
future plans to take advantage of the structured 
nature of the Proceedings and to use the lists of 
persons, locations and occupations that have al-
ready been compiled for annotating new texts.  
Crane and Jones (2006) discuss the evaluation of 
the extraction of 10 named entity classes (personal 
names, locations, dates, products, organizations, 
streets, newspapers, ships, regiments and railroads) 
from a 19th century newspaper. The quality of 
their results vary for different entity types, from 
99.3% precision for Streets to 57.5% precision for 
Products. The authors suggest the kinds of knowl-
edge that digital libraries need to assemble as part 
of their machine readable reference collections in 
order to support entity identification as a core ser-
vice, namely, the need for bigger authority lists, 
more refined rule sets and rich knowledge sources 
as training data. 
At least least two projects are also relevant in 
the context of NER and historical text processing, 
namely NORA <http://www.noraproject.org/> and 
ARMADILLO 
<http://www.hrionline.ac.uk/armadillo/>. The goal 
of the first is to produce text mining software for 
discovering, visualizing, and exploring significant 
patterns across large collections of full-text hu-
manities resources in existing digital libraries. The 
goal of the latter is to evaluate the benefits of 
automated mining techniques (including informa-
tion extraction) on a set of online resources in 
eighteenth-century British social history. 
 
3 By using the General Architecture for Text Engineering 
(GATE) platform; <http://gate.ac.uk>. 
2
4 Named Entity Recognition 
Named entity recognition (NER) or entity identifi-
cation/extraction, is an important supporting tech-
nology with numerous applications in a number of 
human language technologies. The system we use 
originates from the work conducted in the Nomen 
Nescio project; for details see Johannessen et al 
(2005). In brief, the Swedish system is a multi-
purpose NER system, comprised by a number of 
modules applied in a pipeline fash-ion. Six major 
components can be distinguished, making a clear 
separation between lexical, gram-matical and proc-
essing resources. The six compo-nents are: 
? lists of multiword names, taken from 
various Internet sites or extracted from vari-
ous corpora, running directly over the to-
kenised text being processed; 
? a rule-based, shallow parsing component 
that uses finite-state grammars, one gram-
mar for each type of entity recognized; 
? a module that uses the annotations pro-
duced by the previous two components, 
which have a high rate in precision, in order 
to make decisions regarding other un-
annotated entities. This module is further 
discussed in Section 4.2; 
? lists of single names (approx. 100,000); 
? name similarity, this module is further 
discussed in Section 4.3; 
? a theory revision and refinement mod-
ule, which makes a final control of an anno-
tated document, in order to detect and re-
solve possible errors and assign new annota-
tions based on existing ones, for instance by 
applying name similarity or by combining 
various annotation fragments. 
4.1 Named-Entity Taxonomy 
The nature and type of named entities vary depend-
ing on the task under investigation or the target 
application. In any case, personal names, location 
and organization names are considered ?generic?. 
Since semantic annotation is not as well under-
stood as grammatical annotation, there is no con-
sensus on a standard tagset and content to be gen-
erally applicable. Recently, however, there have 
been attempts to define and apply richer name hi-
erarchies for various tasks, both specific (Fleisch-
man and Hovy, 2002) and generic (Sekine, 2004). 
Our current system implements a rather fine-
grained named entity taxonomy with 8 main 
named entitiy types as well as 57 subtypes. Details 
can be found in Johannessen et al, 2005, and Kok-
kinakis, 2004. The eight main categories are: 
? Person (PRS): people names (forenames, 
surnames), groups of people, animal/pet 
names, mythological, theonyms; 
? Location (LOC): functional locations, 
geographical, geo-political, astrological; 
? Organization (ORG): political, athletic, 
media, military, etc.; 
? Artifact (OBJ): food/wine products, 
prizes, communic. means (vehicles) etc.; 
? Work&Art (WRK): printed material, 
names of films and novels, sculptures etc.; 
? Event (EVN): religious, athletic, scien-
tific, cultural etc.; 
? Measure/Numerical (MSR): volume, age, 
index, dosage, web-related, speed etc.; 
? Temporal (TME). 
Time expressions are important since they allow 
temporal reasoning about complex events as well 
as time-line visualization of the story developed in 
a text. The temporal expressions recognized in-
clude both relative (n?sta vecka ?next week?) and 
absolute expressions (klockan 8 p? morgonen i dag 
?8 o?clock in the morning today?), and sets or se-
quences of time points or stretches of time (varje 
dag ?every day?). 
4.2 Animacy Recognition 
The rule-based component of the person-name rec-
ognition grammar is based on a large set of desig-
nator words and a group of phrases and verbal 
predicates that most probably require an animate 
subject (e.g. ber?tta ?to tell?, fundera ?to think?, 
tr?ttna ?to become tired?). These are used in con-
junction with orthographic markers in the text, 
such as capitalization, for the recognition of per-
sonal names. In this work, we consider the first 
group (designators) as relevant knowledge to be 
extracted from the person name recognizer, which 
is explored for the annotation of animate instances 
3
in the literary texts. The designators are imple-
mented as a separate module in the current pipe-
line, and constitute a piece of information which is 
considered important for a wide range of tasks (cf. 
Orasan and Evans, 2001). 
The designators are divided into four groups: 
designators that denote the nationality or the eth-
nic/racial group of a person (e.g. tysken ?the Ger-
man [person]?); designators that denote a profes-
sion (e.g. l?karen ?the doctor?); those that denote 
family ties and relationships (e.g. sv?rson ?son in 
law?); and finally a group that indicates a human 
individual but cannot be unambiguously catego-
rized into any of the three other groups (e.g. pa-
tienten ?the patient?). Apart from this grouping, 
inherent qualities, for at least a large group of the 
designators, (internal evidence/morphological 
cues) also indicate referent (natural) gender. In this 
way, the animacy annotation is further specified 
for male, female or unknown gender; unknown in 
this context means unresolved or ambiguous, such 
as barn ?child?.  
Swedish is a compounding language and com-
pound words are written as a single orthographic 
unit (i.e. solid compounds). This fact makes the 
recognition of animacy straightforward with mini-
mal resources and feasible by the use of a set of 
suitable headwords, and by capturing modifiers by 
simple regular expressions. Approximately 25 pat-
terns are enough to identify the vast majority of 
animate entities in a text; patterns such as 
?inna/innan/innor?, ?man/mannen/m?n/m?nnen?, 
?log/logen/loger?, ?kt?r/kt?ren/kt?rer? and 
?iker/ikern/ikerna?. For instance, the pattern in (1) 
consists of a reliable suffix ?inna? which is a typi-
cal designator for female individuals, preceded by 
a set of obligatory strings and an optional regular 
expression which captures a long list of com-
pounds (2). 
(1) [a-z???]*(kv|?lskar|man|grev|?)inna 
(2) taleskvinna, yrkeskvinna, idrotts-
kvinna, ungkvinna, Stockholmskvin-
na, Dalakvinna, sambo?lskarinna, 
lyx?lskarinna, ex-?lskarinna, sam-
largrevinna, ex?lskarinna, markgre-
vinna, majgrevinna, ?nkegrevinna,? 
Examples of animacy annotations are given in (3). 
The attribute value FAM stands for FAmily relation 
and Male; PRM for PRofession and Male; FAF for 
FAmily relation and Female and finally UNF for 
UNknown and Female. 
(3) [?]<ENAMEX TYPE="FAM">riksgrefvin-
nans far</ENAMEX>, <ENAMEX TYPE= 
"PRM">?fveramiralen</ENAMEX> [?] 
hade till <ENAMEX TYPE="FAF">mor 
</ENAMEX> <ENAMEX TYPE="UNF">gre-
fvinnan</ENAMEX> Beata Wrangel fr?n 
[?] 
Table (3) in Section 6.1 presents the results for the 
evaluation of this type of normative information. 
Note also, that in order to make the annotations 
more practical we have included the person name 
designators (e.g. ?herr? ? ?Mr?) in the markup as in 
(4); here PRS stands for PeRSon: 
(4) <ENAMEX TYPE="UNM">Herr</ENAMEX> 
<ENAMEX TYPE="PRS" SBT="HUM">Boman 
</ENAMEX> becomes <ENAMEX TYPE= 
"PRS-UNM" SBT="HUM">Herr Boman 
</ENAMEX> 
4.3 Name Similarity 
We can safely assume that the various system re-
sources will not be able to identify all possible en-
tities in the texts, particularly personal and location 
names. Although there is a large overlap between 
the names in the texts and the gazetteer lists, there 
were cases that could be considered as entity can-
didates but were left unmarked. This is because 
exhaustive lists of names even for limited domains 
are hard to obtain, and, in some domains even dif-
ficult to manage. Therefore, we also calculated the 
orthographic similarity between such words and 
the gazetteer content, according to the following 
criteria: a potential entity starts with a capital let-
ter; it is ? 5 characters long; it is not part of any 
other annotation and it does not stand in the begin-
ning of a sentence. We have empirically observed 
that the length of 5 characters is a reliable thresh-
old, unlikely to exclude many NEs. As a matter of 
fact, only two such cases could be found in the 
evaluation sample, namely ?tten Puff ?the family 
Puff? and ?Yen-? in the context ?Yen- kenberg? 
As measure of orthographic similarity (or rather, 
difference) we used the Levenshtein distance (LD; 
also known as edit distance) between two strings. 
The LD is the number of deletions, insertions or 
substitutions required to transform a string into 
another string. The greater the distance, the more 
different the strings are. We chose to regard 1 and 
2 as trustworthy values and disregarded the rest. 
We chose these two values since empirical obser-
vations suggest that contemporary Swedish and 
4
19th century Swedish entities usually differ in one 
or two characters. In case of more than one match, 
we choose the most frequent alternative, as in the 
case of Wenern below. Table 1 illustrates various 
cases and the obtained results. 
text word # gazeteer LD ann. ?? 
Dalarne 6 Dalarna 1 loc yes 
Asptomten 1 --- --- --- - 
H?rnevi* 1 Arnevi 2 prs no 
Sabbathsberg 1 Sabbatsberg 1 loc yes 
Wenern* 7 Werner,Waern 
V?nern 
2 
2 
prs 
loc 
no 
Kakn?s 1 Valn?s,Ramn?s 2 loc yes 
Kallmar 1 Kalmar 1 loc yes 
Table 1. LD between potential NEs and the ga-
zeteers; ?*?: both are locations;????: correct annot.? 
5 The Document Centered Approach 
There is a known tradeoff between rule-based and 
statistical systems. Handcrafted grammar-based 
systems typically obtain better results, but at the 
cost of considerable manual effort by domain ex-
perts. Statistical NER systems typically require a 
large amount of manually annotated training data, 
but can be ported to other domains or genres more 
rapidly and require less manual work. Although the 
Swedish system is mainly rule-based, using a 
handcrafted grammar for each entity group, it can 
also be considered a hybrid system in the sense 
that it applies a document-centered approach 
(DCA) to entity annotation, which is a different 
paradigm compared to the local context approach, 
called external evidence by McDonald (1996). 
With DCA, information for the disambiguation of 
a name is derived from the entire document.  
DCA as a term originates from the work by 
Mikheev (2000: 138), who claims that: 
 
important words are typically used in a 
document more than once and in different 
contexts. Some of these contexts create 
very ambiguous situations but some don?t. 
Furthermore, ambiguous words and 
phrases are usually unambiguously intro-
duced at least once in the text unless they 
are part of common knowledge presup-
posed to be known by the readers. 
 
This implies a form of online learning from the 
document being processed where unambiguous 
usages are used for assigning annotations to am-
biguous words, and information for disambiguation 
is derived from the entire document.  
Similarly, label consistency, the preference of 
the same annotation for the same word sequence 
everywhere in a particular discourse, is a compara-
ble approach for achieving qualitatively higher re-
call rates with minimal resource overhead (cf. 
Krishnan and Manning, 2006). Such an approach 
has been used, e.g., by Aramaki et al (2006), for 
the identification of personal health information 
(age, id, date, phone, location and doctor?s and pa-
tient?s names). 
Figure 1. Example of label consistency 
 
Figure 1 illustrates this approach with an example 
taken from Almqvist?s Collected Works, Vol. 30. In 
this example, the first occurrence of the female 
person name Micmac, which is not in the gazetteer 
lists, is introduced by the author with the unambi-
guous designator faster ?aunt?. Many of the subse-
quent mentions of the same name are given with-
out any reliable clue for appropriate labelling. 
However, as already discussed, there is strong evi-
dence that subsequent mentions of the same name 
should be annotated with the same label, and since 
the same entity usually appears more than once in 
the same discourse, in our case a book, labelling 
consistency should guarantee better performance. 
There are exceptions for certain NE categories 
which may consist of words that are not proper 
nouns such as in the Work&Art category, and of 
course the temporal and measure groups which are 
blocked from this type of processing; cf. section 
6.2. 
6 Evaluation and Error Analysis 
The system was evaluated twice, while no nor-
malization or other preprocessing was applied to 
the original documents. Problems identified during 
the first evaluation round were taken under consid-
eration and specific changes were suggested to the 
system by incorporating appropriate modifications. 
5
During the first run, no adaptations or enhance-
ments were made to the original NER system. Af-
ter the first evaluation round, four major areas 
were identified in which the system either failed to 
produce an annotation or produced only partial or 
erroneous annotations. These failures were caused 
by: 
? Spelling variation: particularly the use of 
<f/w/e/q> instead of <v/v/?/k> as in modern 
Swedish. Most of the cases could be easily 
solved while other required different means 
such as calculating the LD between the 
name lists and possible name mentions in 
the texts (Section 4.3). One case that could 
be easily tackled was the addition of alter-
nate spelling forms for a handful of key-
words and designators, especially the prepo-
sition av/af common in temporal contexts, 
such as i b?rjan af/av 1790-talet ?in the be-
ginning of the 1790s?; or words such 
begge/b?gge ?both? and qv?ll/kv?ll ?eve-
ning?; 
? A number of definite plural forms of 
nouns, often designating a group of persons, 
with the suffix ?erne? instead the ?erna? as 
in modern Swedish, such as Kine-
serne/Kineserna ?the Chinese [people]? and 
Svenskarne/Svenskarna ?the Swedes?; 
? Unknown names: mentioned once with 
unreliable context; 
? Structure preservation: the document 
structure of the texts in Litteraturbankens is 
designed to create a faithful rendering of the 
visual appearance of the original printed 
books. In extracting the texts from the XML 
format used in Litteraturbanken, we did not 
want to apply any kind of normalization or 
other processing. Such an approach would 
have altered the document structure. This 
implies that for a handful of the entities, for 
which the hyphenation in the original paper 
version has divided a name into two parts, as 
in (5), correct identification cannot be ac-
complished, while in some cases only a par-
tial identification was possible, as in (6). 
(5) [?] Stock- holm 
(6) <ENAMEX TYPE=?PRS? SBT=?HUM?>Bertha 
von Lichten-</ENAMEX> ried 
6.1 Results 
As a baseline for the evaluation we use the result 
of simple dictionary lookup in the single name 
gazetteer. This process is very accurate (w.r.t. pre-
cision). We could identify a number of cases with 
erroneous annotations, due to various circum-
stances: Names in the gazetteer lists may have 
multiple entity tags associated with them, and thus 
an entity may belong to more than one group that 
could not be disambiguated by the surrounding 
context, such as Ekhammar as a city and surname; 
many names are ambiguous with common nouns 
or verbs, such as Stig as a first name and as the 
verb ?step/walk?; the gazetteers contained a num-
ber of words that should not have been in the list in 
the first place, such as Hvem ?Who?, styrman ?first 
mate? and f?nrik ?lieutenant?. A probable cause of 
the latter problem is the fact that the name lists 
have been semi-automatically compiled from vari-
ous sources including corpora and the Internet.  
We performed two evaluations, based on two 
different random samples consisting of 500 seg-
ments (roughly 30,000 tokens) each. A segment 
consists of an integral number of sentences (up to 
10?20). The overall results for all tests are shown 
in table 2. Results for individual entities using the 
whole system during both runs are found in table 3. 
The samples were evaluated according to preci-
sion, recall and f-score using the formulas: 
 
Precision = (Total Correct + Partially Corrtect) /  
All Produced 
Recall = (Total Correct + Partially Correct) /  
All Possible 
F-score =2*P*R/P+R. 
 
 
Table 2. Overall performance of the NER 
6
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3. Performance of the NER on the individual 
named entities including animacy 
 
Partially correct means that an annotation gets par-
tial credit. For instance, if the system produces an 
annotation for the functional location Nya Elemen-
tarskolan as in (7) instead of the correct (8), then 
such annotations are given half a point, instead of a 
perfect score. 
(7) Nya <ENAMEX TYPE=?LOC? SBT=?FNC?> 
Elementarskolan</ENAMEX> 
(8) <ENAMEX TYPE=?LOC? SBT=?FNC?>Nya 
Elementarskolan</ENAMEX> 
If, on the other hand, the type is correct but the 
subtype is wrong, then the annotation is given a 
score of 0.75 points (e.g. a functional location in-
stead of a geopolitical location). 
6.2 Limitations of the Centering Approach 
Labeling consistency and the DCA approach relies 
on the assumption that usage is consistent within 
the same document by the same author. However, 
we have observed that there are problems with en-
tities composed of more than a single word, par-
ticularly within the group Work&Art, which can 
produce conflicting information, if we allow the 
individual words in such content (often nouns or 
adjectives) to be re-applied in the text. 
For instance, the name of the novel Syster och 
bror occurred 32 times in one of the evaluation 
texts (Almqvist?s Collected Works Volume 29). If 
we allow the individual words that constitute the 
title, Syster, och and bror to be re-applied in the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
text as individual words (2 common nouns and a 
conjunction), then we would have degraded the 
precision considerably since we would have al-
lowed Work&Art annotations for irrelevant words. 
However, such cases can be resolved by simply 
letting the system ignore multiword Work&Art 
annotations during the DCA processing. 
 
 
Figure 2. Occurrences of the multi-word entity Sys-
ter och bror; the rule-based system could reliably 
identify and annotate 2/32 occurrences. 
 
Generally speaking, the experimental results have 
shown that any breaking of a multiword entity, 
except personal names, into its individual words 
often has a negative effect on performance. The 
best results are achieved when the DCA approach 
deals with single or bigram entities, particularly 
personal names. 
7
7 Conclusions and Future Prospects 
In this paper we have described the application of a 
generic Swedish named entity recognition system 
to a number of literary texts, novels from the 19th 
century, part of Litteraturbanken, the Swedish Lit-
erature Bank. We evaluated the results of the 
named entity recognition and identified a number 
of error sources which we tried to resolve and then 
introduce changes that would cover for such cases 
in the rule-based component of the system, in order 
to increase its performance (precision and recall) 
during a second evaluation round. 
Entity annotations open up a whole new re-
search spectrum for new kinds of qualitative and 
quantitative exploitations of literary and historical 
texts, allowing more semantically-oriented explo-
ration of the textual content. In the near future, we 
will annotate and evaluate a larger sample and pos-
sibly integrate machine learning techniques in or-
der to improve the results even more. We are also 
working to integrate the handling of named entity 
annotations into Litteraturbanken?s search and 
browsing interfaces and hope to be able to conduct 
our first demonstrations and tests with users later 
this year. 
References 
Eiji Aramaki, Takeshi Imai, Kengo Miyo and Kazuhiko 
Ohe. 2006. Automatic Deidentification by using Sen-
tence Features and Label Consistency. Challenges in 
NLP for Clinical Data Workshop. Washington DC.  
Kalina Bontcheva, Diana Maynard, Hamish Cunning-
ham and Horacio Saggion. 2002. Using Human Lan-
guage Technology for Automatic Annotation and In-
dexing of Digital Library Content. Proceedings of the 
6th European Conference on Research and Advanced 
Technology for Digital Libraries.  
Andrew Borthwick. 1999. A Maximum Entropy Ap-
proach to Named Entity Recognition. PhD Thesis. 
New York University.  
Gregory Crane and Alison Jones. 2006. The Challenge 
of Virginia Banks: an Evaluation of Named Entity 
Analysis in a 19th-century Newspaper Collection. 
ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries, 
JCDL. Chapel Hill, NC, USA. 31?40.  
Karina van Dalen-Oskam and Joris van Zundert. 2004. 
Modelling Features of Characters: Some Digital 
Ways to Look at Names in Literary Texts. Literary 
and Linguistic Computing 19(3): 289?301.  
Julia Flanders, Syd Bauman, Paul Caton and Mavis 
Cournane. 1998. Names Proper and Improper: Ap-
plying the TEI to the Classification of Proper Nouns. 
Computers and the Humanities 31(4): 285?300.  
Michael Fleischman and Eduard Hovy. 2002. Fine 
Grained Classification of Named Entities. Proceed-
ings of the 19th International Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics. Taipei, Taiwan. 1?7.  
Janne Bondi Johannessen, Kristin Hagen, ?sne 
Haaland, Andra Bj?rk J?nsdottir, Anders N?klestad, 
Dimitrios Kokkinakis, Paul Meurer, Eckhard Bick 
and Dorte Haltrup. 2005. Named Entity Recognition 
for the Mainland Scandinavian Languages. Literary 
and Linguistic Computing. 20(1): 91?102. 
Dimitrios Kokkinakis. 2004. Reducing the Effect of 
Name Explosion. Proceedings of the LREC-
Workshop: Beyond Named Entity Recognition - Se-
mantic Labeling for NLP. Lisbon, Portugal.  
Vijay Krishnan and Christopher D. Manning. 2006. An 
Efficient Two-Stage Model for Exploiting Non-Local 
Dependencies in Named Entity Recognition. Pro-
ceedings of COLING/ ACL 2006. Sydney, Australia. 
1121?1128.  
David D. McDonald. 1996. Internal and External Evi-
dence in the Identification and Semantic Categorisa-
tion of Proper Nouns. Corpus-Processing for Lexical 
Acquisition. James Pustejovsky and Bran Boguraev 
(eds). MIT Press. 21?39.  
Andrei Mikheev. 2000. Document Centered Approach 
to Text Normalization. Proceedings of the 23rd ACM 
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in 
Information Retrieval. Athens, Greece. 136?143.  
Satoshi Sekine. 2004. Definition, Dictionaries and Tag-
ger for Extended  Named Entity Hierarchy. Proceed-
ings of the Language Resources and Evaluation Con-
ference (LREC). Lisbon, Portugal.  
Constantin Orasan and Roger Evans. 2001. Learning to 
Identify Animate References. Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Computational Natural Language 
Learning (CoNLL-2001). ACL-2001. Toulouse, 
France.  
Robert Shoemaker. 2005. Digital London. Creating a 
Searchable Web of Interlinked Sources on Eighteenth 
Century London. Program: Electronic Library & In-
formation Systems 39(4): 297?311. 
 
8
Proceedings of the 6th EACL Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 18?23,
Avignon, France, 24 April 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Toward a Language Independent Methodology for Generating
Artwork Descriptions ? Exploring Framenet Information
Dana Dann?lls
Spr?kbanken
Department of Swedish
University of Gothenburg, Sweden
dana.dannells@svenska.gu.se
Lars Borin
Spr?kbanken
Department of Swedish
University of Gothenburg, Sweden
lars.borin@svenska.gu.se
Abstract
Today museums and other cultural her-
itage institutions are increasingly stor-
ing object descriptions using seman-
tic web domain ontologies. To make
this content accessible in a multilin-
gual world, it will need to be conveyed
in many languages, a language gen-
eration task which is domain specific
and language dependent. This paper
describes how semantic and syntactic
information such as that provided in a
framenet can contribute to solving this
task. It is argued that the kind of in-
formation offered by such lexical re-
sources enhances the output quality of
a multilingual language generation ap-
plication, in particular when generat-
ing domain specific content.
1 Introduction
Today museums and other cultural her-
itage institutions are increasingly storing ob-
ject descriptions using structured informa-
tion representation formats, such as seman-
tic web domain ontologies. To make such
cultural heritage content accessible to differ-
ent groups and individuals in a multilingual
world, this information will need to be con-
veyed in textual or spoken form in many lan-
guages, a language generation task which is
domain specific and language dependent.
Generating multilingual natural language
texts from domain specific semantic repre-
sentations, such as semantic web domain on-
tologies, is a task which involves lexicaliza-
tion and syntactic realization of the discourse
relations. This paper deals with the syntac-
tic realization problem, which is best illus-
trated with an example. Consider the pos-
sible formulations of the semantic relation
Create_representation that has been lexicalized
with the English verb paint:
1. Leonardo da Vinci painted this scene.
2. The lovely Sibyls were painted in the last cen-
tury.
3. The Gerichtsstube was painted by Kuhn in
1763.
The syntactic structure of each sentence
differs in terms of the semantic roles of the
verb arguments and other constituents of the
sentence. The first sentence contains the se-
mantic roles Creator and Represented, the sec-
ond sentence contains Represented and Time,
and in the third sentence we find Creator, Rep-
resented and Time.
As the examples show there are several
ways of semantically characterizing the sit-
uation expressed by a verb, with implica-
tions for the syntactic realization of that verb.
When generating natural language from se-
mantic web ontologies it is important to find
generic strategies that allow us to identify
the semantic elements of a verb and associate
them with the appropriate argument realiza-
tion of that verb. This is particularly relevant
in multilingual settings because the semantic
and syntactic behavior of verbs will vary de-
pending on the target language, both in the
constructions found and in their distribution.
Previous work on natural language gener-
ation of cultural heritage information from
semantic web ontologies has relied on a
large amount of specially tailored manual
linguistic information to produce descrip-
tions that are targeted to a specific group of
readers (Androutsopoulos et al, 2001; Dan-
18
n?lls, 2008; Konstantopoulos et al, 2009). Al-
though valuable information for generating
natural languages is found in computational
lexical-semantic resources such as the Berke-
ley FrameNet (section 3) which exist today in
several languages (Erk et al, 2003; Subirats
and Petruck, 2003; Ohara et al, 2003; Borin et
al., 2010), there has been little emphasis on
how to manage digitized data from digital
libraries using these open source resources.
In this paper we demonstrate how the infor-
mation available in such electronically avail-
able resources can be exploited for generat-
ing multilingual artwork descriptions.
In the remainder of this paper we describe
a case study on English and Swedish that un-
derscores the importance of using a lexical
resource such as a framenet (section 2). We
present the kind of information that is offered
by two existing framenets (section 3). We
demonstrate how a domain specific natural
language generator can benefit from the in-
formation that is available in both framenets
(section 4). We end with a discussion and
pointers to future work (section 5).
2 Data Collection and Text Analysis
2.1 Corpus Data
To identify the semantic and syntactic con-
structions that characterize object descrip-
tions in the cultural heritage domain, we
have collected parallel texts from Wikipedia
in two languages: English and Swedish. In
total, we analyzed 40 parallel texts that are
available under the category Painting. Addi-
tionally, we selected object descriptions from
digital libraries that are available through on-
line museum databases. The majority of the
Swedish descriptions were taken from the
World Culture Museum,1 the majority of the
English descriptions were collected from the
Met Museum.2
2.2 Semantic Analysis
The strategy we employed to analyze the
texts follows the approach presented by
McKeown (1985) on how to formalize prin-
1<http://collections.smvk.se/pls/vkm/
rigby.welcome>
2<http://www.metmuseum.org>
ciples of discourse for use in a computational
process. Seven frame elements have been ex-
amined, these include: Location (L), Creator
(CR), Representation (RE), Represented (R), De-
scriptor (D), Time (TI), Type (T). The text anal-
ysis has shown that the following combina-
tions of these major frame elements are the
most common:
1. RE, T, CR, TI, L, D, R
2. RE, T, CR, R, TI, L, D
3. RE, TI, T, CR, D, L, R
4. RE, TI, CR, D, R, L
The listed semantic combinations reflect
the word order that we have found in the
text analysis for the two languages. How-
ever, since many of the analyzed sentences
that begin with the object in focus (the Rep-
resentation) appear in the passive voice, i.e,
was painted by, was created by, the word or-
der of these combinations may vary. Further-
more, not all of the listed semantic elements
are mandatory in the object descriptions. For
example, although corresponding to the first
combination of semantic elements, the sen-
tence De Hooch probably painted this picture
in the early 1660s only contains the frame el-
ements CR, RE and TI.
2.3 Syntactic Analysis
The texts have been syntactically annotated
using the Maltparser (Nivre et al, 2007). Fig-
ure 1 shows two example sentences con-
verted to constituent trees.
S
XXXXX

NP
HHH

The portrait
VP
aaa
!!!
V
HHH

was painted
PP
Z
Z
NAACL-HLT Workshop on the Induction of Linguistic Structure, pages 8?15,
Montre?al, Canada, June 3-8, 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Transferring Frames: Utilization of Linked Lexical Resources
Lars Borin
Markus Forsberg
Richard Johansson
Kaarlo Voionmaa
University of Gothenburg
first.last@svenska.gu.se
Kristiina Muhonen
Tanja Purtonen
University of Helsinki
first.last@helsinki.fi
Abstract
In our experiment, we evaluate the transfer-
ability of frames from Swedish to Finnish in
parallel corpora. We evaluate both the theo-
retical possibility of transferring frames and
the possibility of performing it using avail-
able lexical resources. We add the frame in-
formation to an extract of the Swedish side
of the Kotus and JRC-Acquis corpora using
an automatic frame labeler and copy it to the
Finnish side. We focus on evaluating the re-
sults to get an estimation on how often the
parallel sentences can be said to express the
same frame. This sheds light on the questions:
Are the same situations in the two languages
expressed using different frames, i.e. are the
frames transferable even in theory? How well
can the frame information of running text be
transferred from one language to another?
1 Introduction
To our knowledge, there is no ongoing effort to cre-
ate a framenet for Finnish. This experiment gives in-
formation on whether it is feasible to build a prelimi-
nary framenet for Finnish by transferring the frames
with their lexical units from Swedish. The building
of semantically annotated language resources from
scratch is a costly and time consuming effort. In
this experiment, we test the feasibility of utilizing
Swedish and Finnish lexical resources for building a
Finnish framenet.
Transferring lexical units from Swedish to
Finnish is possible because of the wordnet connec-
tions of both languages: both the Swedish wordnet
and the Finnish wordnet are linked to the Princeton
wordnet. This connection is described in more detail
in Section 2.
We evaluate the transferability of the frames and
their lexical units from Swedish to Finnish. In the
evaluation, we use Swedish?Finnish parallel corpora
to see whether the same sentence is expressed using
the same frames in both languages. Using parallel
corpora, we can evaluate not only the theoretically
similar content of frames in two different languages,
but also their use in actual texts.
The idea of semantic role transfer across paral-
lel corpora is not novel (see Section 2.3), but to our
knowledge, the use of linked lexical resources pro-
posed here is. The language pair Swedish?Finnish
is also one for which this methodology has not
been attempted earlier. With our experiment we
can see whether transferring the frame information
from Swedish to Finnish could work, given that the
languages are not demonstrably related, and struc-
turally quite different. The work presented here
consequently provides a data point for the evalua-
tion of the language-independence of this kind of
methodology, which can arguably only be convinc-
ingly demonstrated by actually attempting to apply it
on a range of typologically diverse languages (Ben-
der, 2011).
From a more practical point of view, there may
well be as much Finnish?Swedish as Finnish?
English parallel data, since Finnish and Swedish
are the two official languages of Finland, and all
public documents must by law be available in both
languages, and for practical reasons also a large
amount of other texts. In addition, despite their non-
relatedness and large structural differences, the two
8
languages have a long history of contact and bilin-
gualism. Finnish has borrowed words and struc-
tures from Swedish on a large scale, and the lexi-
cal semantics of the two languages have converged
in many domains. This means that we may expect
frames to transfer well across the two languages,
whereas the structural differences may make us
more pessimistic about the transferability of frame
elements.
2 Language Resources
2.1 Wordnet Connections
Wordnets are lexical databases that group words of
a language into synonym sets ? or synsets ? each
synset supposedly expressing one distinct concept in
the language. Wordnets further provide general def-
initions of the synsets, and encode the semantic rela-
tions between the synsets. Typically they are mono-
lingual, but efforts have been made to produce mul-
tilingual wordnets as well; see e.g. Vossen (1998).
FinnWordNet (Lind?n and Carlson, 2010) is a
wordnet for Finnish that complies with the format
of the Princeton WordNet (PWN) (Fellbaum, 1998).
It was built by translating the Princeton WordNet 3.0
synsets into Finnish by human translators. It is open
source and contains 117 000 synsets. The Finnish
translations were inserted into the PWN structure re-
sulting in a bilingual lexical database.
SweFN++ is an integrated open-source lexical
resource for Swedish (Borin et al, 2010; Borin,
2010). It includes the Swedish framenet (SweFN)
and Swesaurus, a Swedish wordnet. The wordnet
has been semi-automatically assembled from freely
available Swedish lexical resources (Borin and Fors-
berg, 2011), and part of it has been linked to the Core
WordNet, a 5000-synset subset of PWN. All re-
sources in SweFN++ are linked together on the word
sense level using the persistent sense identifiers of
the SweFN++ pivot resource SALDO, a large-scale
lexical-semantic resource (Borin et al, 2008; Borin
and Forsberg, 2009). Using these links, we can col-
lect a set of 434 frames and 2 694 word senses that
have a direct PWN ? Swedish wordnet ? SweFN
? FinnWordNet connection. Using these connec-
tions, we can transfer the frame information of the
words from Swedish to Finnish. We used the Korp
pipeline (Borin et al, 2012) to analyze the Swedish
part of the parallel text to get hold of the SALDO
sense identifiers. The analysis is not able to distin-
guish senses that do not differentiate themselves for-
mally (by different word forms or morphosyntactic
descriptions).
2.2 Framenet and the Semantic Labeler
Framenets are lexical databases that define seman-
tic relations. The best-known framenet is Berkeley
FrameNet which is based on the theory of frame se-
mantics (Fillmore, 1976). SweFN is built using the
same principles as the Berkeley Framenet (Ruppen-
hofer et al, 2006) of English. The frames are mostly
the same as in English.
In the experiment, we use an automatic seman-
tic role labeler for Swedish, developed by Johansson
et al (2012). The labeler is based on the Swedish
framenet and it uses the same frame and frame ele-
ment labels.
2.3 Related Work
From a methodological point of view, the first
question to ask should be whether the semantic
frames are meaningful in both languages: for in-
stance, if the Swedish FrameNet has defined a frame
SELF_MOTION and a list of associated frame ele-
ments (SELF_MOVER, GOAL, PATH etc.), does it
make sense to define an identical frame in a Finnish
FrameNet? This question has been studied by Pad?
(2007) for English?German and English?French,
and although most frames were cross-linguistically
meaningful, a number of interesting discrepancies
were found. Whether the number of discrepancies is
higher in a pair of more typologically different lan-
guages is an important question.
As far as we are aware, there has been no previ-
ous attempt in using multilingual WordNets or simi-
lar lexicons when deriving lexical units in frames in
new languages. The WordNet?FrameNet combina-
tion has seen some use in monolingual applications:
for instance, Burchardt et al (2005) and Johansson
and Nugues (2007) attempted to extend the coverage
of FrameNet by making use of WordNet. Pad? and
Lapata (2005a) used word alignment in sentence-
aligned parallel corpora to find possible lexical units
in new languages.
There have been several studies of the feasibil-
ity of automatically producing the role-semantic an-
9
notation in new languages, although never for lan-
guages as structurally dissimilar as Swedish and
Finnish. Pad? and Lapata (2005b) projected anno-
tation from English to German, and Johansson and
Nugues (2006) implemented a complete pipeline for
English?Swedish by (1) automatic annotation on the
English side; (2) annotation transfer; and (3) training
a Swedish semantic role labeler using the automati-
cally produced annotation.
3 Frames from Swedish to Finnish
3.1 Outline of the Experiment
We start off by locating such Swedish word senses
that are both represented in SweFN and linked to
PWN in two Finnish?Swedish parallel corpora. The
sentences that include such a word make up the eval-
uation data set. After this, the Swedish half is en-
riched with frame labels using the framenet-based
semantic role labeler for Swedish.
After running the semantic labeler on the evalu-
ation data, we pick the 20 most commonly occur-
ring frames from both corpora. For each of the
most common frames, we pick the 6 first occur-
rences for closer scrutiny. Due to the differing na-
ture of Swedish and Finnish, we make one change
before selecting the 20 most frequent frames: We ex-
clude the frame which is evoked (erroneously) only
by the Swedish indefinite articles en/ett ? homony-
mous with the numeral ?one?? among the 6 first oc-
currences. We take the 21st most frequent frame in-
stead because there are no articles in Finnish. To
sum up, the frames under examination are selected
based on the frequency of the frame, and the sen-
tences including the frame are selected in the order
in which they occur.
After picking 120 (6 x 20) sentences from both
corpora, the correctness of the semantic labeler is
manually checked. A linguist marks the correctness
of both the frame and the frame element label. At
this stage, the linguist does not consider the trans-
ferability of the frame, but merely checks the output
of the automatic role labeler, marking the frame and
the frame element either correct or incorrect. E.g
problematic analyses caused by polysemous words
are marked incorrect. We check the output of the
labeler before analyzing the transferability of the
frames because if the frame information is incorrect
in the Swedish text to begin with, there is no point
in transferring it to Finnish.
After checking the Swedish frame information,
the Swedish?Finnish parallel sentences are com-
pared. Two native Finnish speakers estimate,
whether the frame and frame element label is trans-
ferable to Finnish or not. Because FrameNet is
based on Frame Semantics (Fillmore, 1976), accord-
ing to which the meanings of most words can best be
understood by a description of a situation, the work-
ing hypothesis is that the semantic frames should be
more or less language neutral. Hence, the semantic
frame we assign for a certain situation in Swedish,
should be transferable to Finnish.
In addition to the theoretical frame transferability,
we also report the practical applicability of the trans-
fer via the wordnet connections. We check whether
the Swedish word is expressed in the Finnish par-
allel corpus with a word that has a direct link from
the Swedish wordnet to the Finnish wordnet via the
Princeton Wordnet. If there is no direct Wordnet link
from the Swedish word to the Finnish one, we re-
port whether the Finnish word used in the sentence
and the Finnish word linked to the Swedish word via
wordnets are in the same synset.
In sum, we manually evaluate whether the 20
most commonly occurring frames of the Swedish
test sentences are the same in the equivalent Finnish
sentences. After reporting whether the frames are
equivalent in both languages, we evaluate, how
many of the frame element labels can be transferred
to Finnish.
3.2 The Test Corpora
Presumably, transferability of the frames between
parallel corpora depends on the translation of the
corpus. Our hypothesis is that if the translator
follows the original expression very carefully, the
frames can be more similar than in a more freely
translated text. To see whether the transferability of
the frames varies according to a corpus, we used two
test corpora.
The test corpora consist of extracts from the
JRC-Acquis Corpus (Steinberger et al, 2006) and
the KOTUS Swedish?Finnish Parallel Corpus (Re-
search Institute for the Languages of Finland, 2004).
Both are Swedish?Finnish parallel corpora that are
sentence aligned. In both corpora, the text type is
10
formal: the former is a collection of legislative text
and the latter consists of press releases of different
Finnish companies.
4 Results
The evaluation consists of three parts: First and
foremost, we concentrate on estimating whether the
frame used in Swedish can be transferred to Finnish
even in theory. These results are presented in Sec-
tion 4.1. If the sentence is expressed using the same
frames, we also report how many of the frame ele-
ments encoded correctly in Swedish are realized in
Finnish (Section 4.2). In Section 4.3, we discuss the
possibility of transferring the frames via the word-
net connections. The results for the two different
corpora are presented separately enabling us to see
whether the text type impacts frame transferring.
4.1 Possibility of Transferring Frames
In Tables 1 and 2, the first column lists the 20 most
frequent frames of the evaluation corpora. The sec-
ond column shows that for all 20 frames, we took
the first six Swedish occurrences. The third column
shows how many of the Swedish frame labels are
correct. Finally, the right-most column portrays how
many of the correct Swedish frames can be trans-
ferred to Finnish. The result we are mostly inter-
ested in is the difference between the third and the
fourth columns.
As can be seen from Tables 1 and 2, most of
the correct labels for Swedish are transferable to
Finnish. In the JRC-Acquis corpus, the semantic la-
beler succeeded in 75%, and 72% of the frame la-
bels can be transferred to Finnish. The correspond-
ing success rates for the Kotus corpus are 80% and
72%.
Many of the words that are not correctly labeled
in Swedish occur in idiomatic expressions, and by
chance, some idioms are so frequent in the corpus
that they end up to our evaluation corpus. E.g. the
idiom tr?da i kraft / astua voimaan / come into effect
is expressed in the same way in both Swedish and
Finnish (lit. ?tread into force?). In both languages, a
verb usually belonging to the frame SELF_MOTION
is used in this idiom, but in the idiom, the meaning
of it cannot be said to be expressing self motion.
Some sentences in which the frames are consid-
Frame N Correct Correct
in Swe in Fin
Being_necessary 6 6 6
Calendric_unit 6 6 6
Capability 6 3 3
Coming_to_believe 6 0 0
Commitment 6 6 6
Deciding 6 6 6
Dimension 6 5 4
Leadership 6 6 6
Part_orientational 6 4 4
Political_locales 6 6 6
Possession 6 2 1
Questioning 6 1 1
Removing 6 6 6
Request 6 6 6
Scrutiny 6 6 6
Self_motion 6 0 0
Substance 6 4 4
Suitability 6 6 5
Text 6 5 5
Using 6 6 5
Total (N) 120 90 86
Total (%) 100 75 72
Table 1: Frames from the JRC-Acquis Corpus
Frame N Correct Correct
in Swe in Fin
Assistance 6 6 6
Attempt_suasion 6 6 6
Becoming 6 6 3
Business 6 6 6
Calendric_unit 6 6 6
Capability 6 3 3
Change_position_ 6 6 5
on_a_scale_increase
Commitment 6 5 5
Create_physical_artwork 6 0 0
Create_representation 6 1 1
Deciding 6 6 6
Dimension 6 3 2
Employing 6 6 6
Leadership 6 4 4
Measure_duration 6 6 6
People 6 6 6
Possession 6 3 1
Relative_time 6 5 5
Supporting 6 6 2
Transfer 6 6 6
Total (N) 120 96 85
Total (%) 100 80 72
Table 2: Frames from the Kotus Corpus
11
ered non-transferable already on a theoretical level
are expressed in Finnish completely without the
frame, as demonstrated in Example (1) and (2).
(1) Tillv?xten
growth
var
was
dock
still
mindre
smaller
?n
than
det
the
ursprungliga
original
m?let.
goal.
Still, growth was lower than what was the origi-
nal goal.
(2) Se
it
j?i
remained
kuitenkin
still
alkuper?ist?
original
tavoitetta
goal
heikommaksi.
weaker.
However, it remained weaker than what was the
original goal.
In the Swedish example (1), the word mindre
?smaller? is used when expressing the decrease of
economical growth. The word mindre fits the frame
DIMENSION, but it is used in a figurative way. The
Finnish parallel sentence could be expressed us-
ing the direct translation pienempi ?smaller? but the
translation is different. Mindre in the Finnish Ko-
tus corpus is translated as heikompi ?weaker?, which
is not expressing dimension even in a metaphorical
way.
When focusing only on the correct Swedish la-
bels, transferring frames seems to be beneficial, as
reported in Table 3. The success rate of a theoretical
possibility to use Swedish as a source language for
Finnish frames is 92%.
Correct Transferable Success %
Frames Frames
Kotus 90 86 96%
JRC-A 96 85 89%
Total 186 171 92%
Table 3: The Success Rate of Frame Transfer
Table 3 sums up the comparison of the two cor-
pora. The difference (7%) between the corpora is
not remarkable, so based on these test corpora, the
impact of the translation type is not big. In other
words, in both corpora, the correct Swedish frames
can be transferred to Finnish successfully.
4.2 Success of Transferring Frame Elements
When the sentence is expressed using the same
frames in both languages, we also report, how many
of the frame elements encoded correctly in Swedish
are realized in Finnish. These results are presented
in Tables 4 and 5. The numbers show how benefi-
cial it is to transfer the frame element labels of the
Swedish semantic labeler to Finnish.
The most common frame elements of the Swedish
corpora are listed in the first column. We scrutinize
such elements in detail which occur in the corpora
at least four times. The rest are added up and pre-
sented on the last lines of the tables. The second
column shows the frequency of the frame element,
while the third column gives the number of correct
frame element labels in the Swedish corpora. The
last column shows the number of transferable frame
elements.
As can be seen from Table 6 that sums up the re-
sults of the frame element transfer, frame element la-
bels do not transfer from Swedish to Finnish as well
as the frame labels. The success rate of the frame
transfer is 92%, where as the frame elements can be
successfully transferred in 83% of the cases.
In the Kotus corpus, 75% of the frame element la-
bels are transferable. However, there is a difference
between the two corpora: In the JRC-Acquis corpus,
91% of the elements can be transferred to Finnish.
4.3 Transferring Frames via Wordnets
Next we report how many of the Swedish frame-
evoking words are expressed using such words that
have the same wordnet identifier in Finnish. If the
parallel sentences are not expressed using words that
are equivalent in the wordnets, we examine whether
the words are in equivalent synsets. This informa-
tion is needed when estimating the usefulness of lex-
ical resources and their internal links in the frame
transferring.
In Tables 7 and 8, the first row displays the total
number of frame-evoking words. The second row
shows how many of the frames are transferable to
Finnish even in theory. The numbers on the third
row reflect the possibility of using the WordNet con-
nections in frame transferring; this number shows
how many of the words under examination are ex-
pressed both in Swedish and in Finnish with the
equivalent wordnet words. The fourth row shows
how many of the words are not directly linked with
each other but are located in equivalent synsets. On
the fifth row, we report how many of the words are
12
Frame N Correct Correct
Element in Swe in Fin
Entity 9 8 5
Speaker 8 2 2
Item 7 3 2
Theme 6 4 4
Supported 6 2 0
Recipient 6 5 5
Place 6 2 2
Whole 5 3 3
Landmark_occasion 5 5 5
Count 5 5 5
Content 5 4 4
Time_of_creation 4 0 0
Time 4 4 3
Supporter 4 1 1
Employer 4 0 0
Cognizer 4 4 4
Agent 4 2 2
Other (32 FEs) 60 35 20
Total (N) 152 89 67
Total (%) 100 59 44
Table 4: Frame Elements from the Kotus Corpus
Frame N Correct Correct
Element in Swe in Fin
Time 10 6 9
Speaker 9 2 2
Entity 9 7 5
Instrument 7 4 4
Theme 6 6 5
Evaluee 6 6 5
Ground 5 4 3
Final_category 5 5 4
Decision 5 2 2
Topic 4 0 0
Leader 4 2 2
Landmark_occasion 4 3 3
Dependent 4 4 3
Author 4 1 1
Other (32 FEs) 66 44 39
Total (N) 148 96 87
Total (%) 66 65 58
Table 5: Frame Elements from the JRC-Acquis Corpus
Correct Transferable Success %
Frame E. Frame E.
Kotus 89 67 75%
JRC-A 96 87 91%
Total 185 154 83%
Table 6: The Success Rate of Frame Element Transfer
Frame-evoking words 120
Transferable to Finnish 85
Same word as in FWN 37
In the same synset 2
Could be in the same synset 31
Table 7: Wordnet Links in the Kotus Corpus
Frame-evoking words 120
Transferable to Finnish 86
Same word as in FWN 41
In the same synset 0
Could be in the same synset 16
Table 8: Wordnet Links in the JRC-Acquis Corpus
synonyms of the word in question and could there-
fore be located in the same synset in the wordnets.
As can be seen in Tables 7 and 8, only 46% (37/85
and 41/86) of the theoretically transferable words
can be transferred to Finnish directly using the word-
net links. Our hypothesis was that we could get bet-
ter results when looking at all the words in a synset.
This appears to be a wrong assumption: There are
only 2 words that come from the same synset that
are not equivalent words used in the translations.
The numbers on the fifth rows are remarkably big,
especially when compared to the number of real-
ized synonyms on the fourth row. These 47 words
could (or should) be located in the same synset as the
words in question. If the wordnets were complete,
i.e. if all words that could be in the same synset
were in the same synset, the theoretically transfer-
able LUs would be 82% (70/85) and 65% (56/86).
5 Conclusion and Future Work
The main point of the experiment was to see if build-
ing a preliminary Finnish framenet and labeling se-
mantic roles for Finnish using Swedish resources
is feasible at all. In particular, we wanted to see
whether the same situations are expressed using the
same frames in both languages and whether it is pos-
sible to transfer the frames and frame elements with
their lexical units from one language to the other.
In our experiment, we have evaluated how well
the frames and frame elements can be transferred
from a Swedish corpus to its Finnish parallel corpus.
We have shown that in theory, 92% of the correct
Swedish frame labels and 83% of the correct frame
13
element labels can be transferred to Finnish.
We also investigated whether linked wordnets
could be used for the transfer of frame-evoking
words between Swedish and Finnish. The results
here are more ambiguous, however. On the one
hand, only about half of the words could be linked
in this way. On the other hand, it turns out that this
in part is because of many synsets being incomplete
in these wordnets which are still under construction.
Thus we should not dismiss out of hand the useful-
ness of lexical-semantic resources such as wordnets
for the task of cross-language frame transfer, but
rather explore further how the knowledge encoded
in them could be best put to use.
The result of our experiment encourages us to find
ways of performing frame transfer automatically.
This can be accomplished using a word aligned par-
allel corpus for Swedish and Finnish. The automatic
word alignment of Finnish is generally seen as a
complicated task because of the free constituent or-
der and rich morphology of Finnish. However, our
future work is to examine the success of using au-
tomatic word alignment, e.g. Giza++, in automat-
ically transferring the frame information from one
language to another.
Acknowledgements
The research presented here was supported by the
Swedish Research Council (the project Swedish
Framenet++, VR dnr 2010-6013) and by the Uni-
versity of Gothenburg through its support of the
Centre for Language Technology and its support of
Spr?kbanken (the Swedish Language Bank). The
work on linking the Swedish wordnet to the Prince-
ton Core WordNet was conducted with funding by
the European Commission through its support of
the META-NORD project under the ICT PSP Pro-
gramme, grant agreement no 270899. We would like
to thank the anonymous reviewers for their construc-
tive comments and Jyrki Niemi for his valuable help
with FinnWordNet.
References
Emily M. Bender. 2011. On achieving and evaluating
language-independence in NLP. Linguistic Issues in
Language Technology, 6(3).
Lars Borin and Markus Forsberg. 2009. All in the fam-
ily: A comparison of SALDO and WordNet. In Pro-
ceedings of the Nodalida 2009 Workshop on WordNets
and other Lexical Semantic Resources ? between Lexi-
cal Semantics, Lexicography, Terminology and Formal
Ontologies, Odense, Denmark.
Lars Borin and Markus Forsberg. 2011. Swesaurus ? ett
svenskt ordn?t med fria tyglar. LexicoNordica, 18:17?
39.
Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, and Lennart L?nngren.
2008. The hunting of the BLARK ? SALDO, a freely
available lexical database for Swedish language tech-
nology. In Joakim Nivre, Mats Dahll?f, and Beata
Megyesi, editors, Resourceful language technology.
Festschrift in honor of Anna S?gvall Hein, number 7
in Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis: Studia Linguistica
Upsaliensia, pages 21?32. Uppsala University, Depart-
ment of Linguistics and Philology, Uppsala.
Lars Borin, Dana Dann?lls, Markus Forsberg,
Maria Toporowska Gronostaj, and Dimitrios Kokki-
nakis. 2010. The past meets the present in the
Swedish FrameNet++. In Proc. of EURALEX, pages
269?281, Leeuwarden. EURALEX.
Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, and Johan Roxendal. 2012.
Korp ? the corpus infrastructure of Spr?kbanken. In
Proceedings of LREC 2012.
Lars Borin. 2010. Med Zipf mot framtiden ? en inte-
grerad lexikonresurs f?r svensk spr?kteknologi. Lexi-
coNordica, 17:35?54.
Aljoscha Burchardt, Katrin Erk, and Anette Frank. 2005.
A WordNet detour to FrameNet. In Proceedings of the
GLDV 2005 workshop GermaNet II, Bonn, Germany.
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. Kluwer The MIT Press.
Charles J. Fillmore. 1976. Frame semantics and the na-
ture of language. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences: Conference on the Origin and Development
of Language and Speech, 280(1):20?32.
Richard Johansson and Pierre Nugues. 2006. A
FrameNet-based semantic role labeler for Swedish. In
Proc. of Coling/ACL.
Richard Johansson and Pierre Nugues. 2007. Using
WordNet to extend FrameNet coverage. In Proceed-
ings of the Workshop on Building Frame-semantic Re-
sources for Scandinavian and Baltic Languages, at
NODALIDA, pages 27?30, Tartu, Estonia.
Richard Johansson, Karin Friberg Heppin, and Dimitrios
Kokkinakis. 2012. Semantic role labeling with the
Swedish FrameNet. In Proceedings of LREC-2012.
Krister Lind?n and Lauri Carlson. 2010. FinnWordNet ?
WordNet p? finska via ?vers?ttning. LexicoNordica ?
Nordic Journal of Lexicography, 17:119?140.
14
Sebastian Pad? and Mirella Lapata. 2005a. Cross-
lingual bootstrapping for semantic lexicons: The case
of Framenet. In Proceedings of AAAI-05, pages 1087?
1092, Pittsburgh, United States.
Sebastian Pad? and Mirella Lapata. 2005b. Cross-
linguistic projection of role-semantic information. In
Proceedings of Human Language Technology Confer-
ence and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 859?866, Vancouver,
Canada.
Sebastian Pad?. 2007. Translational equivalence
and cross-lingual parallelism: The case of FrameNet
frames. In Proceedings of the NODALIDA Workshop
on Building Frame Semantics Resources for Scandina-
vian and Baltic Languages, Tartu, Estonia.
Research Institute for the Languages of Finland. 2004.
KFSPC: KOTUS Swedish-Finnish Parallel Corpus.
http://www.csc.fi/kielipankki.
Josef Ruppenhofer, Michael Ellsworth, Miriam R. L.
Petruck, Christopher R. Johnson, and Jan Scheffczyk.
2006. FrameNet II: Extended theory and practice. Un-
published Manuscript.
Ralf Steinberger, Bruno Pouliquen, Anna Widiger,
Camelia Ignat, Toma? Erjavec, Dan Tufis?, and D?niel
Varga. 2006. The JRC-Acquis: A multilingual
aligned parallel corpus with 20+ languages. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC), pages 2142?
2147.
Piek Vossen, editor. 1998. EuroWordNet: a multilingual
database with lexical semantic networks for European
Languages. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
15
Survey Article
Unsupervised Learning of Morphology
Harald Hammarstr?m?
Radboud Universiteit and Max Planck
Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology
Lars Borin??
University of Gothenburg
This article surveys work on Unsupervised Learning of Morphology. We define Unsupervised
Learning of Morphology as the problem of inducing a description (of some kind, even if only
morpheme segmentation) of how orthographic words are built up given only raw text data of
a language. We briefly go through the history and motivation of this problem. Next, over 200
items of work are listed with a brief characterization, and the most important ideas in the field
are critically discussed. We summarize the achievements so far and give pointers for future
developments.
1. Introduction
Morphology is understood here in its usual sense in linguistics, namely, as referring to
(the linguistic study and description of) the internal structure of words. More specifi-
cally, we understand morphology following Haspelmath (2002, page 2) as ?the study
of systematic covariation in the form and meaning of words.? For our purposes, we
assume that we have a way of identifying the text words of a language, ignoring the
fact that the term word has eluded exhaustive cross-linguistic definition. Similarly, we
assume a number of commonly made distinctions in linguistic morphology, whose basic
import is indisputable, but where there is an ongoing discussion on exactly where to
draw the boundaries with respect to particular phenomena in individual languages.
Generally, a distinction is made between inflectional morphology and word forma-
tion. Inflectional morphology deals with the various realizations of the ?same? lexical
word, depending on the particular syntactic context in which the word appears. Typical
examples of inflection are verbs agreeing with one or more of their arguments in the
clause, or nouns inflected in particular case forms in order to show their syntactic rela-
tion to other words in the phrase or clause, for example, showing which verb argument
they express. Word formation deals with the creation of new lexical words from existing
? Centre for Language Studies, Radboud Universiteit, Postbus 9103, 6500 HD Nijmegen, The Netherlands/
Department of Linguistics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Deutscher Platz 6,
04103 Leipzig, Germany. E-mail: h.hammarstrom@let.ru.nl.
?? Spr?kbanken, Department of Swedish Language, University of Gothenburg, Box 200, SE-405 30
G?teborg, Sweden. E-mail: lars.borin@svenska.gu.se.
Submission received: 2 March 2010; revised submission received: 19 August 2010; accepted for publication:
4 October 2010.
? 2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Computational Linguistics Volume 37, Number 2
ones, for example, agent nouns from verbs. If the same kinds of mechanisms are used as
in inflectional morphology (i.e., the resulting word is derived out of only one existing
word), linguists talk about derivational morphology. If two or more existing lexical
words are combined in order to make up a new word, the terms compounding or
incorporation are used, depending on the categories of the words involved.
There is a fairly wide array of formal means available cross-linguistically for ex-
pressing inflectional and derivational categories in languages. Most commonly, how-
ever, some form of affixation is involved?that is, some phonological material is added
to the end of the word (suffixation), to the beginning of the word (prefixation), or
(much more rarely) inside the stem of the word (infixation). Suffixes and prefixes (but
rarely infixes) can form long chains, where the different positions, or ?slots,? express
different kinds of inflectional or derivational categories. If a language has suffixing
and/or prefixing?sometimes called concatenative morphology?it obviously follows
that text words in that language can be segmented into a sequence of morphological
elements: a stem and a number of suffixes after the stem and/or prefixes before the
stem.1
Morphology is one of the oldest linguistic subdisciplines, and this brief presenta-
tion by necessity omits many intricacies and greatly simplifies a vast scholarship. (For
standard, in-depth, introductions to this fascinating field, see, e.g., Nida [1949], Jensen
[1990], Spencer and Zwicky [1998], or Haspelmath [2002].)
In language technology applications, a morphological component forms a bridge
between texts and structured information about the vocabulary of a language. Some
kind of morphological analysis and/or generation thus forms a basic component in
many natural language processing applications. Many languages have quite complex
morphological systems, with the number of potential inflected forms of a single lex-
ical word running into the thousands, requiring a substantial amount of work if the
linguistic knowledge of the morphological component is to be defined manually. For
this reason, researchers often turn to machine learning approaches. This survey article
is concerned with unsupervised approaches to morphology learning.
For the purposes of the present survey, we use the following definition of Un-
supervised Learning of Morphology (ULM).
Input: Raw (unannotated, non-selective2) natural language text data
Output: A description of the morphological structure (there are various levels to be
distinguished; see subsequent discussion) of the language of the input text
With: As little supervision (parameters, thresholds, human intervention, model
selection during development, etc.) as possible
Some approaches have explicit or implicit biases towards certain kinds of lan-
guages; they are nevertheless considered to be ULM for this survey. Morphology may
be narrowly taken as to include only derivational and inflectional affixation, where the
number of affixes a root may take is finite3 and the order of the affixes may not be
1 The picture is less simple in reality, because affixation is often accompanied by so-called
morphophonological changes?changes in the shape of the stem or affix involved, or both?which often
have the effect of blurring the boundaries between the elements.
2 With the term non-selective we intend to exclude text data that requires manual selection (e.g., curated
singular?plural pairs).
3 The number of inflectional affixes is finite by definition. The derivational affixes?especially in heavily
agglutinating languages?may be recursive, but are in practice finite.
310
Hammarstr?m and Borin Unsupervised Learning of Morphology
permuted.4 This survey also subsumes attempts that take a broader view including
clitics5 and compounding (and there seems to be no reason in principle to exclude
incorporation and lexical affixes: see Mithun [1999], pages 37?67, for some examples).
Many, but not all, approaches focus on concatenative morphology/compounding only.
All works considered in this survey are designed to function on orthographic
words, that is, raw text data in an orthography that provides a ready-made segmen-
tation of text into words. Crucially, this excludes the rather large body of work that
only targets word segmentation, that is, segmenting a sentence or a full utterance into
words (cf. Goldsmith [2010] who also overviews word segmentation). However, works
that explicitly aim to treat both word segmentation and morpheme segmentation in
one algorithm are included. Hence, subsequent uses of the term segmentation in the
present survey are to be understood as morpheme segmentation rather than word
segmentation. We prefer the term segmentation to analysis because, in general in ULM,
the algorithm does not attempt to label the segments.
There have been other approaches to machine learning of morphology than pure
ULM as defined here, the most popular ones being:
 approaches that require selective input, such as ?singular?plural pairs,?
or ?all members of a paradigm? (Garvin 1967; Klein and Dennison 1976;
Golding and Thompson 1985; Wothke 1985; McClelland and Rumelhart
1986; Brasington, Jones, and Biggs 1988; Tufis 1989; Zhang and Kim 1990;
Borin 1991; Theron and Cloete 1997; Oflazer, McShane, and Nirenburg
2001, for example)
 approaches where some (small) amount of annotated data, some
(small) amount of existing rule sets, or resources such as a machine-
readable dictionary or a parallel corpus, are mandatory (Yarowsky and
Wicentowski 2000; Yarowsky, Ngai, and Wicentowski 2001; Cucerzan and
Yarowsky 2002; Neuvel and Fulop 2002; Johnson and Martin 2003; Rogati,
McCarley, and Yang 2003, for example)
Such approaches are excluded from the present survey, unless the required data (e.g.,
paradigm members) are extracted from raw text in an unsupervised manner as well.
We also exclude the special case of the second approach where morphology learning
means not ?learning the morphological system of a language,? but rather ?learning the
inflectional classes of out-of-vocabulary words,? namely, approaches where an existing
morphological analysis component is used as the basis for guessing in which existing
paradigm an unknown text word should belong (e.g., Antworth 1990; Mikheev 1997;
Bharati et al 2001; Forsberg, Hammarstr?m, and Ranta 2006; Lind?n 2008; Lind?n 2009).
One of the matters that varies the most between different authors is the desired
outcome. It is useful to set up the implicational hierarchy shown in Table 1 (which
4 There are, however, rare cases of languages which allow the permutation of specific pairs of prefixes,
such as Kagulu (Petzell 2007), Yimas and Karawari (Foley 1991, pages 31?32) as well as Chintang,
Bantawa, and possibly other Kiranti languages where prefix ordering in general is very free (Rai 1984;
Bickel et al 2007).
5 Clitics are affix-like elements that attach to words in particular syntactic positions, rather than to words
of particular categories as proper affixes do. The English genitive -?s is sometimes classified as a clitic,
because you can say things like The girl I met yesterday?s purse (the -?s attaches to the end of the noun
phrase, regardless of the part of speech of the last word, an adverb in this case). This could not happen
with an inflectional suffix like the plural -s: *The girl I met yesterdays cannot mean The girls I met yesterday.
311
Computational Linguistics Volume 37, Number 2
Table 1
Levels of power of morphological analysis.
Form Meaning
Affix list A list of the affixes
?
Same-stem decision Given two words, decide if
they are affixations of the
same stem
Given two words, decide if
they are affixations of the
same lexeme
?
Segmentation Given a word, segment it
into stem and affix(es)
Morphological analysis A functional labeling for the
affixes in the segmentation
?
Inflection tables A list of the affixation
possibilities for all stems
Paradigm list A list of the paradigms for
all stem types, complete
with functional labels for
paradigm slots
?
Lexicon+Paradigm A list of the paradigms and a list of all stems with information
of which paradigm each stem belongs to
?
Justification A linguistically and methodologically informed motivation
for the morphological description of a language
need of course not correspond to steps taken in an actual algorithm). The division
is implicational in the sense that if one can do the morphological analysis of a lower
level in the table, one can also easily produce the analysis of any of the levels above it.
Reflecting a fundamental assumption underlying most ULM work, form and meaning
(semantics) are kept separate in the table (see Section 2). For example, if one can perform
segmentation into stem and affixes, one can decide if two words are of the same stem
(if meaning is disregarded) or the same lexeme (if meaning is taken into account). The
converse need not hold; it is perfectly possible to answer the question of whether two
words are of the same stem with high accuracy, without having to commit to what the
actual stem should be.
Many recent articles fail to deal properly with previous and related work, some
reinvent heuristics that have been proposed earlier, and there is little modularization
taking place. Previous surveys and overviews for a general audience are Borin (1991),
Batchelder (1997, pages 66?68), Powers (1998), Clark (2001, pages 80?82), Xanthos
(2007, pages 95?107), Goldsmith (2001), Daelemans (2004, page 1898), Roark and Sproat
(2007, pages 116?136), Hammarstr?m (2007b, pages 10?15), Chan (2008, pages 48?60),
Hammarstr?m (2009b, pages 14?21), Borin (2009), Goldsmith (2010), and, to a more
limited extent, the related-work sections of individual research papers. Kurimo, Creutz,
and Turunen (2007), Kurimo, Creutz, and Varjokallio (2008a, 2008b), Kurimo and
Turunen (2008), Kurimo and Varjokallio (2008), and McNamee (2008) are overviews
of systems in the MorphoChallenge of the respective year. However, we will try to
be more comprehensive than previous surveys and discuss the ideas in the field
critically.
312
Hammarstr?m and Borin Unsupervised Learning of Morphology
We will not attempt a comparison in terms of accuracy figures as this is wholly
impossible, not only because of the great variation in goals but also because most
descriptions do not specify their algorithm(s) in enough detail. Fortunately, this aspect is
better handled in controlled competitions, such as the Unsupervised Morpheme Analysis?
MorphoChallenge6 which offers tasks of segmentation of Finnish, English, German,
Arabic, and Turkish.
2. History and Motivation of ULM
Usually and justifiedly, the work of Harris (1955, 1967) is given as the starting point
of ULM. From another perspective, however, the same work by Harris can be said to
equally represent the culmination of an endeavor in the linguistic school of thought
known as American structuralism, to formalize the process of linguistic description
into so-called linguistic discovery procedures.
The variety of American structuralism which concerned itself most with the formal-
ization of linguistic discovery procedures is often connected with the name of Leonard
Bloomfield, and its core tenet may be succinctly summed up in Bloomfield?s oft-quoted
dictum: ?The only useful generalizations about language are inductive generalizations?
(Bloomfield 1933, page 20). The so-called ?extremist Post-Bloomfieldians? took this
program a step further: ?From Bloomfield?s justified insistence on formal, rather than
semantic, features as the starting-point for linguistic analysis, this group (especially
Harris) set up as a theoretical aim the description of linguistic structure exclusively in
terms of distribution? (Hall 1987, page 156).
The earliest reason for interest in ULM was thus?at least in part?methodological
and arguably even ideological, but not (unlike at least some of the later ULM work)
motivated by, for example, a desire to simulate language acquisition in humans.
More or less simultaneously with but independently of Harris, the Russian linguist
Andreev launched a program much like that of Harris.7 Andreev?s work is much less
known than that of Harris?s, and for this reason we will describe it in some detail here.
In a series of publications (Andreev 1959, 1963, 1965b, 1967), he develops an ?algorithm
for statistical-combinatory modeling of languages.? This is part of a research program
which, just like that of Harris, aims at eliminating semantics and considerations of
meaning completely from the process of ?discovery? of language structure.
Thus, Andreev claims to be able to go from unsegmented transcribed speech all the
way up to syntax, using basically one and the same approach grounded in text (corpus)
statistics. Given our focus on ULM, here we will be concerned only with his approach
as applied to morphological segmentation.
Andreev?s approach is much more explicitly based in text statistics?and to some
extent in language typology?than Harris?s work. The algorithm for morphological
segmentation is described in some detail in the works of Andreev and his colleagues.
It relies on statistics of letter frequencies in a text corpus, and of average word length
in characters and average sentence length in words. From these statistics he calculates a
number of heuristic thresholds which are used to iteratively grow affix candidates from
characters at given positions in text words, and paradigm candidates from the resulting
segmentations. Instead of looking at successor/predecessor counts or transition proba-
bilities, Andreev looks at character positions in relation to word edges, from the first and
6 Web site http://www.cis.hut.fi/morphochallenge2009/ accessed 10 September 2009.
7 To our knowledge, Andreev never refers to Harris?s work.
313
Computational Linguistics Volume 37, Number 2
the last character inwards no further than the average word length. At each position, the
amount of overrepresentation is calculated for each character found in this position in
some word. The overrepresentation (?correlative function? in Andreev?s terminology)
is defined as the relative frequency of the character in this word position divided by
its relative frequency in the corpus. The character?position combinations are used in
order of decreasing overrepresentation in an iterative see-saw procedure, where affix
and stem candidates are collected in alternating iterations of the algorithm. Andreev?s
approach reflects the same intuition as that of Harris; we would expect word-edge
sequences of highly overrepresented characters to be flanked by marked differences
in predecessor or successor counts calculated according to Harris?s method.
A concrete example of how Andreev?s method works (with the finer details omit-
ted) is the following, originally presented by Andreeva (1963), but the presentation here
is partly based on that in Andreev (1967).
In a 900,000-word corpus of electronics texts in Russian, the most overrepresented
letter was <j> (Russian <i?>) in the last position of the word, where it is eight times as
frequent as in the corpus as a whole (Andreeva 1963, page 49). For the words ending in
<j>, its most overrepresented predecessor was <o>, and using some thresholds derived
from corpus statistics, the first affix candidate found was -oj (Russian -<oi?>).Removing
this ending from all words in which it appears and matching the remainders of the
words (i.e., putative stems) against the other words of the corpus, yields a set of words
from which additional suffix candidates emerge (including the null suffix). This set of
words is then iteratively reduced, using the admissible suffix candidates (those below
a certain length exceeding a heuristic threshold of overrepresentation) in each step, as
long as at least two stem candidates remain. In other words: There must be at least two
stems in the corpus appearing with all the suffix candidates. In the Russian experiment
reported by Andreeva (1963), a complete adjective paradigm was induced, with 12
different suffixes. The initial suffix candidate, -oj, has a high functional load and conse-
quently a high text frequency: It is the most ambiguous of the Russian adjective suffixes,
appearing in four different slots in the adjective paradigm, and is also homonymous
with a noun suffix.
In Andreev (1965b) the method is tested extensively on Russian, which is the subject
of several papers in the volume, and a number of other languages: Albanian (Per?ikov
1965), Armenian (Melkumjan 1965), Bulgarian (Fedulova 1965), Czech (O?igova
1965), English (Malahovskij 1965), Estonian (Hol?m 1965), French (Kordi 1965), German
(Fitialova 1965), Hausa (Fihman 1965a), Hungarian (Andreev 1965a), Latvian (Jakubajtis
1965), Serbo-Croatian (Panina 1965), Swahili (Fihman 1965b), Ukrainian (Eliseeva 1965),
and Vietnamese (Jaku?eva 1965). As an aside, we may note that only after the turn of
the millennium are we again seeing this variety of languages in ULM work. Most of
these studies are small-scale proof-of-concept experiments on corpora of varying sizes
(from a few thousand words in many of the studies up to close to one million words for
Russian). The outcomes are more often than not quite small ?paradigmoid fragments,?
that is, incomplete and not always in correspondence with traditional segmentations.
It is noteworthy, however, that the method could not produce a single instance of
morphological segmentation for Vietnamese (Jaku?eva 1965, page 228), which is as it
should be, because Vietnamese is often held forth as a language without morphology.
The papers describing these experiments are short, and it is not always clear exactly
what has been done. In fact, computers are not mentioned at all in most of the papers;
on the contrary, it is quite clear that at least some of the experiments have been carried
out manually. In principle, because Andreev and the other authors in Andreev (1965b)
describe the procedure in great detail, it should be possible to replicate some of the
314
Hammarstr?m and Borin Unsupervised Learning of Morphology
findings (cf. Altmann and Lehfeldt 1980, pages 195?198). To our knowledge, there
has been one attempt to do this, by Cromm (1997), who reimplemented the method
and tested it on the German Bible, experimenting with various parameter settings
and also making some changes to the method itself. He notes that several parameters
that Andreev provides mostly without motivation or comment in fact can be changed
in a more accepting direction, leading to much increased recall without much loss
in precision. Unfortunately, however, in his short paper, Cromm does not provide
enough information about the algorithm or the changes that he made to it, so that the
Russian original is still the only publicly available source for the details of Andreev?s
approach.
A very different, more practically oriented, motivation for ULM came in the 1980s,
beginning with the supervised morphology learning ideas by Wothke (1985, 1986) and
Klenk (1985a, 1985b) which later led to partly unsupervised methods (see the following).
Because full natural language lexica, at the time, were too big to fit in working memory,
these authors were looking for a way to analyze or stem running words in a ?nicht-
lexikalisches? manner, that is, without the storage and use of a large lexicon. This
motivation is now obsolete.
The interest in purebred ULM was fairly low until about 1990, however, with only
a few works appearing between the mid 1960s and 1990. Especially in the 1980s, the
focus in computational morphology was on the development of finite-state approaches
with hand-written rules, but in the course of the following decade, interest in ULM
rose greatly, in the wake of a general increased attention during the 1990s to statistical
and information-theoretically informed approaches in natural language processing.
In speech processing, the problem of word segmentation is ever-present, and as the
computational tools for taking on this problem became increasingly sophisticated and
increasingly available not least as the result of a general development of computing
hardware and software, researchers in linguistics and computational linguistics started
taking a fresh look at the problems of word segmentation and ULM.
The work of Goldsmith (2000, 2001, 2006) represents a kind of focal point here. He
pulls together a number of strands from earlier work, sets them against a theoretical
background informed both by information theory (MDL) and linguistics, and uses
them specifically to address the problem of ULM?in particular, unsupervised learning
of inflectional morphology?and not, for instance, that of word segmentation or of
stemming for information retrieval, and so forth.
Further, there has been the idea that ULM could contribute to various open ques-
tions in the field of first-language acquisition (see, e.g., Brent, Murthy, and Lundberg
1995; Batchelder 1997; Brent 1999; Clark 2001; Goldwater 2007). However, the connec-
tion is still rather vague and even if ULM has matured, it is not clear what implications,
if any, this has for child language acquisition. Children have access to semantics and
pragmatics, not just text strings, and it would be very surprising if such cues were not
used at all in first language acquisition. Further, if some ULM technique was shown to
be successful on some reasonably sized corpora, it does not automatically follow that
children can (and do, if they can) use the same technique. Most current ULM techniques
crucially involve long series of number crunching that seem implausible for the child-
learning setting.
After the turn of the century, ULM has become something of a growth industry
in language technology. There are several reasons for this. One obvious reason is a
generally increased interest in machine learning, both theoretically (as a research area
interesting in itself and as a possible tool for modeling human language acquisition
and language learning) and for pragmatic reasons, as a way to reduce the manual work
315
Computational Linguistics Volume 37, Number 2
involved in the construction of the lexical and grammatical knowledge bases needed for
the realization of sophisticated language technology applications.8
Another reason has to do with the acceptance of the world as multilingual and the
understanding that language communities are very unequally endowed with language
technology resources. There are on the order of 7,000 languages spoken in the world
today (Lewis 2009). Their size in number of first-language speakers is very unevenly
distributed. The top 30 languages in the world account for more than 60% of its popu-
lation. At the other end of the scale, we find that most languages are spoken by quite
small communities:
There are close to 7,000 languages in the world, and half of them have fewer than 7,000
speakers each, less than a village. What is more, 80% of the world?s languages have
fewer than 100,000 speakers, the size of a small town. (Ostler 2008, page 2)
On the whole, small language communities will tend to have correspondingly small
financial and other resources that could be spent on the development of language
technology, but the cost of, for example, constructing a lexicon or a parser for a lan-
guage is more or less constant, and not proportional to the number of speakers of the
language.
At the same time, it has been observed over and over again that the use or non-use
of a language in a particular situation?where the language could in principle be used,
but where there is a choice available between two or more languages?is intimately
connected with the attitudes towards the language among the participants. This is
perhaps the most reliable determiner of language use, and not factors such as effort,
lack of vocabulary, and so on, which in many cases seem to be post hoc rationalizations
motivating a choice made on attitudinal grounds. Another way of expressing this is that
languages are more or less prestigious in the eyes of their speakers, and that linguistic
inferiority complexes seem to be common in the world.
However, rather than taking status as an inherent and immutable characteristic of a
language, we should see it for what it is, namely, a perceived characteristic, something
that lies in the eye of the beholder. As such, it can be influenced by human action.
Important for our purposes here is that it has been suggested that making available
modern information and communication technologies for a language, including the
creation of linguistic resources and language technology for it, may serve to raise its
status (see, e.g., the papers in Saxena and Borin 2006).
This, then, is another reason for pursuing ULM: to be able to provide language
technology to language communities lacking the requisite resources. However, ULM,
at least as understood for the purposes of this survey, requires a written language,
which would still exclude a substantial majority of the world?s languages (Borin 2009).
Note that the remainder?languages with a tradition of writing?are not on the whole
small language communities; in the first instance, we are talking about the few hundred
most spoken languages in the world, for example, the 313 languages with at least one
million native speakers (accounting for about 80% of the world?s population) surveyed
by the Linguistic Data Consortium some years back in their Low-density language survey
(Strassel, Maxwell, and Cieri 2003; Borin 2009).
8 Another pragmatic, less savory reason is a general downplaying of linguistic knowledge in the language
technology research community (Reiter 2007).
316
Hammarstr?m and Borin Unsupervised Learning of Morphology
The hope is often expressed in the literature that ULM and other unsupervised
methods could be employed in order to rapidly and cheaply (in terms of human effort)
bootstrap basic language technology resources for new languages.
It should be noted that, even for larger languages, because of the human effort
needed to build computational morphological resources, many such implementations
are not released to the public domain. Also, open domain texts will always contain a
fair share of (inflected) previously unknown words that are not in the lexicon. There
has to be strategy for such out-of-dictionary words?a ULM-solving algorithm is one
possibility. The ULM problem as specified, therefore, still has a role to play for larger
languages.
Finally, and closely related to the preceding reason, ULM and other kinds of ma-
chine learning of linguistic information are increasingly seen as providing potential
tools in language documentation.9
It has been realized for some time that languages are disappearing at a rapid rate
in the modern world (Krauss 1992, 2007). Many linguists see this loss of linguistic
diversity as a disaster in the cultural and intellectual sphere on a par with the loss of
the world?s biodiversity in the ecological sphere, only on a grander scale; languages
are going extinct more rapidly than species. Enter language documentation (Gippert,
Himmelmann, and Mosel 2006), which is construed as going well beyond traditional
descriptive linguistic fieldwork, aspiring as it does to capture all aspects?linguistic,
cultural, and social?of a language community?s day-to-day life, in video and audio
recordings of a wide range of sociocultural activities, in still images, and in representa-
tive artifacts. Basic linguistic descriptions of lexicon and grammar made on the basis of
transcribed recordings still form an important component of language documentation,
however, and with the realization that languages are disappearing at a far faster rate
than linguists can document them, it is natural to look for ways of making this process
less labor-intensive.10
In summary, we have seen the following motivations for ULM (in chronological
order):
 Linguistic theory
 Elimination of the lexicon
 Child language acquisition
 Morphological engine bootstrapping
 Language description and documentation bootstrapping
As noted, the motivation of eliminating the lexicon is now obsolete, whereas the others
are active to various degrees. By far the most popular motivation has been, and still is,
that of inducing a morphological analyzer/segmentation from raw text data (with little
human intervention) in a well-described language. However, as we have argued herein,
the timing is right for the momentum to carry over also to under-described languages.
9 To our knowledge, Eguchi (1987, page 168) is the first author to suggest ULM as one of several
computational aids to the language documentation fieldworker.
10 For example, in the instructions for the recent large-scale language documentation effort BOLD:PNG?
Basic Oral Language Documentation: Papua New Guinea?we read: ?Try not to spend more than an hour
transcribing a minute of text.? and ?As before, try not to spend more than an hour translating a minute
of text.? www.boldpng.info/bold/stage3.
317
Computational Linguistics Volume 37, Number 2
3. Trends and Techniques in ULM
3.1 Roadmap and Synopsis of Earlier Studies
A chronological listing of earlier work (with very short characterizations) is given in
Table 2. Several papers are co-indexed if they represent essentially the same line of work
by essentially the same author(s).
Given the number of algorithms proposed, it is impossible to go through the tech-
niques and ideas individually. However, we will attempt to cover the main trends and
look at some key questions in more detail.
The problem has been approached in four fundamentally different ways, which we
may summarize in the following way.
(a) Border and Frequency: In this family of methods, if a substring occurs
with a variety of substrings immediately adjacent to it, this is interpreted
as evidence for a segmentation border. In addition, frequent or somehow
overrepresented substrings are given a direct interpretation as candidates
for segmentation. A typical implementation is to subject the data to a
compression formula of some kind, where frequent long substrings with
clear borders offer the optimal compression gain. The outcome of such a
compression scheme gives the segmentation. In addition, for those
approaches which also target paradigms, stem?suffix co-occurrence
statistics are gathered given the segmentation produced, rather than all
possible segmentations.
(b) Group and Abstract: In this family of methods, morphologically related
words are first grouped (clustered into sets, paired, shortlisted, etc.)
according to some metric, which is typically string edit distance, but may
include semantic features (Schone 2001), distributional similarity (Freitag
2005), or frequency signatures (Wicentowski 2002). The next step is to
abstract some morphological pattern that recurs among the groups. Such
emergent patterns provide enough clues for segmentation and can
sometimes be formulated as rules or morphological paradigms.
(c) Features and Classes: In this family of methods, a word is seen as made
up of a set of features?n-grams in Mayfield and McNamee (2003) and
McNamee and Mayfield (2007), and initial/terminal/mid-substring in
De Pauw and Wagacha (2007). Features which occur on many words have
little selective power across the words, whereas features which occur
seldom pinpoint a specific word or stem. To formalize this intuition,
Mayfield and McNamee and McNamee and Mayfield use TF-IDF, and
De Pauw and Wagacha use entropy. Classifying an unseen word reduces
to using its features to select which word(s) it may be morphologically
related to. This decides whether the unseen word is a morphological
variant of some other word, and allows extracting the ?variation? by
which they are related, such as an affix.
(d) Phonological Categories and Separation: In this family of methods, the
phonemes (approximated by graphemes) are first classed into categories,
foremostly, vowel versus consonant. Thereafter, each word is separated
into its vowel skeleton and its consonant skeleton, after which various
318
Hammarstr?m and Borin Unsupervised Learning of Morphology
Table 2
Very brief roadmap of earlier studies.
Model Superv. Experimentation Learns what?
Harris 1955, 1968, 1970 C T English Segmentation
Andreev 1965a, Andreev 1967,
Chapter 2, Per?ikov 1965;
Melkumjan 1965; Fedulova 1965;
O?igova 1965; Malahovskij 1965;
Hol?m 1965; Kordi 1965; Fitialova
1965; Fihman 1965a; Andreev
1965a; Jakubajtis 1965; Panina
1965; Fihman 1965b; Eliseeva
1965; Jaku?eva 1965
C T Vietnamese to
Hungarian (I)
Segmentation
Gammon 1969 C T English Segmentation
Lehmann 1973, pages 71?93 C T French (I) Segmentation
de Kock and Bossaert 1969, 1974,
1978
C T French/Spanish Lexicon+ Paradigms
Faulk and Gustavson 1990 C T English (I) Segmentation
Hafer and Weiss 1974 C T English (IR) Segmentation
Klenk and Langer 1989 C T+SP German Segmentation
Langer 1991 C T+SP German Segmentation
Redlich 1993 C T English (I) Segmentation
Klenk 1992, 1991 C T+SP Spanish Segmentation
Flenner 1992, 1994, 1995 C T+SP Spanish Segmentation
Jan?en 1992 C T+SP French Segmentation
Juola, Hall, and Boggs 1994 C T English Segmentation
Brent 1993, 1999; Brent, Murthy,
and Lundberg 1995; Snover 2002;
Snover, Jarosz, and Brent 2002;
Snover and Brent 2001, 2003
C T English/Child-
English/Polish/
French
Segmentation
Deligne and Bimbot 1997; Deligne
1996
C T English/French (I) Segmentation
Yvon 1996 C T French (I) Segmentation
Kazakov 1997; Kazakov and
Manandhar 1998, 2001
C T French/English Segmentation
Jacquemin 1997 C T English Segmentation
Cromm 1997 C T German Segmentation
Gaussier 1999 C T French/English (I) Lexicon+ Paradigms
D?jean 1998a, 1998b C T Turkish/English/
Korean/French/
Swahili/
Vietnamese (I)
Affix Lists
Medina Urrea 2000, 2003, 2006b C T Spanish Affix List
Schone and Jurafsky 2000, 2001a;
Schone 2001
C T English Segmentation
Goldsmith 2000, 2001, 2006; Belkin
and Goldsmith 2002; Goldsmith,
Higgins, and Soglasnova 2001;
Hu et al 2005b; Xanthos, Hu,
and Goldsmith 2006
C T English (I) Lexicon+ Paradigms
Baroni 2000, 2003 C T Child-English/
English
Affix List
Cho and Han 2002 C T Korean Segmentation
Sharma, Kalita, and Das 2002, 2003;
Sharma and Das 2002
C T Assamese Lexicon+ Paradigms
Baroni, Matiasek, and Trost 2002 C/NC T English/German (I) Related word pairs
Bati 2002 C/NC T Amharic Lexicon+ Paradigms
Creutz 2003, 2006; Creutz and
Lagus 2002, 2004, 2005a, 2005b,
2005c, 2007; Creutz, Lagus, and
Virpioja 2005; Hirsim?ki et al
2003; Creutz et al 2005
C T Finnish/Turkish/
English
Segmentation
319
Computational Linguistics Volume 37, Number 2
Table 2
(continued)
Model Superv. Experimentation Learns what?
Kontorovich, Don, and Singer 2003 C T English Segmentation
Medina Urrea and D?az 2003;
Medina-Urrea 2006a, 2008
C T Chuj/Ral?muri/Czech Affix List
Mayfield and McNamee 2003;
McNamee and Mayfield 2007
- - 8 West European
languages (IR)
Same-stem
Zweigenbaum, Hadouche, and
Grabar 2003; Hadouche 2002
C T Medical French Segmentation
Pirrelli et al 2004; Pirrelli and
Herreros 2007; Calderone 2008
C T Italian/English/Arabic Unclear
Johnson and Martin 2003b C T Inuktitut Unclear
Katrenko 2004 C T Ukrainian Lexicon+ Paradigms
C?avar et al 2004a, 2004b; C?avar,
Rodrigues, and Schrementi 2006;
C?avar et al 2006
C T Child-English Unclear
Rodrigues and C?avar 2005, 2007 NC T Arabic Segmentation
Monson 2004, 2009; Monson et al
2004, 2007a, 2007b, 2008, 2008a,
2008b
C T English/Spanish/
Mapudungun (I)
Segmentation
Yarowsky and Wicentowski 2000;
Wicentowski 2002, 2004
C/NC T 30-ish mostly European
type languages
Segmentation +
Rewrite Rules
Gelbukh, Alexandrov, and Han 2004 C - English Segmentation
Argamon et al 2004 C T English Segmentation
Goldsmith et al 2005; Hu et al 2005a C/NC T Unclear Unclear
Bacchin, Ferro, and Melucci 2005,
2002a, 2002b; Nunzio et al 2004
C T Italian/English Segmentation
Oliver 2004, Chapter 4?5 C T Catalan Paradigms
Bordag 2005a, 2005b, 2007, 2008 C T English/German Segmentation
Hammarstr?m 2005, 2006a, 2006b,
2007b, 2009a, 2009b
C - Maori to Warlpiri Same-stem
Bernhard 2005a, 2005b, 2006, 2007,
2008
C T Finnish/Turkish/English Segmentation+
Related sets
of words
Keshava and Pitler 2005 C T Finnish/Turkish/English Segmentation
Johnsen 2005 C T Finnish/Turkish/English Segmentation
Atwell and Roberts 2005 C T Finnish/Turkish/English Segmentation
Dang and Choudri 2005 C T Finnish/Turkish/English Segmentation
ur Rehman and Hussain 2005 C T Finnish/Turkish/English Segmentation
Jordan, Healy, and Keselj 2005, 2006 C T Finnish/Turkish/English Segmentation
Goldwater, Griffiths, and Johnson
2005; Goldwater 2007;
Naradowsky and Goldwater 2009
C T English/Child-English Segmentation
Freitag 2005 C T English Segmentation
Golcher 2006 C - English/German Lexicon+ Paradigms
Arabsorkhi and Shamsfard 2006 C T Persian Segmentation
Chan 2006, Chan 2008,
pages 101?139
C T English Paradigms
Demberg 2007 C/NC T English/German/
Finnish/Turkish
Segmentation
Dasgupta and Ng 2006, 2007a;
2007b; Dasgupta 2007
C T Bengali Segmentation
De Pauw and Wagacha 2007 C/NC T Gikuyu Segmentation
Tepper 2007; Tepper and Xia 2008 C/NC T+RR English/Turkish Analysis
Xanthos 2007 NC T Arabic Lexicon+ Paradigms
Majumder et al 2007;
Majumder, Mitra, and Pal
2008
C T French/Bengali/French/
Bulgar-
ian/Hungarian
Analysis
Zeman 2008, 2009 C - Czech/English/German/
Finnish
Segmentation+
Paradigms
Kohonen, Virpioja, and Klami
2008
C T Finnish/Turkish/English Segmentation
320
Hammarstr?m and Borin Unsupervised Learning of Morphology
Table 2
(continued)
Model Superv. Experimentation Learns what?
Goodman 2008 C T Finnish/Turkish/English Segmentation
Gol?nia 2008 C T Turkish/Russian Segmentation
Pandey and Siddiqui 2008 C T Hindi Segmentation+
Paradigms
Johnson 2008 C T Sesotho Segmentation
Snyder and Barzilay 2008 C/NC T Hebrew/Arabic/Aramaic/
English
Segmentation
Spiegler et al 2008 C T Zulu Segmentation
Moon, Erk, and Baldridge 2009 C T English/Uspanteko Segmentation
Poon, Cherry, and Toutanova
2009
C T Arabic/Hebrew Segmentation
Abbreviations: C = Concatenative; I = Impressionistic evaluation; IR = Evaluation only in terms of Information Retrieval
Performance; NC = Non-concatenative; RR = Hand-written rewrite rules; SP = Some manually curated segmentation points;
T = Thresholds and Parameters to be set by a human.
frequency techniques reminiscent of those of the (a) approaches can
be applied. This strategy is targeted towards the special kind of
non-concatenative morphology called intercalated morphology11 with
the observation that, empirically, in those (relatively few) languages
which have intercalated morphology, it does seem to depend on
vowel/consonant considerations. In Xanthos (2007), the phonological
categories are inferred in an unsupervised manner (cf. Goldsmith and
Xanthos 2009) whereas in Bati (2002) and Rodrigues and C?avar (2005,
2007) they are seen as given by the writing system.
The first two, (a) and (b), enjoy a fair amount of popularity in the reviewed collection of
work, though (a) is much more common and was the only kind used up to about 1997.
The last two, (c) and (d), have been utilized only by the sets of authors cited therein.
Let us now look at some salient questions in more detail. The following notation
will be used in formal statements:
 w, s, b, x, y, . . . ? ??: lowercase-letter variables range over strings of some
alphabet ? and are variously called words, segments, strings, and so forth.
 W, S, . . . ? ??: capital-letter variables range over sets of
words/strings/segments.
 C, . . .: capital-letter caligraphic variables range over multisets of
words/strings/segments.
 | ? |: is overloaded to denote both the length of a string and the cardinality
of a set.
 w[i]: denotes the character at position i in the string w. For example, if
w = hello then w[1] = h.
 w[i : j]: denotes the segment from position i to j (inclusive) of the string w.
For example, if w = hello then w[1 : |w|] = hello.
11 Also known as templatic morphology or root-and-pattern morphology.
321
Computational Linguistics Volume 37, Number 2
 WC is used to denote the set of words in a corpus C.
 f pW (x) = |{z|xz ? W}|: the (prefix) frequency of x, that is, the number of
words in W with initial segment x.
 f sW (x) = |{z|zx ? W}|: the (suffix) frequency of x, that is, the number of
words in W with final segment x.
Subscript letters are dropped when understood from the context.
3.2 Border and Frequency Methods
3.2.1 Letter Successor Varieties. Most (if not all) authors trace the inspiration for their
border heuristics back to Harris (1955). In fact, Harris defines a family of heuristics,
all based on letter successor/predecessor varieties. They were originally presented as
applying to utterances made up of phoneme sequences (Harris 1955), but they apply
just the same to words, namely, grapheme sequences (Harris 1970). The basic counting
strategy, labelled letter successor varieties (LSV) by Hafer and Weiss (1974), is as follows.
Given a set of words W, the letter successor variety of a string x of length i is defined as
the number of distinct letters that occupy the i + 1st position in words that begin with x
in W:
LSV(x) = |{z[|x| + 1]|z = xy ? W}|
Table 3 shows an example of a letter successor count on a tiny contrived wordlist.
We may define the letter predecessor variety (LPV) analogously. For a given suffix
x, the LPV(x) is the number of distinct letters that occupy the position immediately
preceding x in the words of W that end in x. LSV/LPV counts for an example word are
shown in Table 4.
It should be noted that Harris (1955, page 192, footnote 4) explicitly targets the
variety in letter successors types (i.e., is only interested in which letters ever occur in the
successor position, as opposed to being interested in their frequencies). For example, if
there are two different letters occurring in successor position, one occurring a thousand
times and the other once, Harris?s letter successor variety is still two?the same as if
the two letters occurred once each. Subsequent authors have suggested that the full
frequency distribution of the token letter successors carries a better signal of morpheme
boundary. After all, if there is a significant token frequency skewing, this suggests
that we are in the middle of coherent morpheme. Moreover, mere type counts may
be influenced by phonotactic constraints (consonant after vowel, etc.), which come out
less significant in token frequency counts (Goldsmith 2006, page 6). Already the earliest
Table 3
Example of LSV-counts for some example prefixes (bottom) based on a small example word
list (top).
W = {abide, able, abode, and, art, at, bat}
x a ab abe . . .
{z|z = xy ? W} {abide, able, abode, and, art, at} {abide, able, abode} ? . . .
LSV(x) 4 (b,n,r,t) 3 (i,l,o) 0 . . .
322
Hammarstr?m and Borin Unsupervised Learning of Morphology
Table 4
LSV counts for d-, di-, dis-, . . . , disturbance- and LPV counts for -e, -ce, -nce, . . . , -disturbance. All
figures are computed on the Brown Corpus of English (Francis and Kucera 1964), using the
27 letter alphabet [a ? z] plus the apostrophe. There are |W| = 42,353 word types in lowercase.
LSV 13 20 21 6 1 1 3 1 1 1 1
d i s t u r b a n c e
LPV 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 19 6 12 25
follow-ups to Harris (Gammon 1969; Hafer and Weiss 1974; Juola, Hall, and Boggs 1994)
experiment with replacing the raw LSV/LPV counts with the entropy of the character
token distribution. The character token distribution after a given segment can be seen as
a probability distribution whose events are the characters of the alphabet. The entropy
of this probability distribution then measures how unpredictable the next character is
after a given segment. In general, for a discrete random variable X with possible values
x1, . . . , xn, the expression for entropy takes the following form:
H(X) = ?
n
?
i=1
p(xi) log2 p(xi)
Thus, with alphabet ?, the letter successor entropy (LSE) for a prefix x is defined as
LSE(x) = ?
?
c??
f p(xc)
f p(x)
log2
f p(xc)
f p(x)
At least two authors (Golcher 2006; Hammarstr?m 2009b) have questioned entropy as
the appropriate measure for highlighting a morpheme boundary. Entropy measures
how skewed the distribution is as a whole, that is, how deviant the most deviant
member is, in addition to the second member, the third, and so on. If there is no mor-
pheme boundary, the morpheme continues with (at least) one character. So one deviant,
highly predictable, character is necessary and sufficient to signal a non-break, and it is
arguably irrelevant if there are second- and third-place, and so forth, highly predictable
characters that also signal the absence of a morpheme boundary. For example, the
character token distribution before -ng is shown in Table 5. Obviously, the fact that of
the 3,352 occurrences of -ng, 3,258 of them are preceded by -i-, says that the absence of
a morpheme boundary is highly likely. Now, does it matter that also another 35 are -o-
versus only 4 for -e-? Entropy would also take into account the skewedness of -o- versus
-e-, whereas for Hammarstr?m (2009b) and Golcher (2006) only the skewedness of the
most skewed character (i.e., the character that potentially constitutes the morpheme
continuation) is interesting, in this example -i-. Therefore, these approaches only use the
maximally skewed character to predict the presence/absence of a morpheme boundary.
The letter successor max-drop (LSM) for a prefix x is defined as the fraction not occupied
by its maximally skewed one-character continuation:
LSM(x) = 1 ? maxc??
f p(xc)
f p(x)
323
Computational Linguistics Volume 37, Number 2
Table 5
The character token distributon for the character immediately preceding -ng, computed on the
Brown Corpus of English (Francis and Kucera 1964).
-ng 3,352
-n- 1 -l- l -h- l -e- 4 -u- 26 -a- 26 -o- 35 -i- 3,258
Table 6
Normalized LPV/LPE/LPM-scores for -e, -ce, -nce, . . . , -disturbance. All figures are computed on
the Brown Corpus of English (Francis and Kucera 1964), using the 27-letter alphabet [a ? z] plus
the apostrophe. There are |W| = 42, 353 word types in lowercase.
d i s t u r b a n c e
LPV 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.70 0.22 0.44 0.92
LPE 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.74 0.28 0.38 0.81
LPM 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.83 0.53 0.37 0.85
Which one of LSV/LSE/LSM is the ?correct? one? The answer, of course, depends
on one?s theory of affixation, for which the field has no single answer (see Section 3.6,
subsequently).
Empirically, however, the three measures are highly correlated. To compare the
three, we normalize them to their maxima in order to get a ?border? score ? 1. The
maximum achievable LSV is the alphabet size, so the normalized LSV(x) = LSV(x)|?| .
The maximum achievable LSE is a uniform distribution across the alphabet, so the
normalized LSE(x) =
LSE(x)
?|?|?( 1|?| log2
1
|?| ) . The maximum achievable LSM is a uniform
distribution across the alphabet, so the normalized LSM(x) =
LSM(x)
1? 1|?|
. The predecessor
analogues LPV, LPE, LPM are obvious. Table 6 shows an example word and its
normalized predecessor scores of the three kinds.
As in the example, the three different measures have nearly the same story to tell
in general, at least for English. For the three measures, Table 7 shows the Pearson
product-moment correlation coefficient between the LPH/LPE/LPM-values of all ter-
minal segments, as well as the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient between
the LPH/LPE/LPM-ranks of all terminal segments. Most usages in the literature of the
letter successor counts have been relative to other counts on the same language. In such
cases, the rank correlations show that all three measures can be expected to have near
identical effects.
Table 7
The Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient between LPH/LPE/LPM-values (r) and
the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient between LPH/LPE/LPM-ranks (r-rank).
All values are computed on the Brown Corpus of English (Francis and Kucera 1964), using the
27-letter alphabet [a ? z] plus the apostrophe. There are |W| = 42, 353 word types in lowercase.
LPH&LPE LPE&LPM LPM&LPH
r 0.872 0.957 0.729
r-rank 0.999 0.998 0.996
324
Hammarstr?m and Borin Unsupervised Learning of Morphology
A number of concrete ways to use LSV/LPVs for segmentation are suggested by
Harris (1955) and Hafer and Weiss (1974); for instance:
(a) Cutoff: By far the easiest way to segment a test word is first to pick some
cutoff threshold k and then break the word wherever its successor (or
predecessor or both) variety reaches or exceeds k.
(b) Peak and plateau: In the peak and plateau strategy, a cut in a word w is
made after a prefix x if and only if LSV(w[1 : |x| ? 1]) ? LSV(x) ?
LSV(w[1 : |x| + 1]); that is, if the successor count for x forms a local ?peak?
or sits on a ?plateau? of the LSV-sequence along the word.
(c) Complete word: A break is made after a word prefix (or before a word
suffix) if that prefix (or suffix) is found to be a complete word in the corpus
word list W.
These and similar strategies have been discussed and evaluated in various settings in
the literature, and it is unlikely that any strategy based on LSV/LSE/LSM-counts alone
will produce high-precision results. The example in Table 6 showing morpheme border
heuristics on a specific word illustrates the matter at heart. Any intuitively plausible
theory of affixation should allow abundant combination of morphemes without respect
to their phonological form, which predicts that high LSV/LSE/LSM values should
emerge at morpheme boundaries. However, there appears to be no reason why the
converse should hold?high LSV/LSE/LSM values could emerge in other places of the
word as well. Indeed, any frequent character at the end or beginning of a word may
also be expected to show high LSV/LSE/LSM around it, such as the -e at the end of
disturbance which has higher values than, for example, -ance. Therefore, simply inferring
that high LSV/LSE/LSM values indicate a morpheme border is not a sound principle in
general.
A different (but less successful, even when supervised) way to use character se-
quence counts is that associated with Ursula Klenk and various colleagues (Klenk and
Langer 1989; Klenk 1991, 1992; Langer 1991; Flenner 1992, 1994, 1995; Jan?en 1992). For
each character bigram c1c2, they record, with some supervision in the form of manual
curation, at what percentage there is a morpheme boundary before |c1c2, between c1|c2,
after c1c2|, or none. A new word can then be segmented by sliding a bigram window
and taking the split which satisfies the corresponding bigrams the best. For example,
given a word singing, if the window happens to be positioned at -gi- in the middle,
the bigram splits ng|, g|i, and |in are relevant to deciding whether sing|ing is a good
segmentation. Exactly how to do the split by sliding the window and combining such
bigram split statistics is subject to a fair amount of discussion. It became apparent,
however, that the appropriateness of a bigram split is dependent on, for example, the
position in a word?-ed is likely at the end of a word, but hardly in any other position?
and exception lists and cover-up rules had to be introduced, before the approach was
abandoned altogether.
3.2.2 Frequency Heuristics. For reasons just explained, most (if not all) recent authors
in the border-and-frequency tradition have incorporated another measure, comple-
mentary to a morpheme border heuristic. This measure is nearly always directly or
indirectly related to frequency, that is, frequent segments of some kind are singled out.
Frequency has been used in many different ways. The simplest way is to look at the
raw frequency of segments of any length, but, inevitably, this will sweep in any short
325
Computational Linguistics Volume 37, Number 2
segment. Indeed, better candidates for morphemic segmentation are segments which
are somehow overrepresented, that is, more frequent than random. There are various
ways to define this property as well, including the following.
Overrepresentation as more-frequent-than-its-length: For a segment x of |x| charac-
ters, it is overrepresented to the degree that it is more common than expected
from a segment of its length. This applies to a segment in any position.
f (x)
|?||x|
Overrepresentation as more-frequent-than-its-parts: For a segment x = c1c2 . . . cn of n
characters, it is overrepresented to the degree that it is more common than ex-
pected from a co-occurrence of its parts. This applies to a segment in any position.
f (c1c2 . . . cn)
f (c1)f (c2) . . . (cn)
Overrepresentation as more-frequent-as-suffix: For a segment x, it is overrepresented
to the degree that its probability as a suffix is higher than in any other (non-
final) position. This applies to a segment in terminal position (but with obvious
analogues for other positions).
With such measures, many authors have singled out affixes above a certain over-
representation-value threshold or overrepresentation-rank threshold.
Threshold values are unsatisfactory because typically there is no theory in which
to interpret them. Although they may be set ad hoc with some success, such settings
do not automatically generalize. Such considerations have led many authors to devise
compression-inspired models for exploiting skewed frequencies. In particular, several
different sets of authors have invoked Minimum Description Length (MDL) as the
motivation for a given formula to compress input data into a morphologically analyzed
representation.12
The MDL principle is a general-purpose method of statistical inference. It views the
learning/inference process as data compression: For a given set of hypotheses H and
data set D, we should try to find the hypothesis in H that compresses D most (Gr?nwald
2007, pages 3?40). Concretely, such a calculation can take the the following form. If L(H)
is the length, in bits, of the description of the hypothesis; and L(D|H) is the length, in
bits, of the description of the data when encoded with the help of the hypothesis, then
MDL aims to minimize L(H) + L(D|H).
In principle, all of the works that have invoked MDL in their ULM method act as
follows. A particular way Q of describing morphological regularities is conceived that
has two components which we may call patterns P and data D. A coding scheme is
devised to describe any P and to describe any collection of actual words with some
specific P and D. A greedy search is done for a local minimum of the sum L(P) + L(D|P)
to describe the set of words W (in some approaches) or the bag of word tokens C (in
12 To our knowledge, Brent (1993) is the first author to do so for morphological segmentation.
326
Hammarstr?m and Borin Unsupervised Learning of Morphology
other approaches) of the input text data.13 To take one concrete example, Goldsmith?s
(2006) particular way Q of describing morphological regularities is to allow for a list of
stems, a list of affixes, a list of signatures (structures indicating which stems may appear
with which affixes, i.e., a list of pointers to stems, and a list of pointers to suffixes). The
search is then among different lists of stems, affixes, and signatures to see which is the
shortest to account for the words of the corpus. Further details of such coding schemes
need not concern us here, but for a range of options see, for example, Goldsmith (2001,
2006), Xanthos, Hu, and Goldsmith (2006), Creutz and Lagus (2007), Argamon et al
(2004), Arabsorkhi and Shamsfard (2006), C?avar et al (2004b), Baroni (2003), or Brent,
Murthy, and Lundberg (1995).
It should be noted that the label MDL, in at least the terminology of Gr?nwald
(2007, pages 37?38), is infelicitous for such cases where the P, D-search is not among
different description languages, but among varations within a fixed language Q. For
example, in the stem-affixes-signatures way of description (a specific Q), the search
does not include other (possibly more parsimonious?) ways of description that do not
use stems, affixes, or signatures at all. For the MDL-label to apply with its full philo-
sophical underpinnings, the scope must include any possible compression algorithm,
namely, any Turing machine. In this respect it is important to note that, compared to the
schemes devised so far, Lempel-Ziv compression, another description language, should
yield a superior compression (as, in fact, conceded by Baroni 2000, pages 146?147).
MDL-inspired optimization schemes have achieved very competitive results in practice,
however, and must be considered the leading paradigm to exploit skewed frequencies
for morphological analysis.
3.2.3 Paradigm Induction. The next step after segmentation is to induce systematic alter-
nation patterns, or (inflectional) paradigms,14 and this is usually done as an extension
of a border-and-frequency approach. For purposes of ULM, a paradigm is typically
defined as a maximally large set of affixes whose members systematically occur on an
open class of stems. For a number of reasons, finding paradigms is a major challenge.
The number of theoretically possible paradigms is exponential in the number of affixes
(as paradigms are sets of affixes). Paradigms do not need to be disjoint; in real languages
they are typically not. Rather, words in the same part of speech tend to share affixes
across paradigms (Carstairs 1983). In addition, without any language-specific knowl-
edge, basically the only evidence at hand is co-occurrence of stems and affixes (i.e.,
when a word occurs in the corpus it evidences the co-occurrence of a [hypothetical]
stem and suffix making up that word). Paradigm induction would be an easy problem
if all affixes that could legally appear on a word did appear on each such word in a raw
text corpus. This is, as is well known, far from the case. A typical corpus distribution
is that a few lexemes appear very frequently but by far most lexemes appear once or
only a few times (Baayen 2001). What this means for morphology is that most lexemes
will appear with only one or a minority of their possible affixes, even in languages with
relatively little morphology. Of course, there is also the risk that some rare affix, for
example, the Classical Greek alternative medial 3p. pl. aorist imperative ending -????
13 As most approaches define their task as capturing the set of legal morphological forms, their goal should
be to compress W, but see Goldwater (2007, pages 53?59) for arguments for compressing C.
14 Note also that paradigm information can be fed back into the segmentation process in that some affixes
which do poorly according to some paradigm-related measure (e.g., affixes that do not take part in many
paradigms) can be weeded out.
327
Computational Linguistics Volume 37, Number 2
(Blomqvist and Jastrup 1998), may not appear at all even in a very large Classical Greek
corpus.
More formally, consider a morphological paradigm (set of suffixes) P that is a true
paradigm according to linguistic analysis. If k lexemes that are inflected according to P
occur in a corpus, each of the k lexemes will occur in 1 ? i ? |P| forms. The number of
forms i that a lexeme occurs in is likely not to be normally distributed. Most lexemes
will occur in only one form, and only very few, if any, lexemes will occur in all |P|
forms. It appears that for most languages and most paradigms, the number of lexemes
that occur in i forms tends to decrease logarithmically in i (Chan 2008, pages 75?84). As
an example, consider the three most common paradigms in Swedish and the frequency
of forms in Table 8.
Works which have attempted nevertheless to tackle the matter of paradigms, at
least for languages with one-slot morphology, include Zeman 2008, 2009, Hammarstr?m
(2009b), and Monson (2009). They explicitly or implicitly make use of the following two
heuristics to narrow down the search space:
 Languages tend to have a small number of paradigms (where ?small?
means fewer than 100 paradigms with at least 100 member stems each).
 Languages tend to have only small paradigms (where ?small? means
fewer than 50), that is, the number of affixes in each paradigm is small.
Agglutinative languages, which have several layers of affixes, can be said
to obey this generalization in the sense that each layer has few members,
whereas conversely, the full paradigm achieves considerable size
combinatorially.
Although we know of no empirical evulation of them, in the impression of the present
authors, the two heuristics appear to be cross-linguistically valid.
Chan (2006) is an exceptionally clean study of inducing paradigms, assuming that
the segmentation is already given. The problem then takes the form of a matrix with
Table 8
The three most common paradigms in Swedish according to the SALDO lexicon and
morphological resources (Borin, Forsberg, and L?nngren 2008), as computed on the SUC 1.0
corpus (Ejerhed and K?llgren 1997) of 55,000 word types.
Adjective 1st decl Noun 3rd decl Verb 1st conj
(e.g., gul ?yellow?) (e.g., tid ?time?) (e.g., lag- ?fix?)
-a 2022 -? 1619 -a 1001
-? 1821 -en 1141 -ade 948
-t 1572 -er 1072 -ar 883
-e 221 -erna 583 -at 579
-are 208 -s 310 -as 482
-s 114 -ens 259 -ande 423
-aste 90 -ernas 136 -ad 387
-ast 46 -ers 40 -ades 273
-as 39 -ats 207
-es 13 -andes 5
-ts 4 -ads 3
-ares 1
328
Hammarstr?m and Borin Unsupervised Learning of Morphology
stems on one axis and suffixes on the other axis. Chan then makes use of known
techniques from linear algebra, in particular Latent Dirichlet Allocation, to break the full
matrix into smaller dense submatrices, which, when multiplied together, resemble the
full matrix. There is only one humanly tuned threshold, namely, when to stop breaking
into smaller parts.
3.3 Group and Abstract
In contrast to the methods that use a heuristic for finding morpheme boundaries, the
grouping methods are much less sensitive to continuous segments. String edit distance
is the most straightforward metric for which to find pairs or sets of morphologically
related words (see, e.g., Gaussier 1999; Yarowsky and Wicentowski 2000; Schone and
Jurafsky 2001a; Baroni, Matiasek, and Trost 2002; Hu et al 2005a; Bernhard 2006,
pages 101?117; Bernhard 2007; Majumder et al 2007; Majumder, Mitra, and Pal 2008).
In addition, as unsupervised methods for semantic clustering (e.g., Latent Semantic
Analysis) and distributional clustering became more mature, these could be included as
well (Schone and Jurafsky 2000, 2001a; Schone 2001; Baroni, Matiasek, and Trost 2002;
Freitag 2005). More remarkable, however, is that Yarowsky and Wicentowski (2000)
and Wicentowski (2002, 2004) have shown that frequency signatures can also be used
to (heuristically) find morphologically related words. The example they use is sang
versus sing, whose relative frequency distribution in a corpus is 1,427/1,204 (or 1.19/1),
whereas singed15 versus sing is 9/1,204 (Yarowsky and Wicentowski 2000, pages 209?
210). This way, sing can be heuristically said to be parallel to sang rather than singed,
and indeed the distribution for singed versus singe (its true relative) is 9/2, that is, much
closer to 1.
Suppose now that groups of morphologically related words are somehow heuris-
tically extracted. For example, one group might be {play, player, played, playing} and
another might be {bark, barks, barked, barking}. The next step would be to find what is
common among several groups, not just one. Abstracting morphological alternations
given a family of groups is a thorny issue. For instance, Baroni, Matiasek, and Trost
(2002) leave the matter largely in the exploration phase. Wicentowski (2004) presents a
finished theory based on constraining the abstraction to find patterns in terms of prefix,
suffix, and stem alternations.
The outstanding question for the group-and-abstract approaches, related not only to
grouping but also to abstracting, is how to find one and the same morphological process
(umlauting, adding a suffix, etc.) that operates over a maximal number of groups. The
search space is huge, considering not only the group space but also the large number of
potential morphological processes itself.
The group-and-abstract approaches are also characterized by the ubiquitous use of
ad hoc thresholds. However, there are clear advantages in that they are in principle
capable of handling non-concatenative morphology and in that issues of semantics (of
stems) are addressed from the beginning.
The work by de Kock and Bossaert (1969, 1974, 1978), Yvon (1996), Medina Urrea
(2003) and partly Moon, Erk, and Baldridge (2009) can favorably be seen as a mid-way
between the border-and-frequency and group-and-abstract approaches as they rely on
15 That is, the past tense of the verb singe.
329
Computational Linguistics Volume 37, Number 2
Table 9
Example feature values for the words ng??thi?? (I went) and tu?g??thi?? (we went) adapted from
De Pauw and Wagacha (2007, page 1518). B=-features describe a subset at the start of the word
form, E=-features indicate patterns at the end of the word, and I=-features describe patterns
inside the word form.
class features
ng??thi?? B=n B=ng B=ng?? B=ng??t B=ng??th B=ng??thi I=g I=g?? I=g??t I=g??th I=g??thi
E=g??thi?? I=?? I=??t I=??th I=??thi E=??thi?? I=t I=th I=thi E=thi?? I=h I=hi E=hi??
I=i E=i??
tu?g??thi?? B=t B=tu? B=tu?g B=tu?g?? B=tu?g??t B=tu?g??th B=tu?g??thi I=u? I=u?g I=u?g?? I=u?g??t
I=u?g??th I=u?g??thi E=u?g??thi?? I=g I=g?? I=g??t I=g??th I=g??thi E=g??thi?? I=?? I=??t
I=??th I=??thi E=??thi?? I=t I=th I=thi E=thi?? I=h I=hi E=hi?? I=i E=i??
sets of four members with a particular affixation arrangement (?squares?),16 whose
existence is governed much by the frequency of the affixes in question.
3.4 Features and Classes
The features-and-classes methods share with the group-and-abstract methods the virtue
of not being tied to segmental morpheme choices. As mentioned earlier, in this family of
methods a word is seen as made up of a set of features which have no internal order?
n-grams in Mayfield and McNamee (2003) and McNamee and Mayfield (2007), and
beginning/terminal/internal segments in De Pauw and Wagacha (2007).
For example, Table 9 shows two words and their features in Gi?ku?yu?, a tonal Bantu
language of Kenya. As designed by De Pauw and Wagacha (2007), initial (B=), middle
(I=), or final (E=) segments of a given word constitute its features. A majority of features
enumerated this way will not be morphologically relevant, whereas a minority is. For
example, in this case, I=h is just an arbitrary character without morpheme status,
whereas I=ng??thi happens to be equal to a stem. The idea is that arbitrary features such
as I=h will be too common in the training data to provide a useful constraint, whereas
a more specialized feature like I=ng??thi might indeed trigger useful morphological
generalization properties.
The input word list W thus transforms into a training set of word?feature pairs,
which can be fed into a standard maximum entropy classifier. The next step is, for each
word, to ask the classifier for the k closest classes, namely, words (which will include the
word itself and k ? 1 others with significant feature overlap). Clearly, such clusters may
capture relations that string-edit-distance clustering does not. De Pauw and Wagacha
16 Based on the famous Greenberg square, which is a concrete means of illustrating the minimal
requirement for postulating a paradigm: We need a minimum of two attested stems and two attested
suffixes (or in the general case arbitrary morphological processes), where both stems must occur with
both suffixes:
stemA+sx1 stemB+sx1
stemA+sx2 stemB+sx2
As it is used in linguistics, both the stems and the suffixes in the square must represent attested
form?meaning combinations. This requirement is normally given up in the work reviewed here, where
only the form of postulated stems and affixes is available, but not the meaning. The Greenberg square
goes back to the age-old linguistic notion of proportional analogy (Anttila 1977).
330
Hammarstr?m and Borin Unsupervised Learning of Morphology
(2007, pages 1517?1518) further suggest how specific morphological information, such
as prefixes, tonal changes, etc., may be abstracted from such clusters.
Clearly, feature-based methods provide an interesting new avenue for non-
segmental and long-distance phenomena, but are so far largely unexplored and not free
from thresholds and parameters.
3.5 Phonological Categories and Separation
These approaches specifically target the special kind of non-concatenative morphology
called intercalated morphology (or templatic morphology or root-and-pattern mor-
phology) famous mainly from Semitic languages, such as Arabic. They start out by
assuming that graphemes can be subdivided into those that take part in the root, and
those that take part in the pattern. For the languages so far targeted, Arabic (Rodrigues
and C?avar 2005, 2007; Xanthos 2007) and Amharic (Bati 2002), this is largely true, or
a transcription is used where it is largely true. Rodrigues and C?avar (2005, 2007) and
Bati (2002) hard-code the transition from the graphemic representation of a word to
its (potential) root and pattern parts. This can be said to constitute a strong language
specific bias, tantamount to supervision. Xanthos (2007), on the other hand, starts out
only by assuming that there exists a distinction between root and pattern graphemes
and subsequently learns which graphemes are which. See Goldsmith and Xanthos
(2009) for an excellent survey on how to do this (something which falls under learn-
ing phonological categories rather than morphology learning). Basically, it is possible
only because there are systematic combination constraints between different phonemes
(approximated by graphemes); for example, vowels and consonants alternate in a very
non-random manner.
Once each word is divided into its potential root and pattern, the morphology
learning problem is similar to morphology learning given roots and suffixes, that is,
the typical model for learning concatenative morphology, where the task is to weed out
noise, to decide where patterns (?suffixes?) start and end, which patterns are spurious,
and so on. All these authors who have addressed intercalated morphology use a variant
of MDL (see the border-and-frequency techniques in Section 3.2). The accuracy of ULM
on languages with intercalated morphology appears to be similar to the accuracy on
other languages (cf. Section 4.3).
3.6 General Strengths and Weaknesses
A perhaps worrying tendency is that, despite extensive cross-citation, there is little
transfer between different groups of authors and there is a fair amount of duplication
of work. The lack of a broadly accepted theoretical understanding is possibly related
to this fact. Few approaches have an abstract model of how words are formed, and
thus cannot explain why (or why not) the heuristics employed fail, what kind of errors
are to be expected, and how the heuristics can be improved. Nevertheless, a model for
the simplest kind of concatenative morphology is emerging, namely, that two sets of
random strings, B and S, combine in some way to form a set of words W. For Gelbukh,
Alexandrov, and Han (2004), the segmentation task is to find minimal size |X| + |Y| such
that W ? {xy|x ? X, y ? Y}. For example, if W = {ad, ae, bd, be, cd, ce}, then the minimal
size |X| + |Y| = 5 with X = {a, b, c} and Y = {d, e}. For Bacchin, Ferro, and Melucci
(2005) as well as in the word-segmentation version of Deligne (1996), the segmentation
task is to find a configuration of splits si for each wi = xiyi ? W such that each xi and
331
Computational Linguistics Volume 37, Number 2
yi occur in as many splits as possible. More precisely, the product, over all words,
of the number of splits for the parts x and y should be maximized. Formally, let xiyi
be the parts of wi induced by splits si and let p(x) = |{i|x = xi}| = |{wi|xyi = wi}| be
the number of words in which x equals the first part of the split and similarly let
p?(y) = |{i|y = yi}| = |{wi|xiy = wi}| be the number of words in which y equals the last
part of the split. Then the task is to find splits that maximize the following expression:
arg max
[s1,...,s|W|]
?
wi?W
p(xi) ? p?(yi)
For example, if W = {ad, ae, bd, be, cd, ce, ggg}, then the configuration of splits a|d, a|e, b|d,
b|e, c|d, c|e, g|gg yields the product (2 ? 3)6 ? (1 ? 1).
Brent (1999) devises a precise, but more elaborate, way of constructing W from B
and S, but at the cost of a large search space, and whose global maximum is hard to
characterize intuitively. The same holds for the extension by Snover (2002). Kontorovich,
Don, and Singer (2003), Snyder and Barzilay (2008), Goldwater (2007), Johnson (2008),
and Poon, Cherry, and Toutanova (2009) should also be noted for containing generative
models.
Most approaches, of any of the kinds (a)?(d) described in Section 3.1, explicitly or
implicitly target languages which have (close to) one-slot morphology, that is, a word
(or stem) typically takes not more than one prefix and not more than one suffix. Many
(indeed most; Dryer 2005) languages deviate more or less from this model. At first,
it may seem that multi-slot morphology can be handled by the same algorithms as
one-slot morphology, by iterating the process used for one-slot morphology. A decade
of ULM has shown that the matter is not so simple, because heuristics for one slot
languages do not necessarily generalize to the outermost slot of a multi-slot language.
The (c) and (d) approaches do not combine easily with the others but it is con-
ceivable that the (a) and (b) type of approaches may be mutually enhancing. Results
from the (a) methods may serve to cut down the search space for the (b) methods,
and the (b) methods may provide a way to circumvent thresholds for the (a) methods.
There is also the possibility of serial combination where, for example, the (a) methods
target concatenative morphology and the (b)?or (c)?methods attempt the remaining
cases. Presumably because most methods so far do not produce a clean, well-defined
result, various forms of hybridization of techniques by different authors have yet to be
systematically explored.
Lastly, there are scattered attempts to address morphophonological changes in a
principled way, though so far these have been developed in close connection with a
particular segmentation method and target language (Schone 2001; Schone and Jurafsky
2001a; Wicentowski 2002, 2004; Tepper 2007; Kohonen, Virpioja, and Klami 2008; Tepper
and Xia 2008).
4. Discussion
4.1 Language Dependence of ULM
As we mentioned in Section 3.6, most approaches have an explicit bias towards certain
kinds of morphological systems, those for which we introduced the label ?one-slot mor-
phology.? This is of course not a problem, if the purpose is to bootstrap a morphology
for some languages which happen to belong to the right type. If the purpose is to say
something about human language acquisition or language learning, or if the aim is to
332
Hammarstr?m and Borin Unsupervised Learning of Morphology
devise a method that should work with any language, such a bias naturally becomes
problematic.
The two human learning analogues which have most frequently been proposed
in the literature on ULM and other machine learning of morphology are those of
language acquisition and of linguistic analysis (e.g., as carried out as part of linguistic
fieldwork). Depending on which of the two we choose, the kinds of biases that we may
or may not allow become different. Language acquisition in humans is oral (or sign, but
for practical reasons, we are leaving sign languages completely out of the discussion
here), so expecting written input with word delimiters would then be an inadmissible
bias. ULM as delimited in Section 1 is definitely closer to linguistic analysis than to
language acquisition.
It may be instructive at this point to see what kinds of knowledge are supposed to
be required in order to carry out the discovery procedures mentioned in Section 2:
An analyst approaches a language which either he already knows in some practical
way or with which he sets about to familiarize himself?preferably in a language
learning situation. The analyst?s background is the sum total of his practical knowledge
of other languages, his previous analytical experience, and what he has learned
from the linguistic research of other people. With this knowledge of the language
to be analyzed and with this background knowledge, he makes certain guesses
about the grammatical structure of the language. He then submits these guesses to a
series of systematic checks in which he confirms, disproves, or modifies his original
guesses?and makes a few better guesses en route. This systematic evaluation is
based on a theory of the structure of language, and the theory itself (while containing
elements of creative thinking) is based on empirical study. (Longacre 1964, page 12)
Mutatis mutandis, the procedure described in this quote, contains most elements of ULM
and related methods proposed in the literature. Note that the quote just given stresses
the importance of the knowledge that the linguist brings to the analysis and which in-
forms the whole analytical process. This suggests that there may be a level of general
knowledge about language (in general or a useful subset of languages), or about lin-
guistic analysis, or both, which would be useful to ULM in general, something like the
?knowledge? that white space is a word delimiter in written text, but on a higher level.
One component of a research program on ULM would then be to formulate this kind
of general knowledge in a way which makes sense given that the object of study is lan-
guage, to test it, and to share it with the community of linguistic scholars. A concrete
illustration could be the way that the old notion of proportional analogy (Anttila 1977)
is refined and formalized in various ways and used to test segmentation hypotheses
in works on ULM from the earliest times onwards (e.g., the ?squares? mentioned in
Section 3.3).
4.2 ULM and Semantics
As traditionally conceived, an inflectional paradigm links a set of word forms to
structural descriptions expressed in terms of a stem carrying a lexical meaning and
some formal expression of one or more morphosyntactic categories (or grammatical
meanings) taken from a closed, small set of such categories. This bears emphasizing,
because ULM work generally has been concerned only with the formal expression side
of morphology; that is, instead of the traditional
table-s ?table N PL?
333
Computational Linguistics Volume 37, Number 2
table-s ?table V 3SG?
it will give us simply
table-s
table-s
although it may tell us that the stem table appears in two paradigms.
As far as we know, there have been no attempts to induce functional labels using
ULM, although it is conceivable that the same kind of techniques used, for example,
in order to cluster words semantically (e.g., Latent Semantic Indexing/Analysis or
Random Indexing), could be used also to classify the resulting morphs from a ULM
segmentation (cf. Schone and Jurafsky [2001b] for a study of inducing part-of-speech
class labels in a setting similar to that of ULM). The labelling problem can easily be
considered independent of ULM by using a hand-segmented (or segmented by a hand-
built morphological parser) input corpus.
4.3 Is ULM of Any Use?
As we said in Section 2, there is an explicit expectation frequently encountered in the
more recent literature that ULM and other unsupervised methods could be employed
in order to rapidly and cheaply (in terms of human effort) bootstrap basic language
technology resources for new languages. However, looking at the literature, it seems
that?at least in the area of inflectional morphology?the only approaches that have
so far produced substantial results are the old-fashioned, hand-coded grammar-based
ones, such as the work described by Trosterud (2004), where finite-state morphological
processors and constraint grammar-based disambiguation components are developed
for a number of related languages. The fact that the languages are related is of great
help when dealing with successive languages after the first one. The morphological
component for the first language, North S?mi, required approximately 2.5 person-years
of highly qualified linguistic expert work to reach the prototype stage, whereas the
analogous module for the closely related Lule S?mi was completed in an additional
six months (Trosterud 2006).17 This and other work in the same vein reported in the
literature (e.g., by Artola-Zubillaga 2004 and Maxwell and David 2008) is characterized
by deep and long-lasting involvement by linguistic expertise and further often by the
creative use of digitized versions of conventional printed linguistic resources, especially
dictionaries. The following observation is perhaps trivial, but bears stressing, because
it is in fact often not heeded in practice: For this kind of approach to work, it is
necessary that tools for providing systems with linguistic knowledge use a conceptual
apparatus and notation familiar to the linguists who are supposed to be working with
them. Relevant to our purposes here, the same holds for any attempt to kickstart the
development of a morphological analyzer by using ULM: If the expectation is that
the output of ULM should be manually ?post-edited,? this output must of course be
intelligible to the linguist doing the post-editing.
17 As pointed out by one anonymous reviewer, this suggests that with the right organization of information
flow among machine-learning components, ULM, too, could benefit from working with several closely
related languages simultaneously.
334
Hammarstr?m and Borin Unsupervised Learning of Morphology
Most ULM approaches reported in the literature are small proof-of-concept experi-
ments, which generally founder on the lack of evaluation data. The MorphoChallenge18
series does provide adequate gold-standard evaluation data for Finnish, English, Ger-
man, Arabic, and Turkish as well as task-based Information Retrieval (IR) evaluation
data for English, German, and Finnish. It can be seen that ULM systems are mature
enough to enhance IR, but so far, ULM systems are not close to full accuracy on the
gold standard and outside commentators have generally been unimpressed with these
results (e.g., Mahlow and Piotrowski 2009, page vi). However, many (most?) of the
strong-looking systems reported in the literature have not, for one reason or another,
taken part in the MorphoChallenge. Taking MorphoChallenge results and proof-of-
concept reports together, it seems that high accuracy by ULM systems is presently only
achievable if the language has small amounts of one-slot concatenative morphology,
whereas for morphologically more complex languages, parameter tuning and/or lower
accuracy is to be expected.
We are not yet in a position to assess whether there are other tasks than IR which, in
general, benefit significantly from (noisy) ULM, such as Speech Recognition (Hirsim?ki
et al 2003, 2005, 2006; Kurimo et al 2006) or Machine Translation (Sereewattana 2003;
Virpioja et al 2007; Bojar, Stran??k, and Zeman 2008; Kirik and Fishel 2008; De Gispert
et al 2009; Fishel and Kirik 2010) because almost only the Morfessor system has been
tested, and results are, if positive, not completely unambiguous. One usage of noisy
ULM, at least, is for smoothing language identification models (Hammarstr?m 2007a;
Ceylan and Kim 2009).
Further, ULM approaches are data-hungry, which precludes their use with many
low-density languages. There is much ongoing work addressing these issues, however,
so we can probably expect some progress in this area (Bird 2009).
4.4 Future Directions
In practice, the near future should define a high-accuracy threshold-minimal system for
one-slot morphology languages, using refinements of ideas already extant.
A major challenge, and the reason for duplication of work in the past, is to find a
theory that explains why (or why not) a given algorithm works. Further study of theo-
retical properties of (stochastic) combining of string sets/bags are likely to hold the key
to the culmination of the border-and-frequency methods?not further experimentation
with ad hoc heuristics. The recent increased interest in Bayesian generative models in
general in NLP may possibly serve as a catalyst.
In the group-and-abstract paradigm, working with feature sets of a word, as in
De Pauw and Wagacha (2007), is an ingenious generalization that holds numerous
advantages over string edit distances. Feature set comparisons are naturally defined
over arbitrary collections, whereas string edit distances work on pairs of strings. Many
morphologically related words differ in several characters and are therefore not particu-
larly close in edit distance. Features instead of edit distances provide a neat framework,
based on global properties of the feature distribution, of capturing the fact that some
character mismatches do not really matter, whereas some character matches (although
not necessarily long) are very significant.
For paradigm induction, it is clear that the ULM field has not made use of the large
literature on clustering in other fields. Chan (2006) is a step in this direction, but further
18 Web site www.cis.hut.fi/morphochallenge2009/ accessed 10 September 2009.
335
Computational Linguistics Volume 37, Number 2
steps are lacking; in particular, spectral clustering (of some kind) has not been explored
for paradigm induction in ULM. Also here, given the typical skewed stem distributions
and skewed suffix distributions (exemplified in Section 3.2), some theoretical work is
needed to determine its implications for clustering.
Finally, we see ample opportunity for empirical investigations into lesser-known
languages for which data has become available only recently (Abney and Bird 2010).
This would clarify the potential of ULM usefulness for underdescribed and under-
resourced languages.
5. Conclusion
After more than half a century of research, the field of ULM has made good progress (as
have many other areas of computational linguistics), but there is still a long way to go
before it will become practically useful or even theoretically interesting to linguists. In
the terms of Table 1 in Section 1, the state of the art of ULM is somewhere in the region of
?Segmentation? and ?Inflection tables,? if we are talking about linguistic form, but there
has been next to no progress at all when it comes to linguistic meaning (e.g., functional
labeling of affixes).
In the early days of ULM, the expectation was that it should constitute?when even-
tually achieved sometime in the future?a formalized version of a linguistic discovery
procedure, that is, a knowledge-heavy enterprise. Instead, recent successes in the area
have been largely contingent upon the rapid development in computational linguistics
of statistical and information-theoretic knowledge-light (but robust) methodologies.
We believe (like Wintner 2009 for computational linguistics in general), however,
that if ULM is to become a serious alternative to?or, equally likely, a natural component
of?manually built computational morphology systems for a wide and diverse range of
languages, and especially if we are to make headway in the area of semantics, we need
to see more interaction between the present approaches to ULM with the computational
techniques and mathematical modeling tools they can bring to bear on the problem on
the one hand, and typologically informed linguistic research on morphology founded
on a vast store of knowledge and methodology refined over two millennia on the other.
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank three anonymous
referees for helpful comments and
suggestions.
References
Abney, Steven and Steven Bird. 2010. The
human language project: Building a
universal corpus of the world?s languages.
In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 88?97, Uppsala.
Altmann, Gabriel and Werner Lehfeldt. 1980.
Einf?hrung in die quantitative Phonologie,
volume 7 of Quantitative Linguistics.
Bochum: Brockmeyer.
Andreev, Nikolaj Dmitrievic?. 1959.
Modelirovanije jazyka na base ego
statistic?eskoj i teoretiko-mno?estvennoj
struktury. In Tezisy sove?c?anija po
matematic?eskoj lingvistike, 14?21 Aprelja 1959
goda. Ministerstvo vys?ego obrazovanija
SSSR, Leningrad, pages 15?22.
Andreev, Nikolaj Dmitrievic?. 1963.
Algoritmy statistiko-kombinatornogo
modelirovanija morfologii, sintaksisa,
slovoobrazovanija i semantiki. In
Materialy po matematic?eskoj lingvistike i
ma?inomu perevodu: Sbornik II. Izdatel?stvo
Leningradskogo universiteta, Leningrad,
pages 3?44.
Andreev, Nikolaj Dmitrievic?. 1965a. Opyt
statistiko-kombinatornogo vydelenija
pervogo morfologic?eskogo tipa v
vengerskom jazyke. In Nikolaj Dmitrievic?
Andreev, editor, Statistiko-kombinatornoe
modelirovanie jazykov. Nauka, Leningrad,
pages 205?211.
Andreev, Nikolaj Dmitrievic?, editor. 1965b.
Statistiko-kombinatornoe modelirovanie
jazykov. Nauka, Leningrad.
336
Hammarstr?m and Borin Unsupervised Learning of Morphology
Andreev, Nikolaj Dmitrievic?. 1967.
Statistiko-kombinatornye metody v
teoretic?eskom i prikladnom jazykovedenii.
Nauka, Leningrad.
Andreeva, L. D. 1963. Statistiko-
kombinatornoe vydelenie paradigmy
pervogo mofologic?eskogo tipa v russkom
jazyke. In Materialy po matematic?eskoj
lingvistike i ma?innomu pervodu: Sbornik II.
Izdatel?stvo Leningradskogo universiteta,
Leningrad, pages 45?60.
Anttila, Raimo. 1977. Analogy. Mouton,
The Hague.
Antworth, Evan L. 1990. PC-KIMMO: A
two-level processor for morphological analysis.
Occasional Publications in Academic
Computing 16. Summer Institute of
Linguistics, Dallas.
Arabsorkhi, Mohsen and Mehrnoush
Shamsfard. 2006. Unsupervised discovery
of Persian morphemes. In Proceedings of the
11th Conference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics,
EACL 2006, pages 175?178, Trento.
Argamon, Shlomo, Navot Akiva, Amihood
Amir, and Oren Kapah. 2004. Efficient
unsupervised recursive word
segmentation using minimum description
length. In Proceedings of COLING 2004,
pages 1058?1064, Geneva.
Artola-Zubillaga, Xabier. 2004. Laying lexical
foundations for NLP: The case of Basque
at the ixa research group. In SALTMIL
Workshop at LREC 2004: First Steps in
Language Documentation for Minority
Languages, pages 9?18, Lisbon.
Atwell, Eric and Andrew Roberts. 2005.
Combinatory hybrid elementary analysis
of text. In Proceedings of MorphoChallenge
2005, pages 37?41, Helsinki University of
Technology, Helsinki.
Baayen, Harald R. 2001. Word Frequency
Distributions, volume 18 of Text, Speech,
and Language Technology. Kluwer,
Dordrecht.
Bacchin, Michela, Nicola Ferro, and Massimo
Melucci. 2002a. The effectiveness of a
graph-based algorithm for stemming.
In ICADL ?02: Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Asian Digital
Libraries, volume 2555 of Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, pages 117?128,
Singapore.
Bacchin, Michela, Nicola Ferro, and Massimo
Melucci. 2002b. University of Padua at
CLEF 2002: Experiments to evaluate a
statistical stemming algorithm. In Working
Notes for CLEF 2002: Cross-Language Evaluation
Forum Workshop, pages 161?168, Rome.
Bacchin, Michela, Nicola Ferro, and Massimo
Melucci. 2005. A probabilistic model for
stemmer generation. Information Processing
and Management, 41(1):121?137.
Baroni, Marco. 2000. Distributional Cues in
Morpheme Discovery: A Computational Model
and Empirical Evidence. Ph.D. thesis,
University of California, Los Angeles.
Baroni, Marco. 2003. Distribution-driven
morpheme discovery: A computational/
experimental study. Yearbook of Morphology,
213?248.
Baroni, Marco, Johannes Matiasek, and
Harald Trost. 2002. Unsupervised
discovery of morphologically related
words based on orthographic and
semantic similarity. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Morphological and Phonological
Learning of ACL/SIGPHON-2002,
pages 48?57, Philadelphia.
Batchelder, E. O. 1997. Computational Evidence
for the Use of Frequency Information in
Discovery of the Infant?s First Lexicon. Ph.D.
thesis, City University of New York.
Bati, Tesfaye Bayu. 2002. Automatic
morphological analyser: An experiment
using unsupervised and autosegmental
approach. Master?s thesis, Addis Ababa
University, Ethiopia.
Belkin, Mikhail and John Goldsmith.
2002. Using eigenvectors of the bigram
graph to infer morpheme identity. In
Morphological and Phonological Learning:
Proceedings of the 6th Workshop of the ACL
Special Interest Group in Computational
Phonology (SIGPHON), pages 41?47,
Philadelphia, PA.
Bernhard, Delphine. 2005a. Segmentation
morphologique ? partir de corpus. Actes
de TALN & R?CITAL 2005, volume 1,
pages 555?564, Dourdan.
Bernhard, Delphine. 2005b. Unsupervised
morphological segmentation based on
segment predictability and word segments
alignment. In Mikko Kurimo, Mathias
Creutz, and Krista Lagus, editors,
Unsupervised segmentation of words into
morphemes ? Challenge 2005, pages 18?22,
Helsinki University of Technology,
Helsinki.
Bernhard, Delphine. 2006. Apprentissage
de connaissances morphologiques pour
l?acquisition automatique de ressources
lexicales. Ph.D. thesis, Universit? Joseph
Fourier ? Grenoble I.
Bernhard, Delphine. 2007. Apprentissage
non supervis? de familles morphologiques
par classification ascendante hi?rarchique.
In Actes de la 14e conf?rence sur le Traitement
337
Computational Linguistics Volume 37, Number 2
Automatique des Langues Naturelles, TALN
2007, volume 1, pages 367?376, Toulouse.
Bernhard, Delphine. 2008. Simple morpheme
labelling in unsupervised morpheme
analysis. In Carol Peters, Valentin Jijkoun,
Thomas Mandl, Henning M?ller, Douglas
W. Oard, Anselmo Pe?as, Vivien Petras,
and Diana Santos, editors, Advances in
Multilingual and Multimodal Information
Retrieval, 8th Workshop of the Cross-
Language Evaluation Forum, CLEF 2007,
Budapest, Hungary, September 19?21,
2007, Revised Selected Papers,
pages 873?880. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Bharati, Akshar, S. M. Bendre Rajeev Sangal,
Pavan Kumar, and Aishwarya. 2001.
Unsupervised improvement of
morphological analyzer for inflectionally
rich languages. In Proceedings of the Sixth
Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim
Symposium (NLPRS-2001), pages 685?692,
Tokyo.
Bickel, Balthasar, Goma Banjade, Martin
Gaenszle, Elena Lieven, Netra Paudyal,
Ichchha Rai, Manoj Rai, Novel Kishor Rai,
and Sabine Stoll3. 2007. Free prefix ordering
in Chintang. Language, 83(1):43?73.
Bird, Steven. 2009. Last words: Natural
language processing and linguistic
fieldwork. Computational Linguistics,
35(3):469?474.
Blomqvist, Jerker and Poul Ole Jastrup. 1998.
Grekisk grammatik: Graesk grammatik,
2 edition. Akademisk Forlag, K?benhavn.
Bloomfield, Leonard. 1933. Language. Henry
Holt & Co, New York.
Bojar, Ondr?ej, Pavel Stran??k, and Daniel
Zeman. 2008. English?Hindi translation in
21 days. In Proceedings of the ICON-2008
NLP Tools Contest, pages 4?7, Pune.
Bordag, S. 2005a. Unsupervised
knowledge-free morpheme boundary
detection. Paper presented at the
Proceedings of Recent Advances in Natural
Language Processing 2005 (RANLP ?05),
Borovets.
Bordag, Stefan. 2005b. Two-step approach to
unsupervised morpheme segmentation. In
Mikko Kurimo, Mathias Creutz, and Krista
Lagus, editors, Unsupervised segmentation
of words into morphemes ? Challenge 2005,
pages 23?27, Helsinki University of
Technology, Helsinki.
Bordag, Stefan. 2007. Elements of
Knowledge-Free and Unsupervised Lexical
Acquisition. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Leipzig, Leipzig.
Bordag, Stefan. 2008. Unsupervised and
knowledge-free morpheme segmentation
and analysis. In Carol Peters, Valentin
Jijkoun, Thomas Mandl, Henning M?ller,
Douglas W. Oard, Anselmo Pe?as, Vivien
Petras, and Diana Santos, editors, Advances
in Multilingual and Multimodal Information
Retrieval, 8th Workshop of the Cross-
Language Evaluation Forum, CLEF 2007,
Budapest, Hungary, September 19?21,
2007, Revised Selected Papers,
pages 881?891. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Borin, Lars. 1991. The Automatic Induction of
Morphological Regularities. Ph.D. thesis,
Uppsala University.
Borin, Lars. 2009. One in the bush:
Low-density language technology.
Research Reports from the Department of
Swedish, No. GU-ISS-09-1. University of
Gothenburg.
Borin, Lars, Markus Forsberg, and Lennart
L?nngren. 2008. The hunting of the
BLARK - SALDO, a freely available lexical
database for Swedish language technology.
In Joakim Nivre, Mats Dahll?f, and Be?ta
Megyesi, editors, Resourceful language
technology: Festschrift in honor of Anna
S?gvall Hein, volume 7 of Studia Linguistica
Upsaliensia. Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis,
Uppsala, pages 21?32.
Brasington, Ron, Steve Jones, and Colin
Biggs. 1988. The automatic induction of
morphological rules. Literary and Linguistic
Computing, 3(2):71?78.
Brent, Michael. 1993. Minimal generative
explanations: A middle ground between
neurons and triggers. In Proceedings of
the Fifteenth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, pages 28?36,
Boulder, CO.
Brent, Michael R. 1999. An efficient,
probabilistically sound algorithm for
segmentation and word discovery.
Machine Learning, 34:71?105.
Brent, Michael R., S. Murthy, and
A. Lundberg. 1995. Discovering
morphemic suffixes: A case study in
minimum description length induction.
In Fifth International Workshop on Artificial
Intelligence and Statistics, pages 482?490.
Fort Lauderdale, FL.
Calderone, Basilio. 2008. Unsupervised
Learning of Linguistic Structures. Ph.D.
thesis, Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa.
Carstairs, Andrew. 1983. Paradigm economy.
Journal of Linguistics, 19:115?125.
C?avar, Damir, Joshua Herring, Toshikazu
Ikuta, Paul Rodrigues, and Giancarlo
Schrementi. 2004a. On induction of
morphology grammars and its role in
bootstrapping. In Proceedings of Formal
338
Hammarstr?m and Borin Unsupervised Learning of Morphology
Grammar 2004, pages 47?62, ESSLLI,
Nancy, France.
C?avar, Damir, Joshua Herring, Toshikazu
Ikuta, Paul Rodrigues, and Giancarlo
Schrementi. 2004b. On statistical
parameter setting. In Proceedings of the
First Workshop on Psycho-Computational
Models of Human Language Acquisition,
pages 9?16, Geneva.
C?avar, Damir, Jushua Herring, Toshikazu
Ikuta, Paul Rodrigues, and Giancarlo
Schrementi. 2006. On unsupervised
grammar induction from untagged
corpora. In P. Kaszubski, editor, PSiCL:
Poznan? Studies in Contemporary
Linguistics, volume 41. Poznan?,
Poland: Adam Mickiewicz University,
pages 57?71.
C?avar, Damir, Paul Rodrigues, and
Giancarlo Schrementi. 2006. Unsupervised
morphology induction for part-of-speech
tagging. In Aviad Eilam, Tatjana Scheffler,
and Joshua Tauberer, editors, Proceedings of
the 29th Annual Penn Linguistics Colloquium,
volume 12(1) of U. Penn Working Papers in
Linguistics. University of Pennsylvania
Press, Philadelphia, pages 29?41.
Ceylan, Hakan and Yookyung Kim. 2009.
Language identification of search engine
queries. In ACL-IJCNLP ?09: Proceedings
of the Joint Conference of the 47th Annual
Meeting of the ACL and the 4th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing of the AFNLP: Volume 2,
pages 1066?1074, Morristown, NJ.
Chan, Erwin. 2006. Learning probabilistic
paradigms for morphology in a latent
class model. In Proceedings of the Eighth
Meeting of the ACL Special Interest Group on
Computational Phonology and Morphology at
HLT-NAACL 2006, pages 69?78, New York
City, NY.
Chan, Erwin. 2008. Structures and
Distributions in Morphology Learning. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA.
Cho, Sehyeong and Seung-Soo Han. 2002.
Automatic stemming for indexing of an
agglutinative language. In T. Yakhno,
editor, Advances in Information Systems,
volume 2457 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
pages 154?165.
Clark, Alexander. 2001. Unsupervised
Language Acquisition. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Sussex.
Creutz, Mathias. 2003. Unsupervised
segmentation of words using prior
distributions of morph length and
frequency. In Proceedings of the ACL
2003, pages 280?287, Sapporo.
Creutz, Mathias. 2006. Induction of the
Morphology of Natural Language:
Unsupervised Morpheme Segmentation
with Application to Automatic Speech
Recognition. Ph.D. thesis, Helsinki
University of Technology, Espoo,
Finland.
Creutz, Mathias and Krista Lagus. 2002.
Unsupervised discovery of morphemes.
In Proceedings of the 6th Workshop of the
ACL Special Interest Group in Computational
Phonology (SIGPHON), pages 21?30,
Philadelphia, PA.
Creutz, Mathias and Krista Lagus. 2004.
Induction of a simple morphology
for highly-inflecting languages. In
Proceedings of the 7th Meeting of the ACL
Special Interest Group in Computational
Phonology (SIGPHON), pages 43?51,
Barcelona.
Creutz, Mathias and Krista Lagus. 2005a.
Inducing the morphological lexicon of a
natural language from unannotated text.
In Proceedings of the International and
Interdisciplinary Conference on Adaptive
Knowledge Representation and Reasoning
(AKRR ?05), pages 106?113, Espoo.
Creutz, Mathias and Krista Lagus. 2005b.
Morfessor in the Morpho Challenge. In
Mikko Kurimo, Mathias Creutz, and Krista
Lagus, editors, Unsupervised segmentation of
words into morphemes ? Challenge 2005,
pages 12?17, Helsinki University of
Technology, Helsinki.
Creutz, Mathias and Krista Lagus. 2005c.
Unsupervised morpheme segmentation
and morphology induction from text
corpora using morfessor 1.0. Technical
report A81, Publications in Computer and
Information Science, Helsinki University
of Technology.
Creutz, Mathias and Krista Lagus. 2007.
Unsupervised models for morpheme
segmentation and morphology learning.
ACM Transactions on Speech and Language
Processing, 4(1?3):1?33.
Creutz, Mathias, Krista Lagus, Krister
Lind?n, and Sami Virpioja. 2005.
Morfessor and hutmegs: Unsupervised
morpheme segmentation for
highly-inflecting and compounding
languages. In Proceedings of the Second
Baltic Conference on Human Language
Technologies, pages 107?112, Tallinn.
Creutz, Mathias, Krista Lagus, and Sami
Virpioja. 2005. Unsupervised morphology
induction using morfessor. In Finite State
339
Computational Linguistics Volume 37, Number 2
Methods in Natural Language Processing: 5th
International Workshop, FSMNLP 2005,
pages 300?301, Helsinki.
Cromm, Oliver. 1997. Affixerkennung in
deutschen wortformen: Ein nicht-
lexikalisches segmentierungsverfahren
nach N. D. Andreev. LDV-Forum,
14(2):4?13.
Cucerzan, Silviu and David Yarowsky.
2002. Bootstrapping a multilingual
part-of-speech tagger in one person-day.
In Proceedings of CoNLL-2002, pages 1?7,
Taipei.
Daelemans, Walter. 2004. Computational
linguistics. In Geert Booij, Christian
Lehmann, Joachim Mugdan, and Stavros
Skopetas, editors, Morphologie/Morphology:
Ein internationales Handbuch zur Flexion
und Wortbildung [An International
Handbook on Inflection and Word-Formation],
volume 17.2 of Handb?cher zur Sprach- und
Kommunikationswissenschaft. Mouton de
Gruyter, Berlin, pages 1893?1900.
Dang, Minh Thang and Saad Choudri. 2005.
Simple unsupervised morphology analysis
algorithm (SUMAA). In Mikko Kurimo,
Mathias Creutz, and Krista Lagus, editors,
Proceedings of MorphoChallenge 2005,
pages 47?51, Helsinki University of
Technology, Helsinki.
Dasgupta, Sajib. 2007. Toward language-
independent morphological segmentation
and part-of-speech induction. Master?s
thesis, The University of Texas at Dallas.
Dasgupta, Sajib and Vincent Ng. 2006.
Unsupervised morphological parsing of
bengali. Language Resources and Evaluation,
3?4:311?330.
Dasgupta, Sajib and Vincent Ng. 2007a.
High-performance, language-independent
morphological segmentation. In Human
Language Technologies 2007: The Conference
of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistic,
pages 155?163, Rochester, NY,
Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Dasgupta, Sajib and Vincent Ng. 2007b.
Unsupervised word segmentation
for Bangla. In Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Natural
Language Processing (ICON 2007),
pages 15?24, Hyderabad.
De Gispert, Adri?, Sami Virpioja, Mikko
Kurimo, and William Byrne. 2009.
Minimum bayes risk combination of
translation hypotheses from alternative
morphological decompositions. In
Proceedings of Human Language Technologies:
The 2009 Annual Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 73?76,
Boulder, CO.
de Kock, Josse and Walter Bossaert. 1969.
Towards an automatic morphological
segmentation. In International Conference
on Computational Linguistics, COLING,
pages 10?11, S?nga-S?by.
de Kock, Josse and Walter Bossaert. 1974.
Introducci?n a la ling??stica autom?tica en las
lenguas Rom?nicas, volume 202 of Biblioteca
rom?nica hisp?nica 2: Estudios y ensayos.
Gredos, Madrid.
de Kock, Josse and Walter Bossaert. 1978. The
Morpheme: An Experiment in Quantitative
and Computational Linguistics. Van Gorcum,
Amsterdam.
De Pauw, Guy and Peter W. Wagacha. 2007.
Bootstrapping morphological analysis of
G??ku?yu? using maximum entropy learning.
In Proceedings of the 8th Annual Conference
of the International Speech Communication
Association (INTERSPEECH 2007),
pages 1517?1520, Antwerp.
D?jean, Herv?. 1998a. Concepts et alorithmes
pour la d?couverte des structures formelles des
langues. Ph.D. thesis, Universit? de Caen
Basse Normandie.
D?jean, Herv?. 1998b. Morphemes as a
necessary concept for structures discovery
from untagged corpora. In NeMLaP3/
CoNLL98 Workshop on Paradigms and
Grounding in Language Learning,
pages 295?298, Philadephia, PA.
Deligne, Sabine. 1996. Mod?les de s?quences de
longueurs variables: application au traitement
du langage ?crit et de la parole. Ph.D. thesis,
?cole Nationale Sup?rieure des
T?l?communications, Paris.
Deligne, Sabine and Fr?d?ric Bimbot. 1997.
Inference of variable-length linguistic
and acoustic units by multigrams. Speech
Communication, 23(3):223?241.
Demberg, Vera. 2007. A language-
independent unsupervised model for
morphological segmentation. In
Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting
of the Association of Computational
Linguistics, pages 920?927, Prague.
Dryer, Matthew S. 2005. Prefixing versus
suffixing in inflectional morphology.
In Bernard Comrie, Matthew S. Dryer,
David Gil, and Martin Haspelmath,
editors, World Atlas of Language Structures.
Oxford University Press, Oxford,
pages 110?113.
Eguchi, Paul K. 1987. Fieldworker and
computer: An end user?s view of computer
340
Hammarstr?m and Borin Unsupervised Learning of Morphology
ethnology. Senri Ethnological Studies,
20:165?174.
Ejerhed, Eva and Gunnel K?llgren. 1997.
Stockholm Ume? Corpus version 1.0,
SUC 1.0. Technical report, Department
of Linguistics, Ume? University.
Eliseeva, K. A. 1965. Statistiko-
kombinatornoe modelirovanie
pervogo tipa v ukrainskoj morfologii.
In Nikolaj Dmitrievic? Andreev, editor,
Statistiko-kombinatornoe modelirovanie
jazykov. Nauka, Leningrad, pages 85?88.
Faulk, R. D. and F. Goertzel Gustavson. 1990.
Segmenting discrete data representing
continuous speech input. IBM Systems
Journal, 29(2):287?296.
Fedulova, N. I. 1965. Vydelenie pervogo
morfologic?eskogo tipa v bolgarskom
jazyke. In Nikolaj Dmitrievic? Andreev,
editor, Statistiko-kombinatornoe
modelirovanie jazykov. Nauka,
Leningrad, pages 110?115.
Fihman, B. S. 1965a. Vydelenie pervogo
morfologic?eskogo tipa v jazyke hausa po
algoritmu statistiko-kombinatornogo
modelirovanija. In Nikolaj Dmitrievic?
Andreev, editor, Statistiko-kombinatornoe
modelirovanie jazykov. Nauka, Leningrad,
pages 189?195.
Fihman, B. S. 1965b. Vydelenie pervogo
morfologic?eskogo tipa v jazyke suahili po
algoritmu statistiko-kombinatornogo
modelirovanija. In Nikolaj Dmitrievic?
Andreev, editor, Statistiko-kombinatornoe
modelirovanie jazykov. Nauka, Leningrad,
pages 196?204.
Fishel, Mark and Harri Kirik. 2010.
Linguistically motivated unsupervised
segmentation for machine translation. In
Proceedings of the Seventh International
Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC?10), pages 1741?1745, Valletta.
Fitialova, I. B. 1965. Statistiko-kombinatornoe
vydelenie pervogo morfologic?eskogo tipa
v nemeckom jazyke. In Nikolaj Dmitrievic?
Andreev, editor, Statistiko-kombinatornoe
modelirovanie jazykov. Nauka, Leningrad,
pages 158?171.
Flenner, Gudrun. 1992. Ein quantitatives
Morphsegmentierungsverfahren f?r
spanische Wortformen. Ph.D. thesis,
Georg-August-Universit?t G?ttingen.
Flenner, Gudrun. 1994. Ein quantitatives
Morphsegmentierungssystem f?r
spanische Wortformen. In Ursula Klenk,
editor, Computatio Linguae II: Aufs?tze
zur algorithmischen und quantitativen
Analyse der Sprache, volume 83
of Zeitschrift f?r Dialektologie und
Linguistik: Beihefte. Franz Steiner,
Stuttgart, pages 31?62.
Flenner, Gudrun. 1995. Quantitative
Morphsegmentierung im Spanischen
auf phonologischer Basis. Sprache
und Datenverarbeitung, 19(2):63?78.
Foley, William. 1991. The Yimas Language of
New Guinea. Stanford University Press,
Stanford, CA.
Forsberg, Markus, Harald Hammarstr?m,
and Aarne Ranta. 2006. Lexicon extraction
from raw text data. In Proceedings of the
5th International Conference, FinTAL,
pages 488?499, Turku.
Francis, Nelson W. and Henry Kucera. 1964.
Brown corpus. Department of Linguistics,
Brown University, Providence, RI.
Freitag, Dayne. 2005. Morphology induction
from term clusters. In Proceedings of the
Ninth Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning (CoNLL-2005),
pages 128?135, Ann Arbor, MI.
Gammon, Edward. 1969. Quantitative
approximations to the word. In
International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, COLING, pages 1?28,
S?nga-S?by.
Garvin, Paul L. 1967. The automation of
discovery procedure in linguistics.
Language, 43(1):172?178.
Gaussier, ?ric. 1999. Unsupervised learning
of derivational morphology from
inflectional lexicons. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Unsupervised Learning in
Natural Language Processing at the 37th
Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL-1999),
pages 24?30, Philadephia, PA.
Gelbukh, Alexander F., Mikhail Alexandrov,
and Sang-Yong Han. 2004. Detecting
inflection patterns in natural language
by minimization of morphological model.
In Alberto Sanfeliu, Jos? Francisco
Mart?nez Trinidad, and Jes?s Ariel
Carrasco-Ochoa, editors, Proceedings of
Progress in Pattern Recognition, Image
Analysis and Applications, 9th Iberoamerican
Congress on Pattern Recognition, CIARP ?04,
volume 3287 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
pages 432?438.
Gippert, Jost, Nikolaus P. Himmelmann,
and Ulrike Mosel, editors. 2006. Essentials
of Language Documentation. Mouton de
Gruyter, Berlin.
Golcher, Felix. 2006. Statistical text
segmentation with partial structure
analysis. In Proceedings of KONVENS
2006, pages 44?51, Konstanz.
341
Computational Linguistics Volume 37, Number 2
Golding, Andrew and Henry S. Thompson.
1985. A morphology component for
language programs. Linguistics,
23:263?284.
Goldsmith, John. 2000. Linguistica: An
automatic morphological analyzer. In
Proceedings from the Main Session of the
Chicago Linguistic Society?s 36th Meeting,
pages 125?139, Chicago, IL.
Goldsmith, John. 2001. Unsupervised
learning of the morphology of natural
language. Computational Linguistics,
27(2):153?198.
Goldsmith, John, Derrick Higgins, and
Svetlana Soglasnova. 2001. Automatic
language-specific stemming in
information retrieval. In Carol Peters,
editor, Cross-Language Information Retrieval
and Evaluation: Proceedings of the CLEF
2000 Workshop, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, pages 273?283.
Goldsmith, John, Yu Hu, Irina Matveeva,
and Colin Sprague. 2005. A heuristic
for morpheme discovery based on
string edit distance. Technical
Report of Computer Science
Department, University of Chicago, IL.
TR-2005-4.
Goldsmith, John and Aris Xanthos. 2009.
Learning phonological categories.
Language, 85(1):4?38.
Goldsmith, John A. 2006. An algorithm for
the unsupervised learning of morphology.
Natural Language Engineering,
12(4):353?371.
Goldsmith, John A. 2010. Segmentation and
morphology. In Alexander Clark, Chris
Fox, and Shalom Lappin, editors, Handbook
of Computational Linguistics and Natural
Language Processing, Blackwell Handbooks
in Linguistics. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford,
pages 364?393.
Goldwater, Sharon. 2007. Nonparametric
Bayesian Models of Lexical Acquisition. Ph.D.
thesis, Brown University.
Goldwater, Sharon, Tom Griffiths, and
Mark Johnson. 2005. Interpolating between
types and tokens by estimating power-law
generators. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 18 [Neural
Information Processing Systems, NIPS 2005],
pages 459?466, Vancouver.
Gol?nia, Bruno. 2008. Learning rules in
morphology of complex synthetic
languages. Master?s thesis, Universit?
de Paris V.
Goodman, Sarah A. 2008. Morphological
induction through linguistic productivity.
In Working Notes for the CLEF 2008
Workshop, Aarhus.
Gr?nwald, Peter D. 2007. The Minimum
Description Length Principle: Adaptive
Computation and Machine Learning.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Hadouche, Fadila. 2002. D?tection de
relations morphologiques en corpus bas?e
sur les cooccurrences. Master?s thesis,
DESS, Centre de Recherche en Ing?nierie
Multilingue, CRIM, France.
Hafer, Margaret A. and Stephen F. Weiss.
1974. Word segmentation by letter
successor varieties. Information Storage
and Retrieval, 10:371?385.
Hall, Jr., Robert A. 1987. Bloomfield and
semantics. In Robert A. Hall, Jr., editor,
Leonard Bloomfield: Essays on his Life and
work. John Benjamins, Amsterdam,
pages 155?160.
Hammarstr?m, Harald. 2005. A new
algorithm for unsupervised induction
of concatenative morphology. In Finite
State Methods in Natural Language
Processing: 5th International Workshop,
FSMNLP 2005, pages 288?289, Helsinki.
Hammarstr?m, Harald. 2006a. A naive
theory of morphology and an algorithm
for extraction. In SIGPHON 2006: Eighth
Meeting of the Proceedings of the ACL Special
Interest Group on Computational Phonology,
pages 79?88, New York, NY.
Hammarstr?m, Harald. 2006b. Poor man?s
stemming: Unsupervised recognition of
same-stem words. In Information Retrieval
Technology: Proceedings of the Third Asia
Information Retrieval Symposium, AIRS
2006, pages 323?337, Singapore.
Hammarstr?m, Harald. 2007a. A fine-
grained model for language identification.
In Proceedings of iNEWS-07 Workshop at
SIGIR 2007, pages 14?20, Amsterdam.
Hammarstr?m, Harald. 2007b. Unsupervised
learning of morphology: Survey, model,
algorithm and experiments. Thesis for
the Degree of Licentiate of Engineering,
Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Chalmers University.
Hammarstr?m, Harald. 2009a. Poor man?s
word-segmentation: Unsupervised
morphological analysis for Indonesian.
In Proceedings of the Third International
Workshop on Malay and Indonesian Language
Engineering (MALINDO), Singapore.
Hammarstr?m, Harald. 2009b. Unsupervised
Learning of Morphology and the Languages
of the World. Ph.D. thesis, Chalmers
University of Technology and University
of Gothenburg.
342
Hammarstr?m and Borin Unsupervised Learning of Morphology
Harris, Zellig. 1967. Morpheme boundaries
within words: Report on a computer test.
In Transformations and Discourse Analysis
Papers 73. Department of Linguistics,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
Reprinted in Harris 1970.
Harris, Zellig S. 1955. From phoneme to
morpheme. Language, 31(2):190?222.
Harris, Zellig S. 1968. Recurrent dependence
process: Morphemes by phoneme
neighbors. In Mathematical Structures of
Language, volume 21 of Interscience tracts in
pure and applied mathematics. Interscience,
New York, pages 24?28.
Harris, Zellig S. 1970. Morpheme boundaries
within words: Report on a computer test.
In Zellig S. Harris, editor, Papers in
Structural and Transformational Linguistics,
volume 1 of Formal Linguistics Series.
D. Reidel, Dordrecht, pages 68?77.
Haspelmath, Martin. 2002. Understanding
morphology. Arnold, London.
Hirsim?ki, Teemu, Mathias Creutz, Vesa
Siivola, and Mikko Kurimo. 2003.
Unlimited vocabulary speech recognition
based on morphs discovered in an
unsupervised manner. In Proceedings of
Eurospeech 2003, Geneva, pages 2293?2996.
Geneva.
Hirsim?ki, Teemu, Mathias Creutz,
Vesa Siivola, and Mikko Kurimo.
2005. Morphologically motivated
language models in speech recognition.
In Proceedings of the International
and Interdisciplinary Conference on
Adaptive Knowledge Representation and
Reasoning (AKRR ?05), pages 121?126,
Espoo.
Hirsim?ki, Teemu, Mathias Creutz, Vesa
Siivola, Mikko Kurimo, Sami Virpioja,
and Janne Pylkk?nen. 2006. Unlimited
vocabulary speech recognition with
morph language models applied to
Finnish. Computer Speech and Language,
20(4):515?541.
Hol?m, H. A. 1965. Vydelenie pervogo
morfologic?eskogo tipa v e?stonskom jazyke
na osnove statistiko-kombinatornogo
modelirovanija. In Nikolaj Dmitrievic?
Andreev, editor, Statistiko-kombinatornoe
modelirovanie jazykov. Nauka, Leningrad,
pages 212?224.
Hu, Yu, Irina Matveeva, John Goldsmith,
and Colin Sprague. 2005a. Refining the
SED heuristic for morpheme discovery:
Another look at Swahili. In Proceedings
of the Workshop on Psychocomputational
Models of Human Language Acquisition,
pages 28?35, Ann Arbor, MI.
Hu, Yu, Irina Matveeva, John Goldsmith, and
Colin Sprague. 2005b. Using morphology
and syntax together in unsupervised
learning. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Psychocomputational Models of Human
Language Acquisition, pages 20?27,
Ann Arbor, MI.
Jacquemin, Christian. 1997. Guessing
morphology from terms and corpora.
In Proceedings, 20th Annual International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval
(SIGIR ?97), pages 155?165,
Philadelphia, PA.
Jakubajtis, T. A. 1965. Statistiko-
kombinatornoe vydelenie pervogo
morfologic?eskogo tipa v laty?skom
jazyke. In Nikolaj Dmitrievic? Andreev,
editor, Statistiko-kombinatornoe
modelirovanie jazykov. Nauka, Leningrad,
pages 116?122.
Jaku?eva, D. A. 1965. Opyt primenenija
algoritma statistiko-kombinatornogo
modelirovanija k v?etnamskomu jazyku.
In Nikolaj Dmitrievic? Andreev, editor,
Statistiko-kombinatornoe modelirovanie
jazykov. Nauka, Leningrad, pages 225?228.
Jan?en, Axel. 1992. Segmentierung
franz?sischer Wortformen ohne Lexikon.
In Ursula Klenk, editor, Computatio
Linguae: Aufs?tze zur algorithmischen
und quantitativen Analyse der Sprache,
volume 73 of Zeitschrift f?r Dialektologie
und Linguistik: Beihefte. Franz Steiner,
Stuttgart, pages 74?95.
Jensen, John T. 1990. Morphology. Word
Structure in Generative Grammar. John
Benjamins, Amsterdam.
Johnsen, Lars G. 2005. Morphological
learning as principled argument. In Mikko
Kurimo, Mathias Creutz, and Krista Lagus,
editors, Proceedings of MorphoChallenge
2005, pages 33?36, Helsinki University of
Technology, Helsinki.
Johnson, Howard and Joel Martin. 2003.
Unsupervised learning of morphology for
English and Inuktitut. In HLT-NAACL
2003, Human Language Technology
Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 43?45, Edmonton.
Johnson, Mark. 2008. Unsupervised word
segmentation for Sesotho using adaptor
grammars. In Proceedings of the Tenth
Meeting of ACL Special Interest Group on
Computational Morphology and Phonology,
pages 20?27, Columbus, OH.
Jordan, Chris, John Healy, and Vlado Keselj.
2005. Swordfish: Using n-grams in an
343
Computational Linguistics Volume 37, Number 2
unsupervised approach to morphological
analysis. In Mikko Kurimo, Mathias
Creutz, and Krista Lagus, editors,
Proceedings of MorphoChallenge 2005,
pages 42?46, Helsinki University of
Technology, Helsinki.
Jordan, Chris, John Healy, and Vlado Keselj.
2006. Swordfish: An unsupervised ngram
based approach to morphological analysis.
In SIGIR ?06: Proceedings of the 29th Annual
International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, pages 657?658, New York, NY.
Juola, Patrick, Chris Hall, and Adam Boggs.
1994. Corpus-based morphological
segmentation by entropy changes. In
Third Conference on the Cognitive Science
of Natural Language Processing, Dublin.
Katrenko, Sophia. 2004. Towards
unsupervised learning of morphology
applied to Ukrainian. Student Session:
16th European Summer School in Logic,
Language and Information, pages 138?148,
Nancy.
Kazakov, Dimitar. 1997. Unsupervised
learning of na?ve morphology with genetic
algorithms. In ECML?97 ? Workshop Notes
on Empirical Learning of Natural Language
Tasks, pages 105?112, Prague.
Kazakov, Dimitar and Suresh Manandhar.
1998. A hybrid approach to word
segmentation. In Proceedings of the 8th
International Workshop on Inductive Logic
Programming (ILP-98), pages 125?134,
Madison, WI.
Kazakov, Dimitar and Suresh Manandhar.
2001. Unsupervised learning of word
segmentation rules with genetic
algorithms and inductive logic
programming. Machine Learning,
43:121?162.
Keshava, Samarth and Emily Pitler. 2005. A
simpler, intuitive approach to morpheme
induction. In Mikko Kurimo, Mathias
Creutz, and Krista Lagus, editors,
Proceedings of MorphoChallenge 2005,
pages 28?32, Helsinki University of
Technology, Helsinki.
Kirik, Harri and Mark Fishel. 2008.
Modelling linguistic phenomena with
unsupervised morphology for improving
statistical machine translation. Paper
presented at the Workshop on
Unsupervised Methods in NLP, held
in conjunction with SLTC?08, Royal
Institute of Technology, Stockholm,
Sweden.
Klein, Sheldon and Terry A. Dennison.
1976. An interactive program for
learning the morphology of natural
languages. In Proceedings of the 3rd
International Meeting on Computational
Linguistics, pages 343?353, Debrecen.
Klenk, Ursula. 1985a. Ein nicht-lexikalisches
Verfahren zur Erkennung spanischer
Wortst?mme. In Ursula Klenk, editor,
Strukturen und Verfahren in der maschinellen
Sprachverarbeitung. AQ-Verlag, Dudweiler,
pages 47?65.
Klenk, Ursula. 1985b. Recognition of
Spanish inflectional endings based on the
distribution of characters. In Computers
in Literary and Linguistic Computing:
Proceedings of the Eleventh International
Conference [L?ordinateur et les recherches
litt?raires et linguistiques: actes de la XIe
Conf?rence internationale], pages 246?253,
Louvain.
Klenk, Ursula. 1991. Verfahren der
Segmentierung von W?rtern in Morphe:
Mit einer Untersuchung zum Spanischen.
In J?rgen Rolshoven und Dieter Seelbach,
editor, Romanistische Computerlinguistik:
Theorien und Implementationen, volume 266
of Linguistische Arbeiten. Niemeyer,
T?bingen, pages 197?206.
Klenk, Ursula. 1992. Verfahren
morphologischer Segmentierung und die
Wortstruktur des Spanischen. In Ursula
Klenk, editor, Computatio Linguae: Aufs?tze
zur algorithmischen und quantitativen
Analyse der Sprache, volume 73 of
Zeitschrift f?r Dialektologie und Linguistik:
Beihefte. Franz Steiner, Stuttgart,
pages 110?124.
Klenk, Ursula and Hagen Langer. 1989.
Morphological segmentation without a
lexicon. Literary and Linguistic Computing,
4(4):247?253.
Kohonen, Oskar, Sami Virpioja, and
Mikaela Klami. 2008. Allomorfessor:
Towards unsupervised morpheme
analysis. In Carol Peters, Thomas
Deselaers, Nicola Ferro, Julio Gonzalo,
Gareth J. F. Jones, Mikko Kurimo,
Thomas Mandl, Anselmo Pe?as, and
Vivien Petras, editors, Evaluating
Systems for Multilingual and Multimodal
Information Access, 9th Workshop of
the Cross-Language Evaluation Forum,
CLEF 2008, Aarthus, Denmark,
September 17?19, 2008, Revised Selected
Papers, pages 975?982, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin.
Kontorovich, L., D. Don, and Y. Singer.
2003. A Markov model for the acquisition
of morphological structure. Technical
report CMU-CS-03-147, School of
344
Hammarstr?m and Borin Unsupervised Learning of Morphology
Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon
University, June.
Kordi, E. E. 1965. Ishodnye dannye
dlja statistiko-kombinatornogo
modelirovanija morfologii sovremennogo
francuzckogo jazyka i vydelenie
pervogo morfologic?eskogo tipa. In
Nikolaj Dmitrievic? Andreev, editor,
Statistiko-kombinatornoe modelirovanie
jazykov. Nauka, Leningrad, pages 172?180.
Krauss, Michael. 1992. The world?s
languages in crisis. Language, 68(1):4?10.
Krauss, Michael E. 2007. Mass language
extinction and documentation: The race
against time. In O. Miyaoka, O. Sakiyama,
and M. Krauss, editors, Vanishing
Languages of the Pacific Rim. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, pages 3?24.
Kurimo, Mikko, Mathias Creutz, and
Ville Turunen. 2007. Overview of
Morpho Challenge in CLEF 2007. In
Working Notes for the CLEF 2007 Workshop,
Budapest.
Kurimo, Mikko, Mathias Creutz, and
Matti Varjokallio. 2008a. Morpho challenge
evaluation by information retrieval
experiments. In Carol Peters, Valentin
Jijkoun, Thomas Mandl, Henning M?ller,
Douglas W. Oard, and Anselmo Pe?as,
editors, Advances in Multilingual and
Multimodal Information Retrieval, 8th
Workshop of the Cross-Language
Evaluation Forum, CLEF 2007, Budapest,
Hungary, September 19?21, 2007, Revised
Selected Papers, pages 991?998.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Kurimo, Mikko, Mathias Creutz, and Matti
Varjokallio. 2008b. Morpho challenge
evaluation using a linguistic gold
standard. In Carol Peters, Valentin Jijkoun,
Thomas Mandl, Henning M?ller, Douglas
W. Oard, and Anselmo Pe?as, editors,
Advances in Multilingual and Multimodal
Information Retrieval, 8th Workshop of
the Cross-Language Evaluation Forum,
CLEF 2007, Budapest, Hungary,
September 19?21, 2007, Revised Selected
Papers, pages 864?872. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin.
Kurimo, Mikko, Antti Puurula, Ebru Arisoy,
Vesi Siivola, Teemu Hirsim?ki, Janne
Pylkk?nen, Tanel Alum?e, and Murat
Sara?lar. 2006. Unlimited vocabulary
speech recognition for agglutinative
languages. In Proceedings of the Main
Conference on Human Language Technology
Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 487?494, New York.
Kurimo, Mikko and Ville Turunen. 2008.
Unsupervised morpheme analysis
evaluation by IR experiments?Morpho
Challenge 2008. In Working Notes for the
CLEF 2008 Workshop, Aarhus.
Kurimo, Mikko and Matti Varjokallio.
2008. Unsupervised morpheme analysis
evaluation by a comparison to a linguistic
gold standard?Morpho Challenge 2008.
In Working Notes for the CLEF 2008
Workshop, Aarhus.
Langer, Hagen. 1991. Ein automatisches
Morphsegmentierungsverfahren f?r
deutsche Wortformen. Ph.D. thesis,
Georg-August-Universit?t zu G?ttingen.
Lehmann, Hubert. 1973. Linguistische
Modellbildung und Methodologie. Max
Niemeyer Verlag, T?bingen.
Lewis, M. Paul, editor. 2009. Ethnologue:
Languages of the World. Available at
www.ethnologue.com/.
Lind?n, Krister. 2008. A probabilistic model
for guessing base forms of new words by
analogy. In Proceedings of CICLing-2008: 9th
International Conference on Intelligent Text
Processing and Computational Linguistics,
pages 106?116, Springer, Berlin.
Lind?n, Krister. 2009. Entry generation
by analogy?encoding new words for
morphological lexicons. Northern
European Journal of Language Technology,
1(1):1?25.
Longacre, Robert E. 1964. Grammar Discovery
Procedures. Mouton, The Hague.
Mahlow, Cerstin and Michael Piotrowski.
2009. Preface. In State of the Art in
Computational Morphology: Proceedings
of the Workshop on Systems and Frameworks
for Computational Morphology, SFCM 2009,
pages v?viii, Zurich.
Majumder, Prasenjit, Mandar Mitra, and
Dipasree Pal. 2008. Bulgarian, Hungarian
and Czech stemming using YASS. In
Advances in Multilingual and Multimodal
Information Retrieval: 8th Workshop of
the Cross-Language Evaluation Forum,
CLEF 2007, pages 49?56, Budapest.
Majumder, Prasenjit, Mandar Mitra,
Swapan K. Parui, Gobinda Kole, Pabitra
Mitra, and Kalyankumar Datta. 2007.
YASS: Yet another suffix stripper.
ACM Transactions on Information
Systems, 25(4):18:1?20.
Malahovskij, L. V. 1965. Nac?al?nyj e?tap
statistiko-kombinatornogo modelirovanija
morfologii anglijskogo jazyka. In
Nikolaj Dmitrievic? Andreev, editor,
Statistiko-kombinatornoe modelirovanie
jazykov. Nauka, Leningrad, pages 137?149.
345
Computational Linguistics Volume 37, Number 2
Maxwell, Michael and Anne David. 2008.
Joint grammar development by linguists
and computer scientists. In Proceedings of
the IJCNLP-08 Workshop on NLP for Less
Privileged Languages, pages 27?34,
Hyderabad.
Mayfield, James and Paul McNamee. 2003.
Single n-gram stemming. In SIGIR ?03:
Proceedings of the 26th Annual International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Informaion Retrieval,
pages 415?416, New York, NY.
McClelland, James L. and David E.
Rumelhart. 1986. On learning the past
tenses of English verbs. In Parallel
Distributed Processing: Explorations in the
Microstructure of Cognition. Volume 2:
Psychological and Biological Models. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA, pages 216?271.
McNamee, Paul. 2008. Retrieval experiments
at Morpho Challenge 2008. In Working
Notes for the CLEF 2008 Workshop, Aarhus.
McNamee, Paul and James Mayfield. 2007.
N-gram morphemes for retrieval. In
Working Notes for the CLEF 2007 Workshop,
Budapest.
Medina Urrea, Alfonso. 2000. Automatic
discovery of affixes by means of a corpus:
A catalog of Spanish affixes. Journal of
Quantitative Linguistics, 7(2):97?114.
Medina Urrea, Alfonso. 2003. Investigaci?n
cuantitativa de afijos y cl?ticos del espa?ol de
M?xico: Glutinometr?a en el Corpus del
Espa?ol Mexicano Contempor?neo.
Ph.D. thesis, El Colegio de M?xico,
M?xico, D.F.
Medina-Urrea, Alfonso. 2006a. Affix
discovery by means of corpora:
Experiments for Spanish, Czech, Ral?muli
and Chuj. In Alexander Mehler and
Reinhard K?hler, editors, Aspects of
Automatic Text Analysis, volume 209 of
Studies in Fuzziness and Soft Computing.
Springer, Berlin, pages 277?299.
Medina Urrea, Alfonso. 2006b. Towards the
automatic lemmatization of 16th century
Mexican Spanish: A stemming scheme for
the CHEM. In Computational Linguistics and
Intelligent Text Processing, 7th International
Conference, CICLing 2006, pages 101?104,
Mexico City.
Medina-Urrea, Alfonso. 2008. Affix
discovery based on entropy and economy
measurements. In Nicholas Gaylord,
Alexis Palmer, and Elias Ponvert, editors,
Computational Linguistics for Less-Studied
Languages, volume X of Texas Linguistics
Society. CSLI Publications, Stanford, CA,
pages 99?112.
Medina Urrea, Alfonso and E. C. Buenrostro
D?az. 2003. Caracter?sticas cuantitativas
de la flexi?n verbal del Chuj. Estudios de
Ling??stica Aplicada, 38:15?31.
Melkumjan, M. R. 1965. Ishodnye dannye
i statistiko-kombinatornoe vydelenie
paradigmy pervogo morfologic?eskogo
tipa v armjanskom jazyke. In
Nikolaj Dmitrievic? Andreev, editor,
Statistiko-kombinatornoe modelirovanie
jazykov. Nauka, Leningrad, pages 123?136.
Mikheev, Andrei. 1997. Automatic rule
induction for unknown-word guessing.
Computational Linguistics, 23(3):405?423.
Mithun, Marianne. 1999. The Languages
of Native North America. Cambridge
Language Surveys. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Monson, Christian. 2004. A framework
for unsupervised natural language
morphology induction. In ACL 2004:
Student Research Workshop, pages 67?72,
Barcelona.
Monson, Christian. 2009. ParaMor: From
Paradigm Structure to Natural Language
Morphology Induction. Ph.D. thesis,
Carnegie Mellon University.
Monson, Christian, Jaime Carbonell, Alon
Lavie, and Lori Levin. 2007a. ParaMor:
Finding paradigms across morphology. In
Carol Peters, Valentin Jijkoun, Thomas
Mandl, Henning M?ller, Douglas W. Oard,
and Anselmo Pe?as, editors, Advances in
Multilingual and Multimodal Information
Retrieval, 8th Workshop of the Cross-
Language Evaluation Forum, CLEF 2007,
Budapest, Hungary, September 19?21,
2007, Revised Selected Papers,
pages 892?899. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Monson, Christian, Jaime Carbonell, Alon
Lavie, and Lori Levin. 2007b. ParaMor:
Minimally supervised induction of
paradigm structure and morphological
analysis. In Proceedings of Ninth Meeting
of the ACL Special Interest Group in
Computational Morphology and Phonology,
pages 117?125, Prague.
Monson, Christian, Jaime Carbonell, Alon
Lavie, and Lori Levin. 2008. ParaMor
and Morpho Challenge 2008. Using
unsupervised paradigm acquisition
for prefixes. In Carol Peters, Thomas
Deselaers, Nicola Ferro, Julio Gonzalo,
Gareth J. F. Jones, Mikko Kurimo,
Thomas Mandl, Anselmo Pe?as, and
Vivien Petras, editors, Evaluating
Systems for Multilingual and Multimodal
Information Access, 9th Workshop of the
Cross-Language Evaluation Forum,
346
Hammarstr?m and Borin Unsupervised Learning of Morphology
CLEF 2008, Aarthus, Denmark,
September 17?19, 2008, Revised Selected
Papers, pages 967?974. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin.
Monson, Christian, Alon Lavie, Jaime
Carbonell, and Lori Levin. 2004.
Unsupervised induction of natural
language morphology inflection classes.
In SIGPHON 2004: Proceedings of the
Seventh Meeting of the ACL Special Interest
Group in Computational Phonology,
pages 52?61, Barcelona.
Monson, Christian, Alon Lavie, Jaime
Carbonell, and Lori Levin. 2008a.
Evaluating an agglutinative segmentation
model for ParaMor. In Proceedings of the
Tenth Meeting of ACL Special Interest Group
on Computational Morphology and Phonology,
pages 49?58, Columbus, OH.
Monson, Christian, Ariadna Font Llitj?s,
Vamshi Ambati, Lori Levin, Alon Lavie,
Alison Alvarez, Roberto Aranovich,
Jaime Carbonell, Robert Frederking,
Erik Peterson, and Katharina Probst.
2008b. Linguistic structure and bilingual
informants help induce machine
translation of lesser-resourced languages.
In Proceedings of the Sixth International
Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC?08), pages 2854?2859, Marrakech.
Moon, Taesun, Katrin Erk, and Jason
Baldridge. 2009. Unsupervised
morphological segmentation and
clustering with document boundaries.
In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 668?677, Singapore.
Naradowsky, Jason and Sharon Goldwater.
2009. Improving morphology induction
by learning spelling rules. In UCAI 2009,
Proceedings of the 21st, International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
Pasadena, California, USA, July 11?17,
2009, pages 1531?1537.
Neuvel, Sylvain and Sean A. Fulop. 2002.
Unsupervised learning of morphology
without morphemes. In Proceedings of the
ACL-02 Workshop on Morphological and
Phonological Learning, Philadelphia,
pages 31?40.
Nida, Eugene A. 1949. Morphology. The
Descriptive Analysis of Words, 2nd edition.
The University of Michigan Press, Ann
Arbor, MI.
Nunzio, G. M. Di, N. Ferro, M. Melucci,
and N. Orio. 2004. Experiments to evaluate
probabilistic models for automatic stemmer
generation and query word translation. In
Proceedings of the Cross-Language Evaluation
Forum (CLEF): Methodology and Metrics
(CLEF 2003), pages 220?235.
Oflazer, Kemal, Marjorie McShane, and
Sergei Nirenburg. 2001. Bootstrapping
morphological analyzers by combining
human elicitation and machine learning.
Computational Linguistics, 27(1):59?85.
Oliver, A. 2004. Adquisici? d?informaci?
l?xica i morfosint?ctica a partir de corpus
sense anotar: aplicaci? al rus i al croat. Ph.D.
thesis, Universitat de Barcelona.
Ostler, Nicholas. 2008. Is it globalization that
endangers languages? In UNESCO/UNU
Conference: Globalization and Languages:
Building our Rich Heritage, pages 206?211,
Paris.
O?igova, G. I. 1965. Statistiko-kombinatornoe
modelirovanie paradigmy pervogo
morfologic?eskogo tipa v c?e?skom jazyke.
In Nikolaj Dmitrievic? Andreev, editor,
Statistiko-kombinatornoe modelirovanie
jazykov. Nauka, Leningrad, pages 89?103.
Pandey, Amaresh Kumar and Tanveer J.
Siddiqui. 2008. An unsupervised Hindi
stemmer with heuristic improvements. In
AND ?08: Proceedings of the Second Workshop
on Analytics for Noisy Unstructured Text
Data, pages 99?105, New York, NY.
Panina, N. A. 1965. Opyt statistiko-
kombinatornogo vydelenija paradigmy
pervogo morfologic?eskogo tipa
v fserbohorvatskom jazyke. In
Nikolaj Dmitrievic? Andreev, editor,
Statistiko-kombinatornoe modelirovanie
jazykov. Nauka, Leningrad, pages 104?109.
Per?ikov, V. F. 1965. Iz opyta statistiko-
kombinatornogo modelirovanija albanskoj
morfologii. In Nikolaj Dmitrievic? Andreev,
editor, Statistiko-kombinatornoe modelirovanie
jazykov. Nauka, Leningrad, pages 181?188.
Petzell, Malin. 2007. A lingustic description
of Kagulu. Ph.D. thesis, G?teborgs
Universitet.
Pirrelli, Vito, Basilio Calderone, Ivan
Herreros, and Michele Virgilio. 2004.
Non-locality all the way through:
Emergent global constraints in the
Italian morphological lexicon. In
SIGPHON 2004: Proceedings of the Seventh
Meeting of the ACL Special Interest Group in
Computational Phonology, pages 52?61,
Barcelona.
Pirrelli, Vito and Ivan Herreros. 2007.
Learning morphology by itself. In
Proceedings of the Fifth Mediterranean
Morphology Meeting (MMM5),
pages 269?290, Fr?jus.
Poon, Hoifung, Colin Cherry, and Kristina
Toutanova. 2009. Unsupervised
347
Computational Linguistics Volume 37, Number 2
morphological segmentation with
log-linear models. In Proceedings of
NAACL ?09: The 2009 Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 209?217, Morristown, NJ.
Powers, David M. W. 1998. Reconciliation of
unsupervised clustering, segmentation
and cohesion. In NeMLaP3/CoNLL ?98
Workshop on Paradigms and Grounding in
Language Learning, Sydney, pages 307?310.
Rai, Novel Kishore. 1984. A Descriptive Study
of Bantawa. Ph.D. thesis, Poona University.
Redlich, A. Norman. 1993. Redundancy
reduction as a strategy for unsupervised
learning. Neural Computation, 5(2):289?304.
Reiter, Ehud. 2007. Last words: The shrinking
horizons of computational linguistics.
Computational Linguistics, 33(2):283?287.
Roark, B. and Richard W. Sproat. 2007.
Machine learning of morphology. In
Computational Approaches to Morphology and
Syntax, volume 4 of Oxford Surveys in
Syntax and Morphology. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, pages 116?136.
Rodrigues, Paul and Damir C?avar. 2005.
Learning Arabic morphology using
information theory. In The Panels 2005:
Proceedings from the Annual Meeting of the
Chicago Linguistic Society, volume 41?2,
pages 49?58, Chicago, IL.
Rodrigues, Paul and Damir C?avar. 2007.
Learning Arabic morphology using
statistical constraint-satisfaction models.
In Elabbas Benmamoun, editor,
Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics: Papers
from the Annual Symposium on Arabic
Linguistics, pages 63?75, Urbana, IL.
Rogati, Monica, Scott McCarley, and Yiming
Yang. 2003. Unsupervised learning of
Arabic stemming using a parallel corpus.
In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of
the ACL, pages 391?398, Sapporo.
Saxena, Anju and Lars Borin, editors. 2006.
Lesser-Known Languages of South Asia:
Status and Policies, Case Studies and
Applications of Information Technology.
Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin.
Schone, Patrick. 2001. Toward Knowledge-Free
Induction of Machine-Readable Dictionaries.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Colorado.
Schone, Patrick and Daniel Jurafsky. 2000.
Knowledge-free induction of inflectional
morphologies using latent semantic
analysis. In Conference on Natural
Language Learning 2000 (CoNLL-2000),
pages 67?72, Lisbon.
Schone, Patrick and Daniel Jurafsky. 2001a.
Knowledge-free induction of inflectional
morphologies. In Proceedings of the North
American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 183?191,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Schone, Patrick and Daniel Jurafsky. 2001b.
Language-independent induction of part
of speech class labels using only language
universals. In "Machine Learning: Beyond
Supervision," Workshop at IJCAI-2001,
pages 53?60, Seattle, WA.
Sereewattana, Siriwan. 2003. Unsupervised
segmentation for statistical machine
translation. Master?s thesis, University
of Edinburgh.
Sharma, Utpal and Rajib Das. 2002.
Classification of words based on affix
evidence. In International Conference on
Natural Language Processing, ICON-2002,
pages 31?39, Mumbai.
Sharma, Utpal, Jugal Kalita, and Rajib Das.
2002. Unsupervised learning of
morphology for building lexicon for a
highly inflectional language. In Proceedings
of the 6th Workshop of the ACL Special
Interest Group in Computational Phonology
(SIGPHON), pages 1?10, Philadelphia.
Sharma, Utpal, Jugal Kalita, and Rajib Das.
2003. Root word stemming by multiple
evidence from corpus. In Proceedings
of the 6th International Conference on
Computational Intelligence and Natural
Computation (CINC), pages 1593?1596,
Cary, NC.
Snover, Matthew G. 2002. An unsupervised
knowledge free algorithm for the
learning of morphology in natural
languages. Master?s thesis, Department
of Computer Science, Washington
University.
Snover, Matthew G. and Michael R. Brent.
2001. A Bayesian model for morpheme
and paradigm identification. In Proceedings
of the 39th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL-2001),
pages 482?490.
Snover, Matthew G. and Michael R. Brent.
2003. A probabilistic model for learning
concatenative morphology. In S. Becker,
S. Thrun, and K. Obermayer, editors,
Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 15. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
pages 1513?1520.
Snover, Matthew G., Gaja E. Jarosz, and
Michael R. Brent. 2002. Unsupervised
learning of morphology using a novel
directed search algorithm: Taking the first
step. In Proceedings of the ACL-02 Workshop
on Morphological and Phonological Learning,
pages 11?20, Philadelphia.
348
Hammarstr?m and Borin Unsupervised Learning of Morphology
Snyder, Benjamin and Regina Barzilay.
2008. Unsupervised multilingual learning
for morphological segmentation.
In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT,
pages 737?745, Columbus, OH.
Spencer, Andrew and Arnold M. Zwicky,
editors. 1998. The Handbook of Morphology.
Blackwell, Oxford.
Spiegler, Sebastian, Bruno Gol?nia, Ksenia
Shalonova, Peter Flach, and Roger Tucker.
2008. Learning the morphology of Zulu
with different degrees of supervision. In
Spoken Language Technology Workshop,
2008 (SLT 2008), pages 9?12, Goa.
Strassel, Stephanie, Mike Maxwell, and
Christopher Cieri. 2003. Linguistic
resource creation for research and
technology development: A recent
experiment. ACM Transactions on Asian
Language Processing, 2(2):101?117.
Tepper, Michael. 2007. Knowledge-lite
induction of underlying morphology: A
hybrid approach to learning morphemes
using context-sensitive rewrite rules.
Master?s thesis, University of Washington.
Tepper, Michael and Fei Xia. 2008. A hybrid
approach to the induction of underlying
morphology. In Proceedings of the Third
International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (IJCNLP 2008),
pages 17?24, Hyderabad.
Theron, Pieter and Ian Cloete. 1997.
Automatic acquisition of two-level
morphological rules. In Fifth Conference
on Applied Natural Language Processing,
pages 103?110, Washington, DC.
Trosterud, Trond. 2004. Porting
morphological analysis and
disambiguation to new languages.
In SALTMIL Workshop at LREC 2004:
First Steps in Language Documentation
for Minority Languages, pages 90?92,
Lisbon.
Trosterud, Trond. 2006. Grammatically
based language technology for minority
languages. In Anju Saxena and Lars
Borin, editors, Lesser-Known Languages
of South Asia: Status and Policies, Case
Studies and Applications of Information
Technology. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin,
pages 293?315.
Tufis, Dan. 1989. It would be much easier if
WENT were GOED. In Proceedings of the
Fourth Conference of the European Chapter of
the ACL, pages 145?152, Manchester.
ur Rehman, Khalid and Iftikhar Hussain.
2005. Unsupervised morphemes
segmentation. In Mikko Kurimo, Mathias
Creutz, and Krista Lagus, editors,
Proceedings of MorphoChallenge 2005,
pages 52?56, Helsinki University of
Technology, Helsinki.
Virpioja, Sami, Jaakko J. V?yrynen, Mathias
Creutz, and Markus Sadeniemi. 2007.
Morphology-aware statistical machine
translation based on morphs induced in
an unsupervised manner. In Proceedings
of Machine Translation Summit XI,
pages 391?498, Copenhagen.
Wicentowski, Richard. 2002. Modeling
and Learning Multilingual Inflectional
Morphology in a Minimally Supervised
Framework. Ph.D. thesis, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD.
Wicentowski, Richard. 2004. Multilingual
noise-robust supervised morphological
analysis using the wordframe model.
In Proceedings of the ACL Special Interest
Group on Computational Phonology
(SIGPHON), pages 70?77, Barcelona.
Wintner, Shuly. 2009. Last words: What
science underlies natural language
engineering? Computational Linguistics,
35(4):641?644.
Wothke, Klaus. 1986. Machine learning of
morphological rules by generalization
and analogy. In Proceedings of the 11th
Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 289?293, Morristown, NJ.
Wothke, Klaus Christian. 1985. Maschinelle
Erlernung und Simulation morphologischer
Ableitungsregeln. Ph.D. thesis, Rheinische
Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universit?t zu Bonn.
Xanthos, Aris. 2007. Apprentissage
automatique de la morphologie: Le cas des
structures racine-sch?me. Ph.D. thesis,
Universit? de Lausanne.
Xanthos, Aris, Yu Hu, and John Goldsmith.
2006. Exploring variant definitions of
pointer length in MDL. In Proceedings of the
Eighth Meeting of the ACL Special Interest
Group on Computational Phonology and
Morphology at HLT-NAACL 2006,
pages 32?40.
Yarowsky, David, Grace Ngai, and Richard
Wicentowski. 2001. Inducing multilingual
text analysis tools via robust projection
across aligned corpora. In Proceedings of the
First International Conference on Human
Language Technology Research, Stroudsburg,
PA, pages 1?8.
Yarowsky, David and Richard Wicentowski.
2000. Minimally supervised morphological
analysis by multimodal alignment. In
Proceedings of the 38th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL-2000), pages 207?216,
Hong Kong.
349
Computational Linguistics Volume 37, Number 2
Yvon, Fran?ois. 1996. Prononcer par analogie:
motivation, formalisation et evaluation. Ph.D.
thesis, ?cole Nationale Sup?rieure des
T?l?communications, Paris.
Zeman, Daniel. 2008. Unsupervised
acquiring of morphological paradigms
from tokenized text. In Advances in
Multilingual and Multimodal Information
Retrieval: 8th Workshop of the Cross-
Language Evaluation Forum, CLEF 2007,
pages 892?899, Budapest.
Zeman, Daniel. 2009. Using unsupervised
paradigm acquisition for prefixes. In Carol
Peters, Thomas Deselaers, Nicola Ferro,
Julio Gonzalo, Gareth J. F. Jones, Mikko
Kurimo, Thomas Mandl, Anselmo Pe?as,
and Vivien Petras, editors, Evaluating
Systems for Multilingual and Multimodal
Information Access, 9th Workshop of the
Cross-Language Evaluation Forum,
CLEF 2008, Aarthus, Denmark,
September 17?19, 2008, Revised Selected
Papers, pages 983?990. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin.
Zhang, Byoung-Tak and Yung-Taek Kim.
1990. Morphological analysis and
synthesis by automated discovery and
acquisition of linguistic rules. In Papers
Presented to the 13th International Conference
on Computational Linguistics (COLING
1990), volume 2, pages 431?436, Helsinki.
Zweigenbaum, P., F. Hadouche, and
N. Grabar. 2003. Apprentissage de
relations morphologiques en corpus.
In Actes de TALN 2003, pages 285?294,
Batz-sur-mer.
350
