Grounding styles of aged dyads: an exploratory study 
Atsue Takeoka, Atsushi Shimojima 
School of Knowledge Science 
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 
1-1, Asahidai, Tatsunokuchi, Ishikawa, 923-1292, Japan 
{takeoka, ashimoji}@jaist.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract 
This paper reports an exploratory study of 
the grounding styles of older dyads, namely, 
the characteristic ways in which they 
mutually agree to have shared a piece of 
information in dialogue. On the basis of 
Traum?s classification of grounding acts, 
we conducted an exploratory comparison of 
dialogue data on older and younger dyads, 
and found that a fairly clear contrast holds 
mainly in the types of acknowledgement 
utterances used by the two groups. We will 
discuss the implications of this contrast, 
concerning how some of the negative 
stereotypes about conversations with older 
people may arise from this difference in 
grounding styles. 
1 Introduction 
Clark (1996) developed the notion of grounding to 
capture intricate processes with which conversants 
establish a set of information as a shared common 
ground for on-going (and possibly subsequent) 
dialogue. In a grounding process, a conversant 
presents a piece of information verbally or 
non-verbally, and the partner issues a particular 
public signal of the receipt, understanding, or 
acceptance of that information. Once a piece of 
information is thus incorporated into a common 
ground, it is available as something than can be 
presupposed in subsequent communication, in 
which still another change to the common ground 
is worked out. 
On the basis of Clark?s work, Traum (1994) 
shows a way of substantiating the process of 
grounding in a finite-state transition model, which 
specifies what contributions to a grounding 
process can be made by individual utterances in 
dialogue and how individual contributions 
combine themselves to make a sequence that 
completes the grounding. In Traum?s terms, such 
contributions are grounding acts, and the units of 
utterance that can perform grounding acts are 
utterance units, and the sequences of utterance 
units that complete are discourse units. 
Now, both Clark?s and Traum?s models of 
grounding are generic, in the sense that they both 
admit a significant range of forms or styles in 
which actual processes of grounding may take 
place. That is, their models tell us what forms of 
grounding sequences are possible or well-formed, 
but do not tell what particular forms are most 
frequent in actual dialogues or, more specifically, 
what forms are most frequent in what sorts of 
dialogue situations. Thus, on the basis of Clark?s 
and Traum?s work, natural questions arise as to 
grounding styles, namely, the possibility of 
characteristic forms of grounding sequences 
adopted by particular types of conversants in 
particular types of occasions. 
This paper investigates this question in its 
special application to casual, non-task-oriented 
dialogues conducted by aged people. Do people 
develop a characteristic style of grounding as they 
age? If so, what exactly distinguish their grounding 
styles in casual, non-task-oriented settings?  
To address these questions, we collected a 
spoken dialogue data comprising both older dyads 
and younger dyads, and analyzed the grounding 
processes in our data on the basis of Traum?s 
finite-state model. 
Why are we particularly interested in possible 
grounding styles of aged people? It is rather 
common that younger people find difficult or get 
frustrated in conversing with aged people. Thus, a 
common stereotype says that conversations with 
aged people are slow-paced, repetitive, and 
     Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 188-195.  Association for Computational Linguistics.
                  Proceedings of the Third SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue,
therefore boring. It is perhaps because of these 
oft-felt problems that younger people often adopt 
?patronizing speech styles? or ?secondary baby 
talk? toward aged people, characterized by 
restricted topics, childlike expressions, directive 
speech, and exaggerated nonverbal signals (Ryan 
& Hummert, 1995) or by slower speech, varied 
paraphrases, decreased grammatical complexity, 
lower propositional density, and other 
modifications (Kemper & Vandeputte, 1995). 
Now, it seems customary that these 
communicative problems between older people 
and younger people are attributed to the side of 
aged people only, to their difficulties in auditory 
reception, alleged slowness of understanding, and 
alleged stubbornness in accepting new ideas. 
However, they may not be problems with one side 
only, nor problems with cognitive capacities or 
personal characters of aged people, but may largely 
come from different grounding styles adopted by 
the two groups of people. That is, the ways they 
agree to have a piece of information shared may 
have different recurrent patterns, and this 
difference may be a real cause of the difficulty and 
the negative stereotype. If so, digging out this 
difference and identifying the characteristic 
grounding styles of aged people are a necessity for 
scientific treatments of communicative problems 
commonly attributed to aged people, as well as 
informed design of dialogue systems that interact 
with aged people. 
Nevertheless, most studies related to 
communications of aged people have focused on 
the influence of aging on basic linguistic 
competence such as word retrievals (Tatsumi 1997, 
Ministry of Health and Welfare 1999), and studies 
of their behaviors in actual dialogues have been 
quite scarce. The studies by Ryan & Hummert 
(1995) and Kemper & Vandeputte (1995) did touch 
on the conversational styles adopted by aged 
people, but their focus was more on the 
conversational styles adopted by younger people 
toward aged people. The study by Bortfeld et al 
(2001) was exceptional in that it measured the 
number of fillers, restarts, and repairs to evaluate 
disfluency of aged people?s speech in 
conversational settings. Yet, the focus of this study 
was on the characteristics of speech by individual 
conversants, rather than the ways in which they 
interact. Thus, conversational styles of aged people, 
let alne their grounding styles, have been seldom 
studied systematically. 
Under this situation, we have no specific 
hypothesis as to whether aged people have any 
characteristic grounding styles and if so, what they 
are. Our purpose in this study is therefore 
exploratory, dedicated to a search for plausible 
hypotheses about grounding styles of aged dyads, 
rather than a verification of their existence and 
specifics. Although our study is thus hypothetical 
in nature, we did identify two clearly 
distinguishable grounding styles in our data, 
correlated with the age ranges of conversants. In 
the following, we will report what they are, how 
they are found, and what implications their 
difference has as to some negative stereotypes 
about conversations with aged people. 
2 Method 
The details of the corpus, its collection, and the 
assignment of tags are given below. 
2.1 Dialogue Data 
Our data consist of 5 dialogues by older dyads (age 
range: 80-88, sd: 2.1) and 5 dialogues by younger 
dyads (age range: 23-39, sd: 5.2). Most of the older 
participants were therefore so-called ?older-olds,? 
meaning that they were between 75 and 85 years of 
age. Familiarities of the older dyads were strong: 
they had known each other since they were 
children or after they moved into the current areas 
of residence, although they started talking each 
other frequently after they joined an common local 
association several years ago. The younger dyads 
were also familiar with each other: they had 
worked in the same department of an institute for at 
least 3 months and up to 5 years and had talked 
with each other almost every working day. 
Dialogues of older dyads were videotaped in a 
community center that the subjects regularly visit 
for activities of their association. Videotaping of 
younger adults took place in a lounge space of their 
work place. The dialogues were casual 
conversations in Japanese, involving no specific 
objectives or tasks. The dialogue topics between 
older dyads included community events, common 
friends, their girlhood, and garden work, while the 
topics between younger adults included their job, 
their children, their cars, and common friends. The 
length of a dialogue in either group was from 30 to 
50 minutes. Older adults participated in our data 
collection on the voluntary basis, while we paid a 
small amount of money for participation of 
younger adults. 
2.2 Transcription and coding 
Transcription 
We transcribed a 5-minute portion after 3 minutes 
from the beginning of each dialogue. All words 
and word fragments audible to the ear were 
transcribed, including overlapping speech, 
nonlexical fillers (such as ?uh?), and other 
vocalizations (such as laughter and whistle). After 
each dialogue was transcribed, we checked the 
videotape to add data of all noddings and salient 
gestures (facial expressions and hand movements) 
to the transcription. The transcriber solicited the 
help of some local residents to understand some of 
the dialectical expressions contained used in 
dialogues by older dyads. 
Coding 
On the basis of Traum?s finite-state transition 
model of grounding, we divided all speech in our 
dialogue data into utterance units (UUs), namely, 
?continuous speech by the same speaker, 
punctuated by prosodic boundaries (including 
pauses of significant length and boundary tones)? 
(Traum, 1994). One of the present authors then 
classified each utterance unit into one of seven 
categories of grounding acts, according to its 
contribution to a grounding process. Table 1 shows 
the seven categories of grounding acts and their 
definitions. 
 
Table 1. Seven categories of grounding acts 
 
Initiate 
(init) 
An initial utterance component of a 
Discourse unit. 
Continue 
(cont) 
A continuation of a previous act 
performed by the same speaker. 
Acknowl- 
edgement 
(ack) 
An acknowledgement claiming or 
demonstrating understanding of a 
previous utterance. It may be either a 
repetition or paraphrase of all or part 
of the utterance, an explicit signal of 
comprehension such as ?ok? or ?uh 
huh?, or an implicit signaling of 
understanding. 
Repair 
(repair) 
Changes the content of the current 
DU. 
ReqRepair 
(reqRepair) 
A request for a repair by the other 
party. 
ReqAck 
(reqAck) 
Attempt to get the other agent to 
acknowledge the previous utterance. 
Cancel 
(cancel) 
Closes off the current DU as 
ungrounded. 
 
Reliability 
To check the reliability of our coding scheme, we 
asked two independent subjects to code a portion 
of our data and compared their results with our 
own. As an instruction to these independent coders, 
we produced a coding manual that lists Traum?s 
definitions of the seven categories of grounding 
acts (see Table 1), sample utterances of each 
category, and some general notes on treatments of 
marginal cases such as fillers, simultaneous 
utterances, and utterances with both Init and Ack 
functions. The subjects did some exercise coding 
before actual coding, and they were encouraged to 
ask questions about the coding standard during the 
exercise period. Both transcribed text and audio 
recording were available to the subjects during the 
actual coding. The subjects coded two partial 
dialogues one from older dyads and the other from 
younger dyads. Each dialogue was about 2.5 
minute in length. 
The interrater reliability among the original 
coder and these two subjects was excellent; there 
was an 83% agreement, with a Cohen?s Kappa 
of .78, for dialogues by older dyads (UUs = 138, 
coders = 3, categories = 9) and a 78% agreement, 
with a Cohen?s Kappa .77, for dialogues by 
younger dyads (UUs = 128, coders = 3, categories 
= 9). 
3 Results 
Thus, our data comprise both dialogues by older 
dyads and ones by younger dyads, but these two 
groups of dialogues were not tightly controlled in 
their settings and therefore are not appropriate for 
exact comparison. For the limited purpose of 
exploratory data analysis, however, it is 
convenient to tentatively divide our data into these 
two groups and compare them from various points 
of view. This section reports four main results of 
such exploratory comparisons, in terms of (1) the 
length of disourse units, (2) the types of frequently 
used acknowledgments, and (3) the frequencies of 
collaborative completions and echoic responses. 
3.1 Utterance units and discourse units 
The two groups of dialogues had no significant 
differences in the total numbers of discourse units 
(older adults, 446; younger adults, 482) and the 
total numbers of utterance units (older adults, 
1406; younger adults, 1309). This roughly means 
that older dyads grounded information as 
frequently as younger dyads, and the numbers of 
utterances needed for each grounding are about the 
same in older dyads and in younger dyads. 
Also, the frequencies of occurrences of the 
seven categories of grounding acts were about the 
same in older dyads and younger dyads (Figure 1).  
 
33.3% 24.5%
29.9%
33.2%
32.9%30.6% 5.6%
7.1%
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
Init Cont Ack no acts
older dyads
younger dyads
 
 
Figure 1. Ratios of grounding acts in older dyads 
and younger dyads 
 
That is, older dyads used grounding acts in about 
the same variety and variance as younger dyads 
did. 
3.2 Types of Acknowledgements 
Initiation-acknowledgements 
Generally, an ?acknowledgement act? appears at 
the end of a grounding unit, indicating that 
conversants have mutually understood what the 
presenter said. In contrast, an ?initiate act? appears 
at the beginning of a grounding unit, initiating the 
presentation of a new information unit. Sometimes, 
a speaker performs both initiation and 
acknowledgement at the same time, by producing 
an initiation utterance whose content presupposes 
the understanding of the preceding presentation. 
An example is found in dialogue excerpt (1) 
from an older dyad, where one of B?s utterances, 
?a-hon-na-ikatta (that?s good),? acknowledges the 
previous utterance of speaker A while initiating 
B?s presentation of her own information. 
 
(1) 
act UU  Utterance 
init17 35.1 A: honera 
   (so) 
cont17(35.1) 35.2 : koneda[laugh] 
   (the other day) 
cont17(35.2) 35.3 : isha-so-ii-mashita 
   (the doctor said so) 
ack17 init18 36.1 B: a-hon-na-ikatta 
   (that?s good) 
ack18 37.1 A: n 
   (m) 
init19 38.1 B: sore-kiitara-anshin-yawano 
   (that may make you feel at 
ease) 
 
We found that acknowledgements of this type 
accounts for a 27% of all acknowledgement 
utterances made by younger adults, while they 
account for only a 10% of those by older adults 
(see the top section of each column in Figure 2). 
The difference was significant 
(t(5)=2.87, .01<p<.05, two-tailed). 
 
233225
203 110
13851
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
older dyads younger dyads
(10.3% )
(42.8% )
(46.9% )
(26.7% )
(22.4% )
(50.9% )
initia tion-ack
general-
purpose ack
non-general-
purpose ack
 
 
Figure 2. Ratios of the three types of 
acknowledgements in older dyads and younger 
dyads 
 
General-purpose acknowledgements 
Beside these dual-functional acknowledgments, 
there were a significant number of ?dedicated? 
acknowledgements, namely, utterances annotated 
as ?acknowledgements? but not as anything else. 
Inside these dedicated acknowledgements, 
however, we can distinguish two types. One type  
consists of general-purpose acknowledgements, 
such as ?uh-huh? and ?m?, that could be used 
irrespective of the contents of the preceding 
presentations. The other type comprises 
special-purpose acknowledgements, such as 
repeating or paraphrasing responses, whose 
contents must vary depending on the contents of 
the preceding presentations. An example of 
general-purpose acknowledgement is speaker A?s 
short utterance ?n (m)? in excerpt (2). In contrast, 
speaker B?s utterance ?n-n-mite (m, you saw it)? in 
excerpt (3) is a case of special-purpose 
acknowledgment since it paraphrases the 
preceding utterance by speaker A and thus depends 
on its specific content.1 
 
(2) 
act UU  Utterance 
init26 50.1 B: nanka-sono 
   (well) 
cont26(50.1) 50.2  shinseki-no-hito-kaeru 
   (the relative left) 
cont26(50.2) 50.3  koro-ni-natte 
   (at time) 
ack26 51.1 A: n 
   (m) 
init27  B: obaasan-ga-kite 
   (her grand mother came and) 
cont27(52.1)   anta-aisatu-senkaine-tte 
   (said ?`you must greet them?) 
 
 
(3) 
act UU  Utterance 
init1 2.1 B: hora-sangousha-noran-naran-wa
-tte 
   (then I had to get in the third car) 
ack1 3.1 A: [laugh] 
    
init2 4.1 B: isshokenme-ni-sangousha-n-tok
o-he 
   (I tried hard to get to the car) 
cont2(4.1) 4.2 : hata-sanbon-mitoite 
   (seeing the flag) 
ack2 5.1 A: n-n-mite 
   (m, you saw it) 
init3 6.1 B: hoite-ittara-mannin-ya-yappa 
   (When I got to the car, it had no 
seats) 
ack3 7.1 A: aa 
   (ah) 
 
1 Actual classifications of dedicated 
acknowledgements into general-purpose and 
special purpose acknowledgements are subtler 
than suggested here. For example, an utterance that 
sounds ?n (m)? could be classified as 
special-purpose if it has a marked prosodic feature 
that signals the speaker?s emotion or feeling. 
Interestingly, older dyads produced more 
general-purpose acknowledgements (43%) than 
younger adults did (23%). The difference is highly 
significant (?2(2)=67.2, p<.01), as we can also see 
by comparing the middle sections of the two 
column in Figure 2. 
Post-grounding acknowledgements 
Dialogues conducted by older dyads contained 
several instances of requests for acknowledgement 
issued after acknowledgements, while those by 
younger dyads contained no such instances (older 
dyads, 9; younger dyads, 0). For example, the 
second request for acknowledgement ?ne (see?)? 
towards the end of excerpt (4) was issued after the 
acknowledgment ?n (m)? by speaker A, requesting 
further acknowledgement of the presentation 
?watashi-no-shita-wo (and my younger sister)? 
that had been already grounded. This phenomenon 
is particularly interesting since a request for 
acknowledgement after acknowledgement is not in 
the scope of Traum?s finite-state transition model 
of grounding sequences. 
 
(4) 
act UU  Utterance 
init92 178.1 B: hoide-shita-ga 
   (and my younger brother) 
reqAck92 178.2 : ne 
   (see?) 
ack92 179.1 A: n 
   (m) 
init93 180.1 B: ano 
   (what was that?) 
cont93(180.1) 180.2 : nakanogou-he-yattee 
   (they left him in relative 
hand) 
ack93 181.1 A: n 
   (m) 
init94 182.1 B: watashi-no-shita-wo 
   (and my younger sister) 
ack94 183.1 A: n 
   (m) 
reqAck94 184.1 B: ne 
   (see?) 
ack94 185.1 A: n 
   (m) 
 
Furthermore, older dyads produced 
?acknowledgements after acknowledgements? 
slightly more frequently than younger did (older 
adults, 35; younger adults, 25). The second 
utterance ?nn (m)? by speaker B is an instance of 
that type of acknowledgements. 
 
(5) 
act UU  Utterance 
cont34(64.3) 64.4 B: hachiju-kara-ue-ni-narya-
nani-wo-nn-na-aryan-na 
   (as we get over 80?s) 
cont34(64.4) 64.5 : otoroeru-bakkari-ya 
   (we are languishing) 
ack34 65.1 A: hou-ya 
   (right) 
ack34 66.1 B: nn 
   (m) 
 
3.3 Collaborative completion and echoic 
response 
Collaborative completions were slightly more 
frequent in older dyads than in younger dyads 
(older adults, 13; younger adults, 7). Likewise, 
echoic responses were   more frequent in older 
dyads than in younger dyads (older adults, 23; 
younger adults, 10). Speaker A?s second utterance 
in excerpt (6) is an example of collaborative 
completion done by an older dyad, and speaker B?s 
second utterance in excerpt (7) is an example of 
echoic response done by an older speaker. 
 
(6) 
act UU  Utterance 
init37 74.1 B: hitori-oru-ga-to 
   (whether being alone or) 
ack37 75.1 A: n 
   (m) 
init38 76.1 B: nina-tooru-ga-to 
   (being with someone) 
cont38(76.1) 76.2 : debu-kibun-ga 
   (feels) 
ack38 init39 77.1 A: chigau-ga 
   (a big difference) 
ack39 78.1 B: chigota-tte-ne 
   (yes, it?s different) 
 
 
(7) 
act UU  Utterance 
ack1 2.2 B: ooi-yo 
   (you?re right) 
init2 3.1 A: tanba-dekiru-ga-ya 
   (that?s how rice can grow) 
ack2 4.1 B: dekiru-ga-ya 
   (can grow) 
4 Discussions 
Thus, our exploratory comparison suggests several 
points of difference between dialogues by older 
dyads and dialogues by younger dyads. What 
would these individual differences reveal about 
common stereotypes about conversations with 
aged people? Do these individual differences 
combine themselves to define two different 
grounding styles attributable to older and younger 
dyads? 
4.1 Initiation-acknowledgement 
utterances were less frequent in older 
dyads. 
Initiation-acknowledgements are dual-functional 
utterances, performing two grounding acts by 
single utterance units. Dedicated 
acknowledgments are mono-functional, 
performing single grounding functions per single 
utterance units. Thus, if we define the grounding 
tempo of a given part of dialogue as the ratio of the 
number of utterance units to the number of 
different grounding acts performed by them, then 
an occurrence of initiation-acknowledgement 
certainly increases the grounding tempo of the 
local context. 
In contrast, a dedicated acknowledgement has 
no such accelerative effect on grounding tempo, 
and a frequent use of dedicated acknowledgements 
may even cause impressions of relative slowness 
of the grounding tempo in the local context. Now 
our exploratory comparison indicated that older 
dyads used dedicated acknowledgements more 
frequently than younger dyads, who used 
initiation-acknowledgements more frequently. It is 
then plausible that this contrast in the kinds of 
frequently used acknowledgements underlies the 
common impression that conversations with older 
people are slow-paced and, since the grounding 
tempo is related to how efficiently information is 
shared, this contrast might partially account for the 
common impression that older people understand 
things slowly. 
 
4.2  Older adutls often acknowledged 
after acknowledgements. 
In this regard, an occurrence of post-grounding 
acknowledgment must have a deceleration effect 
on the grounding tempo in the local context. For 
the grounding function it performs, namely, the 
acknowledgement of the presented information, is 
one that has been done by the preceding 
acknowledgement, and thus the ratio of the number 
of utterance units to the number of grounding 
functions performed by them is even worse than 
the case of dedicated acknowledgments. Now 
again, our exploratory comparison indicated that 
older dyads used post-grounding 
acknowledgements more frequently than younger 
dyads. This contrast therefore might be an added 
cause to the stereotypes mentioned above, 
slow-pacedness and slow-understanding. 
4.3 Older adults tended to use 
general-purpose acknowledgements 
more frequently. 
Precisely because the form of a general-purpose 
acknowledgement, such as ?uh-huh? and ?m,? 
does not depend on the content of the utterance 
being acknowledged, a general-purpose 
acknowledgement gives only weak evidence of 
reception or understanding of the content. In 
contrast, a special-purpose acknowledgement, 
such as repeating or paraphrasing responses, has 
stronger evidentiality, since its form is the result of 
an appropriate choice relative to the content of the 
acknowledged utterance. Now, our preliminary 
comparison indicated that older dyads used 
general-purpose acknowledgements more 
frequently than younger dyads, and this contrast 
may well be still another cause to the negative 
stereotype on older people?s capacities for 
understanding during conversation. 
4.4 Two Grounding Styles 
Overall, our exploratory comparison suggests a 
particular style of grounding as characteristic to 
older dyads. That is, older dyads use more 
dedicated acknowledgments than dual-functional 
acknowledgements involving initiations, and 
among dedicated acknowledgements, older dyads 
use more general-purpose acknowledgements than 
special-purpose acknowledgements; they also use 
post-grounding acknowledgements relatively often, 
either spontaneously or solicited by requests for 
acknowledgements. Let us call this grounding style 
style A, and call the grounding style characterized 
by the opposite tendencies style B. 
Now we have obtained this hypothetical 
contrast in grounding styles through an overall 
comparison of the entire group of older dyads and 
the entire group of younger dyads. So the question 
remains how much this contrast applies to 
individual dyads of older and younger people. 
Aren?t there any exceptional older dyads with 
grounding style B? Any younger dyads with 
grounding style A? 
To address these questions, we re-evaluated our 
data and ranked all ten dialogues in our data 
according to the ratios of dedicated 
acknowledgements, the ratios of  general-purpose 
acknowledgements, and the counts of 
post-grounding acknowledgements (solicited 
acknowledgements and spontaneous 
acknowledgements). Table 2 shows the result of 
ranking, where the hatched cells indicate dialogues 
by older dyads. Here we see that the contrast of 
style A and style B divides older dyads and 
younger dyads fairly clearly. In fact, the separation 
of older and younger dyads is statistically 
significant in the ratio of dedicated 
acknowledgements (W0>=w5,5(0.01)=39, 
two-tailed), the ratio of general-purpose 
acknowledgements (W0>=w5,5(0.025)=38, 
two-tailed) and the counts of solicited 
post-grounding acknowledgements (E(R)=27.5, 
V(R)=36, Z0=3.75, Z(a)=3.09, p<0.002, 
two-tailed). Thus, our hypothesis associating style 
A to older dyads and style B to younger dyads 
receives some initial supports from this analysis. 
On the other hand, Table 2 also shows certain 
exceptions to this association, namely, some older 
dyads with style B and some younger dyads with 
style A. This is only natural as we can easily 
imagine older people who talk like younger people 
as well as younger people who talk like older 
people. Styles are styles, and they are not natural 
traits exclusively possessed by particular species 
of creatures. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2. Rank order of ten dialogues according to the ratios of dedicated acknowledgements, the ratios of  
general-purpose acknowledgements, and the counts of post-grounding acknowledgements (solicited 
acknowledgements and spontaneous acknowledgements) 
 
post-grounding acknowledgements dedicated 
acknowledgments 
general-purpose 
acknowledgments solicited spontaneous 
percentage rank percentage rank counts rank counts rank 
58.41% 1 10.90% 1 0 1 3 1 
62.02% 2 18.60% 2 0 1 4 2 
80.00% 3 19.40% 3 0 1 5 5.5 
81.32% 4 21.50% 4 0 1 5 5.5 
84.11% 5 25.20% 5 0 1 5 5.5 
84.95% 6 41.30% 6 0 1 5 5.5 
88.89% 7 41.80% 7 0 1 6 7 
88.99% 8 42.40% 8 1 8 7 8 
93.27% 9 48.30% 9 4 9.5 10 9.5 
93.33% 10 56.90% 10 4 9.5 10 9.5 
*Hatched cells are data of older dyads. 
 
5 Conclusion 
As a pilot study of the grounding styles of older 
dyads, we analyzed dialogue data featuring both 
older and younger dyads, and identified a certain 
contrast in grounding style that separates the two 
groups fairly clearly. In the style associated with 
older dyads, people use more dedicated 
acknowledgements than dual-functional ones, use 
more general-purpose acknowledgements than 
special-purpose ones, and use relatively many 
post-grounding acknowledgements. In the style 
associated with younger dyads, the opposite 
tendencies on the use of acknowledgements hold. 
On the basis of this contrast, we also discussed the 
implications of the adoption of the first grounding 
style, and conjectured that some of the negative 
stereotypes about conversations with older people 
may be based on this grounding style they adopt. 
Certainly, as the result of an exploratory study, all 
these observations are purely hypothetical. We 
only hope that this study has provided enough 
materials to set a stage for a further, more 
controlled comparison of grounding styles of older 
and younger dyads. 
 
References 
Bortfeld, H., Leon, S.D., Bloom, J.E., Schober, 
M.F., & Brennan, S.E. 2001. Disfluency Rates in 
Conversation: Effects of Age, Relationship, Topic, 
Role, and Gender. Language and Speech, 44(2): 
123-147 
Clark, H.H. 1996. Using language. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Fleiss, J.L. 1981. Statistical Methods of Rates 
and Proportions. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Kemper, S. & Vandeputte, D. 1995. Speech 
adjustments to aging during a referential 
communication task. Journal of Language & 
Social Psychology, 14(1/2): 40-59 
Ministry of Health and Welfare. 1999. White 
paper. Tokyo: Gyousei. 
Ryan, E.B. & Hummert, M.L. 1995. 
Communication predicaments of aging: 
patronizing behavior toward elder adults. Journal 
of Language & Social Psychology, 14?1/2): 
144-166. 
Shimojima, A., Katagiri, Y., Koiso, H, & 
Swerts, M. 1999. Informational and 
dialogue-coordinating functions of prosodic 
features of Japanese echoic responses. Speech 
communication. Speech Communication, 
36(2002):113-132 
Tatsumi, I. 1997. Word finding difficulty as 
aging, Gengo, 26(13): 26-33 
Tannen, D. 1989. Taking Voices: Repetition, 
Dialogue, and Imagery in Conversational 
Discourse. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Traum, D.R. 1994. A Computational Theory of 
Grounding in Natural Language Conversation. 
Technical Report 545. University of Rochester. 
Turn-taking in Graphical Communication: an exploratory study 
Atsue Takeoka1,2, Atsushi Shimojima1,2, Yasuhiro Katagiri2 
1 School of Knowledge Science 
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 
1-1, Asahidai, Tatsunokuchi-machi, Nomi-gun, Ishikawa, 
923-1292, Japan 
{takeoka, ashimoji}@jaist.ac.jp 
2 ATR Media Information Science Labs 
 
2-2 Hikaridai Seika-cho, Soraku-gun, Kyoto, 
619-0288 Japan 
{katagiri}@atr.co.jp 
 
Abstract 
This paper reports an investigation of the 
turn-taking functions of drawings in 
graphical communication.  Based on the 
examination of dialogue data collected that 
involve collaborative drawing interactions, 
as well as spoken dialogue interactions, in a 
joint problem solving task, we found that 
?drawing turns,? in which the drawer 
presents a piece of information to her 
partner through drawing, had almost the 
same turn-keeping effects as ?speech turns.? 
1 Introduction 
2 
                                                     
Dialogue is characterized by taking turns, that is, 
who should talk next and when should they talk.  
Studies on turn-taking in dialogues have mostly 
focused on phenomena and processes of dialogue 
participants taking turns in spoken conversations.  
But speech is not the only means of interaction.  
We draw maps to give directions.  We draw plans 
to discuss floor plans.  We make diagrams to solve 
problems.  It is crucial to take account of these 
non-speech modes to obtain a comprehensible 
model of taking turns as the basic mechanisms of 
human interactions.  It is crucial to elucidate the 
nature of turn-taking in multi-modal setting, as 
communication tools become increasingly 
multi-modal to include such modes as free 
drawings, photographs, web page references and 
other visual information presentations. 
Several researchers have looked at roles of 
non-verbal cues, e.g., eye gaze, gestures and other 
bodily movements, in coordinating turn-taking in 
spoken utterances.  Non-verbal cues were regarded 
as ancillary to speech by providing additional 
signals to support orderly turn-takings in speech 
domain.  In contrast, when we expand the scope of 
dialogues to include multi-modal interactions, we 
need to consider the possibilities of non-speech 
turns, such as drawing turns, and cross-modal turn 
changes, such as those between drawings and 
speech. 
Based on graphical communication data we 
collected, we conducted a preliminary analysis on 
the existence and the functions of drawing turns.  
We found that drawing turns have almost the same 
turn-keeping power as speech turns. 
Mechanism of dialogue interactions: 
turn-taking and grounding 
Sacks, Schegloff and Jefferson (1974) noted 
surprisingly orderly nature of taking turns in our 
ordinary conversations, and proposed a set of rules 
to characterize the underlying mechanisms for the 
turn-taking structures in dialogues. 
We conduct dialogues with turn-takings 
governed by the following rules. 
At each transition-relevance place1 of each turn: 
-If during this turn the current speaker has 
selected A as the next speaker, then A must 
speak next. 
-If the current speaker does not select the next 
speaker, any other speaker may take the next 
turn. 
-If no one else takes the next turn, the current 
speaker may take the next turn. 
In this notion of taking turns, the current 
speaker presents a piece of information to the 
partner in a turn. When a turn consists of clauses, it 
presents a series of information. Even when a turn 
consists of a single word, it also presents a piece of 
information. To take a turn, the partner needs to 
1 Transition-relevance place is where the structure of the 
language allows speaker shifts to occur. 
issue an utterance that is more than a particular 
signal of acceptance of the information presented 
by the current speaker. 
From a different perspective, Clark (1996) 
developed the notion of grounding to capture 
processes with which conversants establish a set of 
information as a shared common ground for 
on-going (and possibly subsequent) dialogue. In a 
grounding process, a conversant presents a piece of 
information verbally or non-verbally, and the 
partner issues a particular public signal to show the 
receipt, understanding, or acceptance of that 
information. 
On the basis of Clark?s work, Traum (1994) 
substantiated the process of grounding in a 
finite-state transition model. The model specifies 
what contributions individual utterance in a 
dialogue make to a grounding process and how 
individual contributions combine themselves to 
make a sequence that completes the grounding. In 
Traum?s terms, such contributions are grounding 
acts, the units of utterance that can perform 
grounding acts are utterance units or 
UUs?according to their contribution to a 
grounding process, the sequences of utterance units 
that complete the grounding are discourse units or 
DUs. Table 1 shows the seven categories of 
grounding acts and their definitions. 
 
Table 1. Seven categories of grounding acts 
Initiate 
(init) 
An initial utterance component of a 
discourse unit. 
Continue 
(cont) 
A continuation of a previous act 
performed by the same speaker. 
Acknowledgement 
(ack) 
An acknowledgement claiming or 
demonstrating understanding of a 
previous utterance. It may be either a 
repetition or paraphrase of all or part of 
the utterance, an explicit signal of 
comprehension such as ?ok? or ?uh 
huh?, or an implicit signaling of 
understanding. 
Repair 
(repair) 
Changes the content of the current DU.
ReqRepair 
(reqRepair) 
A request for a repair by the other 
party. 
ReqAck 
(reqAck) 
Attempt to get the other agent to 
acknowledge the previous utterance. 
Cancel 
(cancel) 
Closes off the current DU as 
ungrounded. 
 
Now, we can define a turn as a constituent of 
one or more DUs that initiate a piece of 
information. The following figure schematically 
shows speech turns consisting of DUs that are 
made of annotated UUs. 
 
A:init
A-DU
A:cont B:ack A:init 
A-DU 
B:ack B:init 
B-DU 
B Speech TurnA Speech Turn
A:ack
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Speech turns defined by the notion of 
DUs and UUs 
 
In graphical communication, especially in 
settings where one speaker gives information to a 
partner, communicator not only speak but also 
draw to present a piece of information. Thus, using 
the definition of speech turns mentioned above, 
natural questions arise as to ?drawing turns?, 
namely, turns that have analogical characteristics 
attributed to speech turns. 
This paper investigates this question in 
dialogues in which one is instructed to inform 
one?s floor plans to a partner. Do drawing turns 
have similar turn-taking rules to speech turns? 
How do drawing turns keep their turns? 
To address these questions, we collected a 
spoken dialogue data with drawings. However, 
since participants used only one pen at a time, no 
such phenomena as taking turns with a pen were 
observed2. Under this setting, our purpose in this 
study is to account for the effect of keeping turns 
when participants are taking drawing turns. 
3 Method 
3.1 Data 
3.2 Transcription 
                                                     
Our data consist of 2 dialogues. Both dyads were 
familiar with each other: in one case they were 
close friends and in the other they were mother and 
son. The objective of each dialogue is to inform 
each other of their floor plans. We prepared a pen 
and papers for the first dyad and two pens and 
papers for the second. However, the second dyad 
seldom drew at the same time. A video camera was 
used to videotape dyads and drawing surfaces from 
above. They participated on a voluntary basis. 
We transcribed 16 minutes and 30 seconds of 
2 The partner could take a turn by using their finger to 
draw transparently. However, this rarely occurred in our 
dialogues. 
dialogues in total. According to the objective of 
each dialogue, a person in each dyad first 
represented their plans with a drawing, and then 
they communicated by pointing or adding 
drawings for further explanation. Then the other 
person in each dialogue did the same. Therefore, 
we had four drawers in two dialogues. Hereafter, 
we refer to a drawer as X and the other party as Y. 
We took one representative portion from each 
drawer. The length of the transcriptions varied 
from one minute and 35 seconds to 5 minutes and 
42 seconds. All audible words and word fragments 
were transcribed, including overlapping speech, 
nonlexical fillers (such as ?uh?), and other 
vocalizations (such as laughter and harrumph). 
Silences of more than 100 milliseconds were also 
written down and the time recorded. 
After audible transcriptions, we added 
segmented drawings in transcriptions, at which 
point of the utterance the drawing segment starts 
and ends. We defined the starting point as the time 
the drawer begins to draw with a pen and the 
ending point as the time the drawer changes grip, 
does not move the pen on the shortest track, or 
takes their hand off of the drawing surface. 
3.3 Coding 
4 Results 
4.1 
On the basis of Traum?s finite-state transition 
model of grounding, we divided all speech in our 
dialogue data into utterance units (UUs), namely, 
?continuous speech by the same speaker, 
punctuated by prosodic boundaries (including 
pauses of significant length and boundary tones)? 
(Traum, 1994). One of the authors then classified 
each utterance unit into one of the seven categories 
of grounding acts. 
Summary of statistics 
In this section, we show a summary of the statistics 
of speech and drawing data. First, we counted the 
number of drawing segments and divided them into 
two groups. One group of drawings were started 
during X?s utterance, followed by X?s utterances or 
X?s utterances followed the drawings. Another 
group of drawings were started during Y?s 
utterance or between Y?s utterances. We call the 
former X-drawings and the latter Y-drawings. 
There were 149 X-drawings and 8 Y-drawings. We 
found four drawing segments by Y with Y?s finger 
but we excluded these from this summary. 
Second, we counted the number of utterances. 
Table 2 shows a summary of the statistics of the 
dialogue data. 
 
Table 2. Number of Utterance Units and their 
breakdown of the seven categories of grounding 
acts and number of Discourse Units 
 Total X Y 
UU 1028 587 441
Grounding Acts 
init 290 234 56
cont 269 218 51
repair 8 6 2
reqRepair 6 0 6
reqAck 5 5 0
ack 344 70 274
ack init 108 54 52
DU 395 287 108
*We also excluded utterances relevant to Y?s finger drawings. 
In this setting of dialogues, only X informed Y 
by drawing. However, X initiated 2.7 times more 
DUs than Y did. The objective of the dialogues was 
for one party to inform their floor plan to the other 
party. These summary data showed that 
information flowed from X to Y not only by 
drawings but also by utterances. 
4.2 Silences 
We first looked at the occurrences of silence in 
speech.  There were 436 periods of silence of more 
than 100 milliseconds in the portion analyzed.  
Silence was classified into 2 categories: during 
drawings and not during drawings. There were 164 
of the former and 272 of the latter. Figure 2 showed 
the frequency distribution of silent periods for each 
group. 
0.0%
5.0%
10.0%
15.0%
20.0%
25.0%
les
s t
ha
n 1
00
ms
10
1m
s-2
00
ms
20
1m
s-3
00
ms
30
1m
s-4
00
ms
40
1m
s-5
00
ms
50
1m
s-6
00
ms
60
1m
s-7
00
ms
70
1m
s-8
00
ms
80
1m
s-9
00
ms
90
1m
s-1
00
0m
s
10
01
ms
-11
00
ms
11
01
ms
-12
00
ms
12
01
ms
-13
00
ms
13
01
ms
-14
00
ms
14
01
ms
-15
00
ms
15
01
ms
-16
00
ms
16
01
ms
-17
00
ms
17
01
ms
-18
00
ms
18
01
ms
-19
00
ms
19
01
ms
-20
00
ms
mo
re
 th
an
 20
01
ms
Not Drawing
Drawing
Figure 2. Frequency distribution of silent periods 
of more than 100ms 
The average time of silences during drawing 
was 667ms and that of during not drawing was 
519ms. 
The data indicates that silences during drawing 
tend to be longer than those during not drawing.  
This suggests that drawings function as 
independent turns.  An occurrence of a drawing 
turn can keep the next speech turns from starting, 
despite no speech is uttered at the time. 
4.3 Overlaps 
If drawing turns work similarly to speech turns in 
terms of their turn-keeping functions, interruptions 
by overlapping speech should occur about the same 
amount toward drawing turns and speech turns. 
Case 1 in Figure 3 schematically shows a regular 
speech turn change structure, whereas Case 2 and 
Case 3, respectively, show a speech turn and a 
drawing turn interrupted by following speech 
turns. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Speech turns and drawing turns 
interrupted by speech turns 
Table 3 shows the relative amount of speech 
turns and drawing turns which were followed by 
overlapping next speech turns.  The result appears 
to indicate that drawing turns are more amenable to 
interruption than speech turns, though the 
difference is not statistically significant (Z0= 1.26, 
p=0.21 two-tailed). 
 
Table 3. Number of speech turn during not drawing 
(see Case 2 in figure 3) 
Total of X speech turns 153
Overlapping X speech turns 17
Ratio 11.1%
 
Table 4. Number of drawing turn during drawing 
(see Case 3 in figure 3) 
Total of X drawing turns 149
Overlapping X drawing turns 25
Ratio 16.8%
 
Close examination of Case 3, in which drawing 
turns are interrupted by the following speech turns, 
revealed that some of the overlapping speech turns 
were actually responses, either acknowledgments 
or request for repairs, directed toward drawing 
contents.  An example of an acknowledgment in 
the drawing context is found in the excerpt below. 
Case1: Ordinary speech turn-taking 
X Speech Turn Y Speech Turn
Case3: Overlappint X?s drawing turn with Y?s speech
turn 
Case2: Overlapping X?s speech turn with Y?s speech 
turn 
Y Speech Turn
X:ackY:init 
Y-DU 
X Speech Turn 
X:cont X:init 
X-DU 
Y:ack X:cont 
X-DU 
X:init 
X:ack
Y-DU
Y:initY:ack 
X-DU 
X:init Y:ack X:cont 
X-DU 
X:init 
Y Speech Turn
X:ackY:init 
Y-DU 
X Drawing Turn 
X Speech Turn 
Y:ack 
X-DU 
X:init Y:ack X:cont 
X-DU 
X:init 
 
act UU Utterance 
init26 41.1 X: kou kocchino houni [mizumawariga ari]
 (like here there is a sink) 
ack26 init27 42.1 Y:                                  [uraomote na] 
 (it is located back to back) 
 
Here, X was drawing a line between two houses 
she already drew before, and directing Y?s 
attention toward the location of kitchen sinks in 
them.  Y could recognize the location of the kitchen 
sinks in the two houses from the drawing, and Y?s 
subsequent short utterance ?uraomote na? verbally 
confirmed the relative locations of them.  Such 
utterances were directed toward drawings and 
worked to give acknowledgments toward their 
contents.  These types of utterances might appear 
as instances of initiation acts if we only look at 
speech domain, but, actually, they do not constitute 
independent initiation acts if we admit grounding 
acts that work across different modalities. 
Table 5 shows the result of recounting speech 
overlaps by excluding cross modal responses.  The 
result shows that drawing turns and speech turns 
are exactly the same (Z0=0.26, p=0.32 two-tailed) 
 
in terms of their vulnerability toward interruptions. 
Table 5. Number of drawing turn during drawing 
(see Case 3 in figure 3) 
Total of X drawing turns 149
Overlapping X drawing turns 19
Ratio 12.8%
5 Discussions 
6 Conclusion 
Generally, when it is one?s turn to speak, the other 
party is less likely to cut into the turn. They try to 
present their information clearly to avoid 
overlapping. In other words, the present speaker?s 
speech turn is  some form of resistance to the other 
party?s interruptions. On the other hand, during 
one?s drawing turn, even though part of the 
drawing period is filled with silence and during 
that silence the other party could easily utter ?init? 
utterances, the data on periods silence showed that 
longer silent periods were allowed during drawing. 
We suppose that drawing turns has some form of 
resistance to keep the other party from interrupting 
their to speak. 
In this study, the percentage of overlapped X?s 
speech turns was 11.1%. That is to say, X?s speech 
turns had 89.9% of resistance to keep turns. In the 
same way, X?s drawing turns was interrupted by 
Y?s ?init? or ?ack init? utterances at 12.8%, which 
showed almost the same extent of resistance, 
87.2%. Thus, our comparison suggests that the 
turn-keeping resistance of X?s drawing turns is 
almost equivalent to that of X?s speech turns. 
The equivalence of the extent of resistance of 
speech and drawing turns also suggests that silence 
during drawing tended to be longer not because the 
other party could not speak while drawing but 
because he/she did not want to speak while 
drawing. In other words, drawing could make an 
excuse for not speaking while preserving the 
smoothness of turn-taking interactions. 
Finally, within the data we analyzed, all the 
cases in which a speech turn overlaps a preceding 
drawing turns were accompanied by co-temporal 
speech by the drawer.  This is schematically shown 
in Case 3 of Figure 3.  In more than half of these 
cases, the following speech makes an overlaps to 
the preceding speech as well as to the drawing 
(Case 4 in Figure 4).  In contrast, although 
theoretically possible, we did not find any cases in 
which bare drawing turns, e.g., without 
accompanying speech by the drawer, were 
interrupted by the following speech turns (Case 5 
in Figure 4).   
 
Case4: Overlap of both X?s speech and X?s
drawing turn with Y?s speech turn 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Drawing turns interrupted by a speech 
turn 
We conducted a preliminary study on the drawing 
turns in graphical communication.  Based on 
collected dialogue data that involve graphical as 
well as spoken interactions, we conducted an 
analysis of both speech and drawing turns.  We 
found that drawing turns have almost the same 
turn-keeping effect as speech turns.  Further 
investigations are necessary on both semantic and 
grounding contributions of drawings to develop 
fuller account of graphical interactions. 
 
References 
Clark, H. H. 1996. Using language. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Sack, H., Schegloff, E. A. & Jefferson, G. 1974. 
A simplest systematics for the organization of  
turn-taking in conversation. Language, 50, 
696-735. 
Traum, D. R. 1994. A Computational Theory of 
Grounding in Natural Language Conversation. 
Technical Report 545. University of Rochester. 
 
X:init
X-DU
X:cont Y:ack
X-DU 
X:init 
X Speech Turn
X:cont 
X Drawing Turn
Y-DU 
Y:init X:ack 
Y Speech Turn
Case5: Overlapping independent X?s drawing turn
with Y?s speech turn 
X Drawing Turn
Y-DU 
Y:init X:ack 
Y Speech Turn
