Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 65?73,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Role of Local Context in Automatic Deidentification
of Ungrammatical, Fragmented Text
Tawanda Sibanda
CSAIL
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
tawanda@mit.edu
Ozlem Uzuner
Department of Information Studies
College of Computing and Information
University at Albany, SUNY
Albany, NY 12222
ouzuner@albany.edu
Abstract
Deidentification of clinical records is a
crucial step before these records can be
distributed to non-hospital researchers.
Most approaches to deidentification rely
heavily on dictionaries and heuristic rules;
these approaches fail to remove most per-
sonal health information (PHI) that cannot
be found in dictionaries. They also can fail
to remove PHI that is ambiguous between
PHI and non-PHI.
Named entity recognition (NER) tech-
nologies can be used for deidentification.
Some of these technologies exploit both
local and global context of a word to iden-
tify its entity type. When documents are
grammatically written, global context can
improve NER.
In this paper, we show that we can dei-
dentify medical discharge summaries us-
ing support vector machines that rely on a
statistical representation of local context.
We compare our approach with three dif-
ferent systems. Comparison with a rule-
based approach shows that a statistical
representation of local context contributes
more to deidentification than dictionaries
and hand-tailored heuristics. Compari-
son with two well-known systems, SNoW
and IdentiFinder, shows that when the lan-
guage of documents is fragmented, local
context contributes more to deidentifica-
tion than global context.
1 Introduction
Medical discharge summaries contain information
that is useful to clinical researchers who study the
interactions between, for example, different med-
ications and diseases. However, these summaries
include explicit personal health information (PHI)
whose release would jeopardize privacy. In the
United States, the Health Information Portability
and Accountability Act (HIPAA) provides guide-
lines for protecting the confidentiality of health care
information. HIPAA lists seventeen pieces of textual
PHI of which the following appear in medical dis-
charge summaries: first and last names of patients,
their health proxies, and family members; doctors?
first and last names; identification numbers; tele-
phone, fax, and pager numbers; hospital names; ge-
ographic locations; and dates. Removing PHI from
medical documents is the goal of deidentification.
This paper presents a method based on a statis-
tical representation of local context for automati-
cally removing explicit PHI from medical discharge
summaries, despite the often ungrammatical, frag-
mented, and ad hoc language of these documents,
even when some words in the documents are am-
biguous between PHI and non-PHI (e.g., ?Hunting-
ton? as the name of a person and as the name of
a disease), and even when some of the PHI cannot
be found in dictionaries (e.g., misspelled and/or for-
eign names). This method differs from traditional
approaches to deidentification in its independence
from dictionaries and hand-tailored heuristics. It
applies statistical named entity recognition (NER)
methods to the more challenging task of deidenti-
65
fication but differs from traditional NER approaches
in its heavy reliance on a statistical representation of
local context. Finally, this approach targets all PHI
that appear in medical discharge summaries. Experi-
ments reported in this paper show that context plays
a more important role in deidentification than dic-
tionaries, and that a statistical representation of lo-
cal context contributes more to deidentification than
global context.
2 Related Work
In the literature, named entities such as people,
places, and organizations mentioned in news arti-
cles have been successfully identified by various ap-
proaches (Bikel et al, 1999; McCallum et al, 2000;
Riloff and Jones, 1996; Collins and Singer, 1999;
Hobbs et al, 1996). Most of these approaches are
tailored to a particular domain, e.g., understanding
disaster news; they exploit both the characteristics
of the entities they focus on and the contextual clues
related to these entities.
In the biomedical domain, NER has focused on
identification of biological entities such as genes
and proteins (Collier et al, 2000; Yu et al, 2002).
Various statistical approaches, e.g., a maximum
entropy model (Finkel et al, 2004), HMMs and
SVMs (GuoDong et al, 2005), have been used with
various feature sets including surface and syntac-
tic features, word formation patterns, morphologi-
cal patterns, part-of-speech tags, head noun triggers,
and coreferences.
Deidentification refers to the removal of identi-
fying information from records. Some approaches
to deidentification have focused on particular cat-
egories of PHI, e.g., Taira et al focused on only
patient names (2002), Thomas et al focused on
proper names including doctors? names (2002). For
full deidentification, i.e., removal of all PHI, Gupta
et al used ?a complex set of rules, dictionaries,
pattern-matching algorithms, and Unified Medical
Language System? (2004). Sweeney?s Scrub sys-
tem employed competing algorithms that used pat-
terns and lexicons to find PHI. Each of the algo-
rithms included in her system specialized in one
kind of PHI, each calculated the probability that a
given word belonged to the class of PHI that it spe-
cialized in, and the algorithm with the highest prece-
dence and the highest probability labelled the given
word. This system identified 99-100% of all PHI in
the test corpus of patient records and letters to physi-
cians (1996).
We use a variety of features to train a support
vector machine (SVM) that can automatically ex-
tract local context cues and can recognize PHI (even
when some PHI are ambiguous between PHI and
non-PHI, and even when PHI do not appear in dic-
tionaries). We compare this approach with three
others: a heuristic rule-based approach (Douglass,
2005), the SNoW (Sparse Network of Winnows)
system?s NER component (Roth and Yih, 2002), and
IdentiFinder (Bikel et al, 1999). The heuristic rule-
based system relies heavily on dictionaries. SNoW
and IdentiFinder consider some representation of the
local context of words; they also rely on informa-
tion about global context. Local context helps them
recognize stereotypical names and name structures.
Global context helps these systems update the prob-
ability of observing a particular entity type based on
the other entity types contained in the sentence. We
hypothesize that, given the mostly fragmented and
ungrammatical nature of discharge summaries, local
context will be more important for deidentification
than global context. We further hypothesize that lo-
cal context will be a more reliable indication of PHI
than dictionaries (which can be incomplete). The re-
sults presented in this paper show that SVMs trained
with a statistical representation of local context out-
perform all baselines. In other words, a classifier
that relies heavily on local context (very little on
dictionaries, and not at all on global context) out-
performs classifiers that rely either on global con-
text or dictionaries (but make much less use of lo-
cal context). Global context cannot contribute much
to deidentification when the language of documents
is fragmented; dictionaries cannot contribute to dei-
dentification when PHI are either missing from dic-
tionaries or are ambiguous between PHI and non-
PHI. Local context remains a reliable indication of
PHI under these circumstances.
The features used for our SVM-based system can
be enriched in order to automatically acquire more
and varied local context information. The features
discussed in this paper have been chosen because of
their simplicity and effectiveness on both grammati-
cal and ungrammatical free text.
66
3 Corpora
Discharge summaries are the reports generated by
medical personnel at the end of a patient?s hospi-
tal stay and contain important information about the
patient?s health. Linguistic processing of these doc-
uments is challenging, mainly because these reports
are full of medical jargon, acronyms, shorthand no-
tations, misspellings, ad hoc language, and frag-
ments of sentences. Our goal is to identify the PHI
used in discharge summaries even when text is frag-
mented and ad hoc, even when many words in the
summaries are ambiguous between PHI and non-
PHI, and even when many PHI contain misspelled
or foreign words.
In this study, we worked with various corpora
consisting of discharge summaries. One of these
corpora was obtained already deidentified1; i.e.,
(many) PHI (and some non-PHI) found in this cor-
pus had been replaced with the generic placeholder
[REMOVED]. An excerpt from this corpus is below:
HISTORY OF PRESENT ILLNESS: The patient
is a 77-year-old-woman with long standing hyper-
tension who presented as a Walk-in to me at the
[REMOVED] Health Center on [REMOVED]. Re-
cently had been started q.o.d. on Clonidine since
[REMOVED] to taper off of the drug. Was told to
start Zestril 20 mg. q.d. again. The patient was sent
to the [REMOVED] Unit for direct admission for
cardioversion and anticoagulation, with the Cardi-
ologist, Dr. [REMOVED] to follow.
SOCIAL HISTORY: Lives alone, has one daughter
living in [REMOVED]. Is a non-smoker, and does
not drink alcohol.
HOSPITAL COURSE AND TREATMENT: Dur-
ing admission, the patient was seen by Cardiology,
Dr. [REMOVED], was started on IV Heparin, So-
talol 40 mg PO b.i.d. increased to 80 mg b.i.d.,
and had an echocardiogram. By [REMOVED] the
patient had better rate control and blood pressure
control but remained in atrial fibrillation. On [RE-
MOVED], the patient was felt to be medically sta-
ble.
...
We hand-annotated this corpus and experimented
with it in several ways: we used it to generate
a corpus of discharge summaries in which the
[REMOVED] tokens were replaced with appropri-
ate, fake PHI obtained from dictionaries2 (Douglass,
1Authentic clinical data is very difficult to obtain for privacy
reasons; therefore, the initial implementation of our system was
tested on previously deidentified data that we reidentified.
2e.g., John Smith initiated radiation therapy ...
2005); we used it to generate a second corpus in
which most of the [REMOVED] tokens and some
of the remaining text were appropriately replaced
with lexical items that were ambiguous between PHI
and non-PHI3; we used it to generate another cor-
pus in which all of the [REMOVED] tokens corre-
sponding to names were replaced with appropriately
formatted entries that could not be found in dictio-
naries4. For all of these corpora, we generated real-
istic substitutes for the [REMOVED] tokens using
dictionaries (e.g., a dictionary of names from US
Census Bureau) and patterns (e.g., names of people
could be of the formats, ?Mr. F. Lastname?, ?First-
name Lastname?, ?Lastname?, ?F. M. Lastname?,
etc.; dates could appear as ?dd/mm/yy?, ?dd Mon-
thName, yyyy?, ?ddth of MonthName, yyyy?, etc.).
In addition to these reidentified corpora (i.e., cor-
pora generated from previously deidentified data),
we also experimented with authentic discharge sum-
maries5. The approximate distributions of PHI in the
reidentified corpora and in the authentic corpus are
shown in Table 1.
Class No. in reidentified No. in authentic
summaries summaries
Non-PHI 17872 112720
Patient 1047 287
Doctor 311 730
Location 24 84
Hospital 592 651
Date 735 1933
ID 36 477
Phone 39 32
Table 1: Distribution of different PHI (in terms of number of
words) in the corpora.
4 Baseline Approaches
4.1 Rule-Based Baseline: Heuristic+Dictionary
Traditional deidentification approaches rely heavily
on dictionaries and hand-tailored heuristics.
3e.g., D. Sessions initiated radiation therapy...
4e.g., O. Ymfgkstjj initiated radiation therapy ...
5We obtained authentic discharge summaries with real PHI
in the final stages of this project.
67
We obtained one such system (Douglass, 2005)
that used three kinds of dictionaries:
? PHI lookup tables for female and male first
names, last names, last name prefixes, hospital
names, locations, and states.
? A dictionary of ?common words? that should
never be classified as PHI.
? Lookup tables for context clues such as titles,
e.g., Mr.; name indicators, e.g., proxy, daugh-
ter; location indicators, e.g., lives in.
Given these dictionaries, this system identifies key-
words that appear in the PHI lookup tables but do
not occur in the common words list, finds approx-
imate matches for possibly misspelled words, and
uses patterns and indicators to find PHI.
4.2 SNoW
SNoW is a statistical classifier that includes a NER
component for recognizing entities and their rela-
tions. To create a hypothesis about the entity type of
a word, SNoW first takes advantage of ?words, tags,
conjunctions of words and tags, bigram and trigram
of words and tags?, number of words in the entity,
bigrams of words in the entity, and some attributes
such as the prefix and suffix, as well as informa-
tion about the presence of the word in a dictionary
of people, organization, and location names (Roth
and Yih, 2002). After this initial step, it uses the
possible relations of the entity with other entities in
the sentence to strengthen or weaken its hypothe-
sis about the entity?s type. The constraints imposed
on the entities and their relationships constitute the
global context of inference. Intuitively, information
about global context and constraints imposed on the
relationships of entities should improve recognition
of both entities and relations. Roth and Yih (2002)
present results that support this hypothesis.
SNoW can recognize entities that correspond to
people, locations, and organizations. For deidenti-
fication purposes, all of these entities correspond to
PHI; however, they do not constitute a comprehen-
sive set. We evaluated SNoW only on the PHI it is
built to recognize. We trained and tested its NER
component using ten-fold cross-validation on each
of our corpora.
4.3 IdentiFinder
IdentiFinder uses Hidden Markov Models to learn
the characteristics of names of entities, including
people, locations, geographic jurisdictions, organi-
zations, dates, and contact information (Bikel et al,
1999). For each named entity class, this system
learns a bigram language model which indicates the
likelihood that a sequence of words belongs to that
class. This model takes into consideration features
of words, such as whether the word is capitalized, all
upper case, or all lower case, whether it is the first
word of the sentence, or whether it contains digits
and punctuation. Thus, it captures the local context
of the target word (i.e., the word to be classified; also
referred to as TW). To find the names of all entities,
the system finds the most likely sequence of entity
types in a sentence given a sequence of words; thus,
it captures the global context of the entities in a sen-
tence.
We obtained this system pre-trained on a news
corpus and applied it to our corpora. We mapped
its entity tags to our PHI and non-PHI labels. Ad-
mittedly, testing IdentiFinder on the discharge sum-
maries puts this system at a disadvantage compared
to the other statistical approaches. However, despite
this shortcoming, IdentiFinder helps us evaluate the
contribution of global context to deidentification.
5 SVMs with Local Context
We hypothesize that systems that rely on dictionar-
ies and hand-tailored heuristics face a major chal-
lenge when particular PHI can be used in many dif-
ferent contexts, when PHI are ambiguous, or when
the PHI cannot be found in dictionaries. We further
hypothesize that given the ungrammatical and ad
hoc nature of our data, despite being very powerful
systems, IdentiFinder and SNoW may not provide
perfect deidentification. In addition to being very
fragmented, discharge summaries do not present in-
formation in the form of relations between entities,
and many sentences contain only one entity. There-
fore, the global context utilized by IdentiFinder and
SNoW cannot contribute reliably to deidentification.
When run on discharge summaries, the strength of
these systems comes from their ability to recognize
the structure of the names of different entity types
and the local contexts of these entities.
68
Discharge summaries contain patterns that can
serve as local context. Therefore, we built an SVM-
based system that, given a target word (TW), would
accurately predict whether the TW was part of PHI.
We used a development corpus to find features that
captured as much of the immediate context of the
TW as possible, paying particular attention to cues
human annotators found useful for deidentification.
We added to this some surface characteristics for the
TW itself and obtained the following features: the
TW itself, the word before, and the word after (all
lemmatized); the bigram before and the bigram af-
ter TW (lemmatized); the part of speech of TW, of
the word before, and of the word after; capitalization
of TW; length of TW; MeSH ID of the noun phrase
containing TW (MeSH is a dictionary of Medical
Subject Headings and is a subset of the Unified Med-
ical Language System (UMLS) of the National Li-
brary of Medicine); presence of TW, of the word
before, and of the word after TW in the name, lo-
cation, hospital, and month dictionaries; the heading
of the section in which TW appears, e.g., ?History
of Present Illness?; and, whether TW contains ?-? or
?/? characters. Note that some of these features, e.g.,
capitalization and punctuation within TW, were also
used in IdentiFinder.
We used the SVM implementation provided by
LIBSVM (Chang and Lin, 2001) with a linear ker-
nel to classify each word in the summaries as ei-
ther PHI or non-PHI based on the above-listed fea-
tures. We evaluated this system using ten-fold cross-
validation.
6 Evaluation
Local context contributes differently to each of the
four deidentification systems. Our SVM-based ap-
proach uses only local context. The heuristic, rule-
based system relies heavily on dictionaries. Identi-
Finder uses a simplified representation of local con-
text and adds to this information about the global
context as represented by transition probabilities be-
tween entities in the sentence. SNoW uses local con-
text as well, but it also makes an effort to benefit
from relations between entities. Given the difference
in the strengths of these systems, we compared their
performance on both the reidentified and authentic
corpora (see Section 3). We hypothesized that given
the nature of medical discharge summaries, Iden-
tiFinder would not be able to find enough global
context and SNoW would not be able to make use
of relations (because many sentences in this cor-
pus contain only one entity). We further hypothe-
sized that when the data contain words ambiguous
between PHI and non-PHI, or when the PHI cannot
be found in dictionaries, the heuristic, rule-based ap-
proach would perform poorly. In all of these cases,
SVMs trained with local context information would
be sufficient for proper deidentification.
To compare the SVM approach with Identi-
Finder, we evaluated both on PHI consisting of
names of people (i.e., patient and doctor names),
locations (i.e., geographic locations), and organiza-
tions (i.e., hospitals), as well as PHI consisting of
dates, and contact information (i.e., phone numbers,
pagers). We omitted PHI representing ID numbers
from this experiment in order to be fair to Identi-
Finder which was not trained on this category. To
compare the SVM approach with SNoW, we trained
both systems with only PHI consisting of names of
people, locations, and organizations, i.e., the entities
that SNoW was designed to recognize.
6.1 Deidentifying Reidentified and Authentic
Discharge Summaries
We first deidentified:
? Previously deidentified discharge summaries
into which we inserted invented but realistic
surrogates for PHI without deliberately intro-
ducing ambiguous words or words not found in
dictionaries, and
? Authentic discharge summaries with real PHI.
Our experiments showed that SVMs with local
context outperformed all other approaches. On the
reidentified corpus, SVMs gave an F-measure of
97.2% for PHI. In comparison, IdentiFinder, hav-
ing been trained on the news corpus, gave an F-
measure of 67.4% and was outperformed by the
heuristic+dictionary approach (see Table 2).6
6Note that in deidentification, recall is much more important
than precision. Low recall indicates that many PHI remain in
the documents and that there is high risk to patient privacy. Low
precision means that words that do not correspond to PHI have
also been removed. This hurts the integrity of the data but does
not present a risk to privacy.
69
We evaluated SNoW only on the three kinds
of entities it is designed to recognize. We cross-
validated it on our corpora and found that its per-
formance in recognizing people, locations, and or-
ganizations was 96.2% in terms of F-measure (see
Table 37). In comparison, our SVM-based system,
when retrained to only consider people, locations,
and organizations so as to be directly comparable to
SNoW, had an F-measure of 98%.8
Method Class P R F
SVM PHI 96.8% 97.7% 97.2%
IFinder PHI 60.2% 76.7% 67.4%
H+D PHI 88.9% 67.6% 76.8%
SVM Non-PHI 99.6% 99.5% 99.6%
IFinder Non-PHI 95.8% 91.4% 93.6%
H+D Non-PHI 95.2% 95.2% 95.2%
Table 2: Precision, Recall, and F-measure on reidentified dis-
charge summaries. IFinder refers to IdentiFinder, H+D refers to
heuristic+dictionary approach.
Method Class P R F
SVM PHI 97.7% 98.2% 98.0%
SNoW PHI 96.1% 96.2% 96.2%
SVM Non-PHI 99.8% 99.8% 99.8%
SNoW Non-PHI 99.6% 99.6% 99.6%
Table 3: Evaluation of SNoW and SVM on recognizing peo-
ple, locations, and organizations found in reidentified discharge
summaries.
Similarly, on the authentic discharge summaries,
the SVM approach outperformed all other ap-
proaches in recognizing PHI (see Tables 4 and 5).
6.2 Deidentifying Data with Ambiguous PHI
In discharge summaries, the same words can appear
both as PHI and as non-PHI. For example, in the
same corpus, the word ?Swan? can appear both as
the name of a medical device (i.e., ?Swan Catheter?)
and as the name of a person, etc. Ideally, we would
like to deidentify data even when many words in the
7The best performances are marked in bold in all of the ta-
bles in this paper.
8For all of the corpora presented in this paper, a performance
difference of 1% or more is statistically significant at ? = 0.05.
Method Class P R F
SVM PHI 97.5% 95.0% 96.2%
IFinder PHI 25.2% 45.2% 32.3%
H+D PHI 81.9% 87.6% 84.7%
SVM Non-PHI 99.8% 99.9% 99.9%
IFinder Non-PHI 97.1% 93.3% 95.2%
H+D Non-PHI 99.6% 99.6% 99.6%
Table 4: Evaluation on authentic discharge summaries.
Method Class P R F
SVM PHI 97.4% 93.8% 95.6%
SNoW PHI 93.7% 93.4% 93.6%
SVM Non-PHI 99.9% 100% 100%
SNoW Non-PHI 99.9% 99.9% 99.9%
Table 5: Evaluation of SNoW and SVM on authentic dis-
charge summaries.
corpus are ambiguous between PHI and non-PHI.
We hypothesize that given ambiguities in the data,
context will play an important role in determining
whether the particular instance of the word is PHI
and that given the many fragmented sentences in our
corpus, local context will be particularly useful. To
test these hypotheses, we generated a corpus by rei-
dentifying the previously deidentified corpus with
words that were ambiguous between PHI and non-
PHI, making sure to use each ambiguous word both
as PHI and non-PHI, and also making sure to cover
all acceptable formats of all PHI (see Section 3). The
resulting distribution of PHI is shown in Table 6.
Class Total # Words # Ambiguous Words
Non-PHI 19296 3781
Patient 1047 514
Doctor 311 247
Location 24 24
Hospital 592 82
Date 736 201
ID 36 0
Phone 39 0
Table 6: Distribution of PHI when some words are ambiguous
between PHI and non-PHI.
70
Our results showed that, on this corpus, the SVM-
based system accurately recognized 91.9% of all
PHI; its performance, measured in terms of F-
measure was also significantly better than all other
approaches both on the complete corpus containing
ambiguous entries (see Table 7 and Table 8) and only
on the ambiguous words in this corpus (see Table 9).
Method Class P R F
SVM PHI 92.0% 92.1% 92.0%
IFinder PHI 45.4% 71.4% 55.5%
H+D PHI 70.1% 46.6% 56.0%
SVM Non-PHI 98.9% 98.9% 98.9%
IFinder Non-PHI 95.0% 86.5% 90.1%
H+D Non-PHI 92.7% 92.7% 92.7%
Table 7: Evaluation on the corpus containing ambiguous
data.
Method Class P R F
SVM PHI 92.1% 92.8% 92.5%
SNoW PHI 91.6% 77% 83.7%
SVM Non-PHI 99.3% 99.2% 99.3%
SNoW Non-PHI 97.6% 99.3% 98.4%
Table 8: Evaluation of SNoW and SVM on ambiguous data.
Method Class P R F
SVM PHI 90.2% 87.5% 88.8%
IFinder PHI 55.8% 64.0% 59.6%
H+D PHI 59.8% 24.3% 34.6%
SNoW PHI 91.6% 82.9% 87.1%
SVM Non-PHI 90.5% 92.7% 91.6%
IFinder Non-PHI 69.0% 61.3% 64.9%
H+D Non-PHI 59.9% 87.4% 71.1%
SNoW Non-PHI 90.4% 95.5% 92.9%
Table 9: Evaluation only on ambiguous people, locations,
and organizations found in ambiguous data.
6.3 Deidentifying PHI Not Found in
Dictionaries
Some medical documents contain foreign or mis-
spelled names that need to be effectively removed.
To evaluate the different deidentification approaches
under such circumstances, we generated a corpus in
which the names of people, locations, and hospitals
were all random permutations of letters. The result-
ing words were not found in any dictionaries but fol-
lowed the general format of the entity name category
to which they belonged. The distribution of PHI in
this third corpus is in Table 10.
Class Total PHI PHI Not in Dict.
Non-PHI 17872 0
Patient 1045 1045
Doctor 302 302
Location 24 24
Hospital 376 376
Date 735 0
ID 36 0
Phone 39 0
Table 10: Distribution of PHI in the corpus where all PHI
associated with names are randomly generated so as not to be
found in dictionaries.
On this data set, dictionaries cannot contribute to
deidentification because none of the PHI appear in
dictionaries. Under these conditions, proper deiden-
tification relies completely on context. Our results
showed that SVM approach outperformed all other
approaches on this corpus also (Tables 11 and 12).
Method Class P R F
SVM PHI 94.0% 96.0% 95.0%
IFinder PHI 55.1% 65.5% 59.8%
H+D PHI 76.4% 27.8% 40.8%
SVM Non-PHI 99.4% 99.1% 99.3%
IFinder Non-PHI 94.4% 91.6% 92.9%
H+D Non-PHI 90.7% 90.7% 90.7%
Table 11: Evaluation on the corpus containing PHI not in
dictionaries.
Of only the PHI not found in dictionaries, 95.5%
was accurately identified by the SVM approach. In
comparison, the heuristic+dictionary approach ac-
curately identified those PHI that could not be found
in dictionaries 11.1% of the time, IdentiFinder rec-
ognized these entities 76.7% of the time and SNoW
gave an accuracy of 79% (see Table 13).
71
Method Class P R F
SVM PHI 93.9% 96.0% 95.0%
SNoW PHI 93.7% 79.0% 85.7%
SVM Non-PHI 99.6% 99.4% 99.5%
SNoW Non-PHI 98.0% 99.5% 98.7%
Table 12: Evaluation of SNoW and SVM on the people, loca-
tions, and organizations found in the corpus containing PHI not
found in dictionaries.
Method SVM IFinder SNoW H+D
Precision 95.5% 76.7% 79.0% 11.1%
Table 13: Precision on only the PHI not found in dictionaries.
6.4 Feature Importance
As hypothesized, in all experiments, the SVM-
based approach outperformed all other approaches.
SVM?s feature set included a total of 26 features,
12 of which were dictionary-related features (ex-
cluding MeSH). Information gain showed that the
most informative features for deidentification were
the TW, the bigram before TW, the bigram after TW,
the word before TW, and the word after TW.
Note that the TW itself is important for classifi-
cation; many of the non-PHI correspond to common
words that appear in the corpus frequently and the
SVM learns the fact that some words, e.g., the, ad-
mit, etc., are never PHI. In addition, the context of
TW (captured in the form of unigrams and bigrams
of words and part-of-speech tags surrounding TW)
contributes significantly to deidentification.
There are many ways of automatically capturing
context. In our data, unigrams and bigrams of words
and their part-of-speech tags seem to be sufficient
for a statistical representation of local context. The
global context, as represented within IdentiFinder
and SNoW, could not contribute much to deiden-
tification on this corpus because of the fragmented
nature of the language of these documents, because
most sentences in this corpus contain only one en-
tity, and because many sentences do not include ex-
plicit relations between entities. However, there is
enough structure in this data that can be captured by
local context; lack of relations between entities and
the inability to capture global context do not hold us
back from almost perfect deidentification.
7 Conclusion
We presented a set of experimental results that show
that local context contributes more to deidentifica-
tion than dictionaries and global context when work-
ing with medical discharge summaries. These docu-
ments are characterized by incomplete, fragmented
sentences, and ad hoc language. They use a lot
of jargon, many times omit subjects of sentences,
use entity names that can be misspelled or foreign
words, can include entity names that are ambigu-
ous between PHI and non-PHI, etc. Similar doc-
uments in many domains exist; our experiments
here show that even on such challenging corpora,
local context can be exploited to identify entities.
Even a rudimentary statistical representation of lo-
cal context, as captured by unigrams and bigrams of
lemmatized keywords and part-of-speech tags, gives
good results and outperforms more sophisticated ap-
proaches that rely on global context. The simplicity
of the representation of local context and the results
obtained using this simple representation are partic-
ularly promising for many tasks that require pro-
cessing ungrammatical and fragmented text where
global context cannot be counted on.
8 Acknowledgements
This publication was made possible by grant num-
ber R01-EB001659 from the National Institute
of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering; by
grant number N01-LM-3-3513 on National Multi-
Protocol Ensemble for Self-Scaling Systems for
Health from National Library of Medicine; and, by
grant number U54-LM008748 on Informatics for In-
tegrating Biology to the Bedside from National Li-
brary of Medicine.
We are grateful to Professor Peter Szolovits and
Dr. Boris Katz for their insights, and to Professor
Carol Doll, Sue Felshin, Gregory Marton, and Tian
He for their feedback on this paper.
References
J. J. Berman. 2002. Concept-Match Medical Data
Scrubbing: How Pathology Text Can Be Used in
Research. Archives of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, 127(6).
D. M. Bikel, R. Schwartz, and R. M. Weischedel. 1999.
72
An Algorithm That Learns What?s in a Name. Ma-
chine Learning Journal Special Issue on Natural Lan-
guage Learning, 34(1/3).
C. Chang and C. Lin. 2001. LIBSVM: a Library for Sup-
port Vector Machines.
N. Collier, C. Nobata, and J. Tsujii. 2000. Extracting
the Names of Genes and Gene Products with a Hidden
Markov Model. Proceedings of COLING.
M. Collins and Y. Singer. 1999. Unsupervised Mod-
els for Named Entity Classification. Proceedings of
EMNLP.
J. Finkel, S. Dingare, H. Nguyen, M. Nissim, C. Man-
ning, and G. Sinclair. 2004. Exploiting Context for
Biomedical Entity Recognition: From Syntax to the
Web. Proceedings of Joint Workshop on Natural Lan-
guage Processing in Biomedicine and its Applications
at COLING.
R. Gaizauskas, G. Demetriou, P. Artymiuk, and P. Willett.
2003. Protein Structures and Information Extraction
from Biological Texts: The PASTA System. Bioinfor-
matics, 19(1).
Z. GuoDong, Z. Jie, S. Jian, S. Dan, T. ChewLim. 2005.
Recognizing Names in Biomedical Texts: a Machine
Learning Approach. Bioinformatics, 20(7).
D. Gupta, M. Saul, J. Gilbertson. 2004. Evalua-
tion of a Deidentification (De-Id) Software Engine to
Share Pathology Reports and Clinical Documents for
Research. American Journal of Clinical Pathology,
121(6).
J. R. Hobbs, D. E. Appelt, J. Bear, D. Israel, M.
Kameyama, M. Stickel, and M. Tyson. 1996. FAS-
TUS: A Cascaded Finite-State Transducer for Extract-
ing Information from Natural-Language Text. In Fi-
nite State Devices for Natural Language Processing.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
M. Douglass, G. D. Clifford, A. Reisner, G. B. Moody,
R. G. Mark. 2005. Computer-Assisted De-
Identification of Free Text in the MIMIC II Database.
Computers in Cardiology. 32:331-334.
A. McCallum, D. Freitag, and F. Pereira. 2000. Maxi-
mum Entropy Markov Models for Information Extrac-
tion and Segmentation. Proceedings of ICML.
E. Riloff and R. Jones. 1996. Automatically Generating
Extraction Patterns from Untagged Text. Proceedings
of AAAI-96.
D. Roth and W. Yih. 2002. Probabilistic Reasoning
for Entity and Relation Recognition. Proceedings of
COLING.
P. Ruch, R. H. Baud, A. Rassinoux, P. Bouillon, G.
Robert. 2000. Medical Document Anonymization
with a Semantic Lexicon. Proceedings of AMIA.
M. Surdeanu, S. M. Harabagiu, J. Williams, and P.
Aarseth. 2003. Using Predicate-Argument Structures
for Information Extraction. Proceedings of ACL 2003.
L. Sweeney. 1996. Replacing personally-identifying in-
formation in medical records, the scrub system. Jour-
nal of the American Medical Informatics Association.
R. K. Taira, A. A. T. Bui, H. Kangarloo. 2002. Identifi-
cation of patient name references within medical doc-
uments using semantic selectional restrictions. Pro-
ceedings of AMIA.
S. M. Thomas, B. Mamlin, G. Schadow, C. McDonald.
2002. A Successful Technique for Removing Names
in Pathology Reports Using an Augmented Search and
Replace Method. Proceedings of AMIA.
H. Yu, V. Hatzivassiloglou, C. Friedman, W. J. Wilbur.
2002. Automatic Extraction of Gene and Protein Syn-
onyms from MEDLINE and Journal Articles. Pro-
ceedings of AMIA.
73
