Learning Methods to Combine Linguistic 
Indicators: Improving Aspectual 
Classification and Revealing Linguistic 
Insights 
Eric V. Siegel* 
Columbia University 
Kathleen R. McKeown* 
Columbia University 
Aspectual classification maps verbs to a small set of primitive categories in order to reason about 
time. This classification isnecessary for interpreting temporal modifiers and assessing temporal 
relationships, and is therefore a required component for many natural anguage applications. 
A verb's aspectual category can be predicted by co-occurrence fr quencies between the verb 
and certain linguistic modifiers. These frequency measures, called linguistic indicators, are chosen 
by linguistic insights. However, linguistic indicators used in isolation are predictively incomplete, 
and are therefore insufficient when used individually. 
In this article, we compare three supervised machine learning methods for combining multiple 
linguistic indicators for aspectual c assification: decision trees, genetic programming, and logistic 
regression. A set of 14 indicators are combined for classification according to two aspectual distinc- 
tions. This approach improves the classification performance for both distinctions, as evaluated 
over unrestricted sets of verbs occurring across two corpora. This demonstrates the effectiveness 
of the linguistic indicators and provides amuch-needed full-scale method for automatic aspectual 
classification. Moreover, the models resulting from learning reveal several linguistic insights that 
are relevant o aspectual classification. We also compare supervised learning methods with an 
unsupervised method for this task. 
1. Introduction 
Aspectual classification maps clauses (e.g., simple sentences) to a small set of cate- 
gories in order to reason about ime. For example, events, such as, You called your father, 
are distinguished from states, such as, You resemble your father. The ability to distinguish 
stative clauses from event clauses is a fundamental component of natural language 
understanding. These two high-level categories correspond to fundamental distinc- 
tions in many domains, including the distinctions between diagnosis and procedure 
in the medical domain, and between analysis and activity in the financial domain. 
Stativity is the first high-level distinction made when defining the aspectual class 
of a clause. Events are further distinguished according to completedness ( ometimes 
called telicity), which determines whether an event reaches a culmination or comple- 
tion point at which a new state is introduced. For example, I made afire is culminated, 
since a new state is introduced--something is made, whereas I gazed at the sunset is 
nonculminated. 
* Computer Science Dept., 1214 Amsterdam Ave., New York NY 10027. E-mail: evs@cs.columbia.edu 
t Computer Science Dept., 1214 Amsterdam Ave., New York, NY 10027. E-mail: kathy@cs.columbia.edu 
@ 2001 Association for Computational Linguistics 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 4 
Aspectual classification is necessary for interpreting temporal modifiers and as- 
sessing temporal entailments (Moens and Steedman 1988; Dorr 1992; Klavans 1994) 
and is therefore a required component for applications that perform certain natural 
language interpretation, generation, summarization, information retrieval, and ma- 
chine translation tasks. Each of these applications requires the ability to reason about 
time. 
A verb's aspectual category can be predicted by co-occurrence fr quencies between 
the verb and linguistic phenomena such as the progressive tense and certain temporal 
modifiers (Klavans and Chodorow 1992). These frequency measures are called linguis- 
tic indicators. The choice of indicators is guided by linguistic insights that describe 
how the aspectual category of a clause is constrained by the presence of these mod- 
ifiers. For example, an event can be placed in the progressive, as in, She was jogging, 
but many stative clauses cannot, e.g., *She was resembling her father (Dowty 1979). One 
advantage of linguistic indicators is that they can be measured automatically. 
However, individual linguistic indicators are predictively incomplete, and are 
therefore insufficient when used in isolation. As demonstrated mpirically in this arti- 
cle, individual linguistic indicators uffer from limited classification performance due 
to several linguistic and pragmatic factors. For example, some indicators were not mo- 
tivated by specific linguistic insights. However, linguistic indicators have the potential 
to interact and supplement one another, so it would be beneficial to combine them 
systematically. 
In this article, we compare three supervised machine learning methods for com- 
bining multiple linguistic indicators for aspectual classification: decision trees, genetic 
programming, and logistic regression. A set of 14 indicators are combined, first for 
classification according to stativity, and then for classification according to complet- 
edness. This approach realizes the potential of linguistic indicators, improving classi- 
fication performance over a baseline method for both tasks with minimal overfitting, 
as evaluated over an unrestricted set of verbs occurring in two corpora. This serves 
to demonstrate he effectiveness of these linguistic indicators and thus provides a 
much-needed full-scale, expandable method for automatic aspectual classification. 
The results of learning are linguistically viable in two respects. First, learning au- 
tomatically produces models that are specialized for different aspectual distinctions; 
the same set of 14 indicators are combined in different ways according to which clas- 
sification problem is targeted. Second, inspecting the models resulting from learning 
revealed linguistic insights that are relevant to aspectual classification. 
We also evaluate an unsupervised method for this task. This method uses co- 
occurrence statistics to group verbs according to meaning. Although this method 
groups verbs generically and is not designed to distinguish according to aspectual 
class in particular, we show that the results do distinguish verbs according to stativity. 
The next two sections of this article describe aspectual classification and linguistic 
indicators. Section 4 describes the three supervised learning methods employed to 
combine linguistic indicators for aspectual classification. Section 5 gives results in 
terms of classification performance and resulting linguistic insights, comparing these 
results, across classification tasks, to baseline methods. Section 6 describes experiments 
with an unsupervised approach. Finally, Sections 7, 8, and 9 survey related work, 
describe future work, and present conclusions. 
2. Aspect in Natural Language 
Because, in general, the sequential order of clauses is not enough to determine the 
underlying chronological order, aspectual classification is required for interpreting 
596 
Siegel and McKeown Improving Aspectual Classification 
Table 1 
Aspectual classes. This table is adapted from Moens and Steedman (1988, p. 17). 
Culminated 
Nonculminated 
EVENTS 
punctual extended 
CULMINATION CULMINATED 
PROCESS 
recognize build a house 
POINT PROCESS 
hiccup run, swim, walk 
STATES 
understand 
even the simplest narratives in natural language. For example, consider: 
(1) Sue mentioned Miami (event). Jim cringed (event). 
In this case, the first sentence describes an event that takes place before the event 
described by the second sentence. However, in 
(2) Sue mentioned Miami (event). Jim already knew (state). 
the second sentence describes a state, which begins before the event described by the 
first sentence. 
Aspectual classification is also a necessary prerequisite for interpreting certain 
adverbial adjuncts, as well as identifying temporal constraints between sentences in 
a discourse (Moens and Steedman 1988; Dorr 1992; Klavans 1994). In addition, it 
is crucial for lexical choice and tense selection in machine translation (Moens and 
Steedman 1988; Klavans and Chodorow 1992; Klavans 1994; Dorr 1992). 
Table 1 sun~narizes the three aspectual distinctions, which compose five aspec- 
tual categories. In addition to the two distinctions described in the previous ection, 
atomicity distinguishes punctual events (e.g., She noticed the picture on the wall) from 
extended events, which have a time duration (e.g., She ran to the store). Therefore, four 
classes of events are derived: culmination, culminated process, process, and point. 
These aspectual distinctions are motivated by a series of syntactic and entailment 
constraints described in the first three subsections below. Further cognitive and philo- 
sophical rationales behind these semantic distinctions are surveyed by Siegel (1998b). 
First we describe aspectual constraints that linguistically motivate the design of sev- 
eral of the linguistic indicators. Next we describe an array of semantic entailments and 
temporal constraints that can be put to use by an understanding system once input 
clauses have been aspectually classified. Then we describe how aspect influences the 
interpretation of temporal connectives and modifiers. Aspectual transformations are 
described, and we introduce the concept of a clause's fundamental aspectual category. 
Finally, we describe several natural anguage applications that require an aspectual 
classification component. 
2.1 Aspectual Markers and Constraints 
Certain features of a clause, such as the presence of adjuncts and tense, are constrained 
by and contribute to the aspectual class of the clause (Vendler 1967; Dowty 1979; 
Pustejovsky 1991; Passonneau 1988; Klavans 1994; Resnik 1996; Olsen and Resnik 
1997). Table 2 illustrates an array of linguistic constraints, as more comprehensively 
597 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 4 
Table 2 
Several aspectual markers and associated constraints on aspectual c ass. 
If a clause can occur: then it must be: 
with a temporal adverb (e.g., then) 
in progressive 
as a complement offorce~persuade 
after "What happened was..." 
with a duration in-PP (e.g., in an hour) 
in the perfect ense 
Event 
Extended Event 
Event 
Event 
Culminated Event 
Culminated Event or State 
summarized by Klavans (1994) and Siegel (1998b). Each entry in this table describes 
an aspectual marker and the constraints on the aspectual category of any clause that 
appears with that marker. For example, a clause must be extended to appear in the 
progressive tense, e.g., 
(3) He was prospering in India extended event), 
which contrasts with, 
(4) *You were noticing that I can hardly be blamed ... (atomic event)) 
As a second example, since the perfect ense requires that the clause it occurs in 
must entail a consequent s ate, an event must be culminated to appear in the perfect 
tense. For example, 
(5) Thrasymachus has made an attempt to get the argument into his own 
hands (culminated event), 
contrasts with, 
(6) *He has cowered own in a paralysis of fear (nonculminated vent). 
2.2 Aspectua l  Enta i lments  
Table 3 lists several aspectual entailments. A more comprehensive list can be found 
in Klavans (1994) or Siegel (1998b). Each entry in this table describes a linguistic 
phenomenon, a resulting entailment, and the constraints on aspectual class that apply 
if the resulting entailment holds. For example, the simple present reading of an event, 
e.g., He jogs, denotes the habi tua l  reading, i.e., every day, whereas the simple present 
reading of a state, e.g., He appears healthy, entails at the moment. 
These entailments serve two purposes: They further validate the three aspectual 
distinctions, and they illustrate an array of inferences that can be made by an under- 
standing system. However, these inferences can only be made after identifying the 
aspectual category of input clauses. 
1 These example sentences are modifications of samples from the corpus of novels described below. 
598 
Siegel and McKeown Improving Aspectual Classification 
Table 3 
Several aspectual entailments. 
If a clause occurring: necessarily entails: then it must be: 
in past progressive t nse 
as argument ofstopped 
in simple present tense 
past tense reading 
past tense reading 
the habitual reading 
Nonculminated Event 
Nonculminated Event or State 
Event 
2.3 Interpret ing Tempora l  Connect ives  and Modi f iers  
Several researchers have developed models that incorporate aspectual class to assess 
temporal constraints between connected clauses (Hwang and Schubert 1991; Schubert 
and Hwang 1990; Dorr 1992; Passonneau 1988; Moens and Steedman 1988; Hitzeman, 
Moens, and Grover 1994). For example, stativity must be identified to detect emporal 
constraints between clauses connected with when. For example, in interpreting, 
(7) She had good strength when objectively tested. 2 
the have state began before or at the beginning of the test event, and ended after or at 
the end of the test event: 
have 
I ? I 
t2z2_  
However, in interpreting, 
(8) Phototherapy was d iscont inued when the bilirubin came down to 13. 
the discontinue vent began at the end of the come event: 
come 
I I 
discont inue 
I I 
Such models also predict temporal relations between clauses combined with other 
connectives such as before, after, and until. 
Certain temporal modifiers are disambiguated with aspectual class. For example, 
for an hour can denote the duration of a nonculminated vent, as in, Igazed at the sunset 
for an hour. In this case, an hour is the duration of the gazing event. However, when 
applied to a culminated event, it denotes the duration of the resulting state, as in, I 
left the room for an hour. In this case, an hour is not the duration of the leaving event, 
but, rather, the duration of what resulted from leaving, i.e., being gone. 
2 These xamples ofwhen come from the corpus of medical discharge summaries described below. 
599 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 4 
2.4 Aspectual Transformations and Coercion 
Several aspectual markers uch as those shown in Table 2 transform the aspectual c ass 
of the clause they modify. For example, a durationfor-PP, e.g., for 10 minutes, denotes 
the time duration of a (nonculminated) process, resulting in a culminated process, e.g., 
(9) I stared at it (process). 
(10) I stared at it for 10 minutes (culminated process). 
Some aspectual auxiliaries also perform an aspectual transformation of the clause 
they modify, e.g., 
(11) I finished staring at it (culminated process). 
Aspectual coercion, a second type of aspectual transformation, can take place 
when a clause is modified by an aspectual marker that violates an aspectual constraint 
(Moens and Steedman 1988; Pustejovsky 1991). In this case, an alternative interpre- 
tation of the clause is inferred which satisfies the aspectual constraint. For example, 
the progressive marker is constrained to appear with an extended event. Therefore, if
it appears with an atomic event, e.g., 
(12) He hiccupped (point), 
the event is transformed to an extended event, e.g., 
(13) He was hiccupping (process). 
in this case with the iterated reading of the clause (Moens and Steedman 1988). 
2.5 The First Problem: Fundamental Aspect 
We define fundamental aspectual class as the aspectual class of a clause before any 
aspectual transformations or coercions. That is, the fundamental spectual category 
is the category the clause would have if it were stripped of any and all aspectual 
markers that induce an aspectual transformation, as well as all components of the 
clause's pragmatic context that induce a transformation. Fundamental spectual c ass is 
therefore a function of the main verb and a select group of complements, asillustrated 
in the previous two subsections. It is the task of detecting fundamental spect hat we 
address in this article. As established by some previous work in linguistics, adjuncts 
are to be handled separately from other clausal constituents in assessing aspectual 
class (Pustejovsky 1995). 
An understanding system can recognize the aspectual transformations that have 
affected a clause only after establishing the clause's fundamental spectual category. 
Linguistic models motivate the division between a module that first detects fundamen- 
tal aspect and a second that detects aspectual transformations (Hwang and Schubert 
1991; Schubert and Hwang 1990; Dorr 1992; Passonneau 1988; Moens and Steedman 
1988; Hitzeman, Moens, and Grover 1994). In principle, it is possible for this second 
module to detect aspectual transformations that apply to any input clause, indepen- 
dent of the manner in which the core constituents interact to produce its fundamental 
aspectual class. 
600 
Siegel and McKeown Improving Aspectual Classification 
2.6 Applications of Aspectual Classification 
Aspectual classification is a required component of applications that perform nat- 
ural language interpretation, atural language generation, summarization, informa- 
tion retrieval, and machine translation tasks (Moens and Steedman 1988; Klavans and 
Chodorow 1992; Klavans 1994; Dorr 1992; Wiebe et al 1997). These applications require 
the ability to reason about time, i.e., temporal reasoning. 
Assessing temporal relationships i a prerequisite for inferring sequences of med- 
ical procedures in medical domains. Many applications that process medical reports 
require aspectual classification because a patient's medical progress and history are 
established as a series of states and events that are temporally related. One task is 
to automatically complete a database ntry for the patient by processing a medical 
discharge summary detailing a patient's visit to the hospital. For example, consider 
the temporal relationship between the clauses connected with when in, 
(14) The small bowel became completely free when dissection was 
continued. 3 
In this case, the become culmination takes place at the onset of the continue process. 
However, in 
(15) The small bowel became completely free when dissection was 
performed. 
the become culmination takes place at the completion of the perform culminated process. 
Aspect is also crucial for tense selection in machine translation between certain 
pairs of languages because some languages have explicit perfective markers and oth- 
ers do not. The perfective marker is used in many languages, such as Bulgarian and 
Russian, to indicate completedness. Therefore, a system translating from a language 
without explicit perfective markers, such as English, to one with explicit perfective 
markers must first detect he aspectual category of an input phrase in order to deter- 
mine the form of the output (Stys 1991; Dorr 1992). Aspect is also required for lexical 
selection in machine translation since, for example, some languages, e.g., German and 
French, have different words for the two uses of for discussed previously in Section 2.3. 
Applications that incorporate aspect rely on the ability to first automatically iden- 
tify the aspectual category of a clause. For example, Passonneau (1998) describes an 
algorithm that depends on what is called lexical aspect, the aspectual information 
stored in the lexicon for each verb, and Dorr (1992) augments Jackendoff's lexical en- 
tries with aspectual information. Combining linguistic indicators with machine learn- 
ing automatically produces domain-specialized aspectual lexicons. 
3. Linguistic Indicators 
Aspectually categorizing verbs is the first step towards aspectually classifying clauses, 
since many clauses in certain domains can be categorized based on their main verb 
only (Siegel 1997, 1998b, 1999). However, the most frequent category of a verb is 
often domain dependent, so it is necessary to perform a specialized analysis for each 
domain. 
3 These xample sentences are modifications of samples from the corpus of medical discharge summaries 
described below. 
601 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 4 
Table 4 
Fourteen linguistic indicators evaluated for aspectual c assification. 
Linguistic Indicator Example Clause 
frequency 
not or never 
temporal adverb 
no subject 
past/pres participle 
duration in-PP 
perfect 
present ense 
progressive 
manner adverb 
evaluation adverb 
past tense 
duration for-PP 
continuous adverb 
(not applicable) 
She can not explain why. 
I saw to it then. 
He was admitted to the hospital. 
... blood pressure going up. 
She built it in an hour. 
They have landed. 
I am happy. 
I am behaving myself. 
She studied iligently. 
They performed horribly. 
I was happy. 
I sang for ten minutes. 
She will live indefinitely. 
Naturally occurring text contains vast amounts of information pertaining to as- 
pectual classification encoded by aspectual markers that have associated aspectual 
constraints. However, the best way to make use of these markers is not obvious. In 
general, while the presence of a marker in a particular clause indicates a constraint on 
the aspectual class of the clause, the absence thereof does not place any constraint. 
Therefore, as with most statistical methods for natural anguage, the linguistic 
constraints associated with markers are best exploited by a system that measures co- 
occurrence frequencies. In particular, we measure the frequencies ofaspectual markers 
across verbs. This way, the aspectual tendencies ofverbs are measured. These tenden- 
cies are likely to correlate with aspectual class (Klavans and Chodorow 1992). For 
example, a verb that appears more frequently in the progressive is more likely to 
describe an event. The co-occurrence frequency of a linguistic marker is a linguistic 
indicator. 
The first column of Table 4 lists the 14 linguistic indicators evaluated to classify 
verbs. Each indicator has a unique value for each verb. The first indicator, frequency, 
is simply the frequency with which each verb occurs over the entire corpus. The 
remaining 13 indicators measure how frequently each verb occurs in a clause with 
a linguistic marker listed in Table 4. For example, the next three indicators listed 
measure the frequency with which verbs (1) are modified by not or never, (2) are 
modified by a temporal adverb such as then or frequently, and (3) have no deep subject 
(e.g., passivized phrases uch as, She was admitted to the hospital). 
Nine of these indicators measure the frequencies of aspectual markers, each of 
which have linguistic onstraints: perfect, progressive, duration in-PP, durationfor-PP, 
no subject, and four adverb groups. The remaining five indicators were discovered ur- 
ing the course of this research. Further details regarding the measurement of hese indi- 
cators, and the linguistic onstraints hat motivate them, can be found in Siegel (1998b). 
Linguistic indicators are measured over corpora automatically. To do this, the 
automatic dentification of individual constituents within a clause is required to detect 
the presence of aspectual markers and to identify the main verb of each clause. We 
employ the English Slot Grammar (ESG) parser (McCord 1990), which has previously 
been used on corpora to accumulate aspectual data (Klavans and Chodorow 1992). 
ESG is particularly attractive for this task since its output describes a clause's deep 
roles, detecting, for example, the deep subject and object of a passivized phrase. 
602 
Siegel and McKeown Improving Aspectual Classification 
4. Combining Linguistic Indicators with Machine Learning 
There are several reasons to expect superior classification performance when employ- 
ing multiple linguistic indicators in combination rather than using them individually. 
While individual indicators have predictive value, they are predictively incomplete. 
This incompleteness has been illustrated empirically by showing that some indicators 
help for only a subset of verbs (Siegel 1998b). Such incompleteness i  due in part to 
sparsity and noise of data when computing indicator values over a corpus with lim- 
ited size and some parsing errors. However, this incompleteness i  also a consequence 
of the linguistic haracteristics of various indicators. For example: 
? While the progressive indicator is linguistically linked to extendedness, it 
is only indirectly linked to completedness. It may be useful for 
predicting whether a verb is culminated or nonculminated due to the 
fact that nonextended (i.e., atomic) verbs are more likely to be 
culminated than extended, i.e., points are rare. 
? Many location verbs can appear in the progressive, ven in their stative 
sense, e.g., The book was lying on the shelf. 
? Some aspectual markers uch as the pseudocleft and many manner 
adverbs test for intentional events in particular (not all events in general), 
and therefore are not compatible with all events, e.g., *I died diligently. 
? Aspectual coercion such as iteration can allow a punctual event o 
appear in the progressive, .g. She was sneezing for a week 
(point ~ process ~ culminated process) 4 (Moens and Steedman 1988). 
? The predictive power of some indicators is uncertain, since several 
measure phenomena that are not linguistically constrained by any 
aspectual category, e.g., the present ense, durative for-PPs, frequency 
and not~never indicators. 
Therefore, the predictive power of individual linguistic indicators is incomplete; 
only the subset of verbs that adhere to the respective constraints or trends can be 
correctly classified. Such incomplete indicators may complement one another when 
placed in combination. Our goal is to take full advantage of the complete range of 
indicators by coordinating and combining them. 
Machine learning methods can be employed to automatically generate a model 
that will combine indicator values. Figure 1 shows a system overview for this process 
(with additional details that are addressed below in Section 5.1.1). This diagram out- 
lines a generic system that combines numerical indicators with machine learning for a 
classification problem, in natural language understanding or otherwise. Indicators are 
computed over an automatically parsed corpus. Then, in the Combine Indicators tage, 
supervised training cases are used to automatically generate a model (Classification 
Method) with supervised machine learning. This method (the hypothesis) inputs in- 
dicator values and outputs the aspectual class. The hypothesis then evaluated over 
unseen supervised test cases. 
4 In this example, for a week requires an extended vent, hus the first coercion. However, this phrase also 
makes an event culminated, thus the second transformation. 
603 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 4 
States vs. Events 
~ , 1 5 9 , 8 9 1  words 
Manual I. 1.863 clauses I Parser I ESG 
Classification I" 
( ,Test_)739 ( Training )739 t l Co.mp,t; i t  
\ \ / 
~)e(ISlOn I ree  
I I 
Figure 1 
System overview ith statistics of the medical discharge summary data for distinguishing 
according to stativity. 
There are five advantages to automating this process with machine learning: 
? The cost of manually generating a model, which is often prohibitive, is 
avoided. 
? Biases introduced by a human engineer are avoided. 
? Automated approaches are extensible to multiple natural anguage 
classification problems, across multiple domains and multiple languages. 
? Once a system has been trained to distinguish verbs by indicator values, 
it can automatically classify all the verbs that appear in a corpus, 
including unseen verbs that were not included in the supervised training 
sample. 
? Resulting models may reveal new linguistic insights. 
The remainder of this section describes the three supervised learning methods 
evaluated for combining linguistic indicators: logistic regression, decision tree induc- 
tion, and a genetic algorithm. At the end of this section, the designs of these three 
methods are compared. In the following section, the three are compared empirically: 
each method is evaluated for classification according to both stativity and completed- 
ness. 
604 
Siegel and McKeown Improving Aspectual Classification 
4.1 Logistic Regression 
As suggested by Klavans and Chodorow (1992), a weighted sum of multiple indica- 
tors that results in one "overall" indicator may provide an increase in classification 
performance. This method follows the intuition that each indicator correlates with the 
probability that a verb belongs in a certain class, but that each indicator has its own 
unique scale, polarity, and predictive significance and so must be weighted accord- 
ingly. 
For example, consider the problem of using in combination (only) two indicators, 
not~never and progressive, to determine the stativity of verbs in a corpus of medical 
reports. The former indicator may show higher values for stative verbs since diag- 
noses (i.e., states) are often ruled out in medical discharge surrunaries, e.g., "The patient 
was not hypertensive," but procedures (i.e., events) that were not done are not usually 
mentioned, e.g., "?An examination was not performed." The progressive indicator is lin- 
guistically predicted to show higher values for event verbs in general, so its polarity 
is the opposite of the not~never indicator. Furthermore, a certain group of stative verbs 
(including, e.g., sit, lay, and rest) can also occur in the progressive, so this indicator 
may be less powerful in its predictiveness. Therefore, the best overall indicator may 
result from adding the value of the not or never indicator, as multiplied by a negative 
weight, to the value of the progressive indicator, as multiplied by a positive weight of 
lesser magnitude. A detailed examination of the weights resulting from learning and 
their linguistic interpretation is described below in Section 5.1.4. 
This set of weights can be determined by a standard gradient descent algorithm 
(see, for example, Mitchell \[1997\]). However, the algorithm employed here is logistic 
regression (Sjantner and Duffy 1989), a popular technique for binary classification. 
This technique determines a set of weights for a linear model, which are applied in 
combination with a certain nonlinear model. In particular, the iterative reweighted 
least squares algorithm (Baker and Nelder 1989) is employed, and the inverse logic 
(nonlinear) function is applied. The Splus statistical package was used for the induction 
process. 
4.2 Decision Tree Induction 
Another method capable of modeling nonlinear elationships between indicators is a 
decision tree. An example tree is shown in Figure 2 (with additional details discussed 
in Section 5.1.4). Each internal node of a decision tree is a choice point, dividing an 
individual indicator into two ranges of possible values by way of a threshold. Each leaf 
node is labeled with a classification (e.g., state or event, in the case of the tree shown). 
In effect, this is simply a set of nested if-then-else statements. Given the set of indicator 
values corresponding to a verb, that verb's class is predicted by traversing the tree 
from the root node to a leaf as follows: at each node, the arc leading downward to 
the left or right is traversed according to the question posed about an indicator value 
at that node. When a leaf node is reached, its label is then taken to be the verb's 
classification. For example, if the frequency is less than 2,013, the arc to the left is 
traversed. Then, if the not~never indicator is greater than or equal to 3.48%, the arc to 
the right is traversed. Finally, if the frequency is greater than or equal to 314, the arc 
to the right is traversed, arriving at a leaf labeled, State. 
This representation e ables complex interactions between indicator values. In par- 
ticular, if one indicator can only help classify a proper subset of verbs, while another 
applies only to a subset hat is distinct but intersects with the first, certain ranges of 
indicator values may delimit verb groups for which the indicators complement one 
another. An example of such delimitation within a learned decision tree is illustrated 
below in Section 5.1.4. 
605 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 4 
< 2,013 
"Izot" < 
28/29 
temporal adv < 0.68%) ~, j requency < 
< 
4~'7488 42/~-~'61 19/19 
106/132 9/10 
Figure 2 
Top portion of decision tree automatically created to distinguish events from states. Leftward 
arcs are traversed when comparisons test true, rightward arcs when they test false. The values 
under each leaf indicate the number of correctly classified examples in the corresponding 
partition of training cases. The full tree has 59 nodes and achieves 93.9% accuracy over unseen 
test cases. 
Table 5 
Default decision tree induction parameters implemented by Splus. 
Minimum partition size before first split: 
Minimum partition size for additional splits: 
Node selection criterion: 
Node purity threshold: 
5 
10 
deviance = -2 times log-likelihood 
deviance < .01 
The most popular method of decision tree induction, which we employ here, is 
recursive partitioning (Quinlan 1986; Breiman et al 1984). This method "grows" a 
decision tree by expanding it from top to bottom. Initially, the tree has only one node, 
a leaf, corresponding to the entire set of training examples. Then, the following process 
is repeated: At each leaf node of the tree, an indicator and threshold are selected such 
that the examples are best distinguished according to aspectual class. This adds two 
leaves beneath the node, and distributes the examples to the new leaves accordingly. 
Table 5 shows the parameters used to control decision tree growth. The criterion 
optimized for each split is deviance, implemented as minus twice the log likelihood. 
The Splus statistical package was used for the induction process. We also compared 
these results to standard CART decision tree induction (Friedman 1977; Breiman et al 
1984). 
4.3 Genetic Programming 
An alternative method that enables arbitrary mathematical combinations of indicators 
is to generate ftmction trees that combine them. A popular method for generating 
606 
Siegel and McKeown Improving Aspectual Classification 
Table 6 
Applying genetic programming to induce a function tree that combines linguistic indicators. 
Objective: 
Terminal set: 
Function set: 
Training cases: 
Raw fitness: 
Parameters: 
Identification of best of run: 
Function tree to combine linguistic indicators 
14, corresponding tothe set of linguistic indicators. 
ADD, MULTIPLY, and DIVIDE 
739 (stativity) or 307 (completedness) verb instances. 
Accuracy over training cases, when best threshold is selected. 
Number of generates =50,000, population size = 500, 
5-member tournament selection, steady state population 
(Syswerda 1989). 
Highest raw fitness. 
such function trees is a genetic algorithm (GA) (Holland 1975; Goldberg 1989), which 
is modeled after population genetics and natural selection. The use of GAs to generate 
function trees (Cramer 1985; Koza 1992) is often called genetic programming (GP). 
Inspired by Darwinian survival of the fittest, the GA works with a pool of initially 
random hypotheses (in this case, function trees), stochastically performing enetic 
recombination a d mutation to propagate or create better individuals, which replace 
old or less good individuals. Recombination between function trees usually consists 
of selecting a subtree from each individual, and swapping them, thereby creating two 
new individuals (Cramer 1985; Koza 1992). For random mutation, a randomly chosen 
subtree can be replaced by a new randomly created subtree (Koza 1992). Because 
the genetic algorithm is stochastic, each run may produce a different function tree. 
Therefore, performance is evaluated over the models produced by multiple runs. 
The function trees are generated from a set of 17 primitives: the binary functions 
ADD, MULTIPLY, and DIVIDE, and 14 terminals corresponding to the 14 indicators 
listed in Table 4, which are occurrence frequencies. The GA parameters are shown in 
Table 6. 
This representation e ables trategic ombinations of indicator values that are 
mathematical, s opposed to logical, manipulations. For example, two indicators that 
are high in predictiveness can be multiplied together, and perhaps added to an indi- 
cator with complementary but less reliable predictiveness. 
The set of primitives was established empirically; other primitives uch as con- 
ditional functions, subtraction, and random constants failed to improve performance. 
The polarities for several indicators were reversed according to the polarities of the 
weights established by logistic regression for stativity. Runs of the GA maintain a 
population size of 500 and end after 50,000 new individuals have been evaluated. 
A threshold must be selected for both logistic and function tree combinations of
indicators o overall outputs can be discriminated to maximize classification perfor- 
mance. For both methods, the threshold is established over the training set and frozen 
for evaluation over the test set. 
4.4 Selecting and Comparing Learning Methods 
The use of machine learning techniques to combine numerical indicators for classi- 
fication problems in general is a well-established practice and includes work with 
decision trees (Fayyad and Irani 1992), logistic regression (Sjantner and Duffy 1989), 
and GP (Koza 1992; Tackett and Carrel 1994). Applications include doctrment classifi- 
cation (Masand 1994), image classification (Tackett 1993), and stock market prediction 
(Allen and Karjalainen 1995). 
607 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 4 
When combining linguistic indicators in particular, the choice of hypothesis repre- 
sentation determines the type of linguistic insights that can result. Decision trees can be 
analyzed by examining the subset of verbs that are sorted to a particular node and the 
constraints on indicator values that put them there. A path from the root to any node 
is a rule that puts constraints on indicator values; this rule can be examined to deter- 
mine if it has a linguistic interpretation. The weights produced by logistic regression 
can be examined to see which indicators are most highly weighted for each classifi- 
cation task. In addition to this, surprisingly, we discovered a decision tree-like rule 
encoded by these weights, as described below in Section 5.1.4. On the other hand, a 
function tree, such as that produced by GP, is more difficult to analyze manually, since 
it is a mathematical combination. However, GP's performance was tested due to the 
potential improvement in classification performance of such a flexible representation 
for numerical functions. 
The relative merit of various learning algorithms is often difficult to ascertain, 
even after results have been collected. In general, each learning algorithm relies on an 
inductive bias, that may produce better esults for some data than for others (Mitchell 
1997). When applied to linguistic indicators, there is little knowledge about how indica- 
tors interact, since initial analysis examines individual indicators in isolation; machine 
learning is being used to automatically discover their interaction. Intuition guides the 
choice and design of algorithms, such as the rationale for each of the three techniques 
described above in this section. Moreover, beyond the particular characteristics of any 
given classification task, the particular data sample to which a learning technique is 
applied may have a large effect on performance, for example, due to the distribution 
and size of the training set, differences between the distributions of the training and 
test sets, and even the particular order in which the training cases are listed. 
The three learning methods we examine in detail are diverse in their representa- 
tion abilities, as described in this section, and, arguably, are therefore representative 
of the abilities of learning algorithms in general when applied to the same data. A 
pilot study showed no further improvement in accuracy or in recall trade-off or ei- 
ther classification problem by another four standard learning algorithms: naive Bayes 
(Duda and Hart 1973), Ripper (Cohen 1995), ID3 (Quinlan 1986) and C4.5 (Quin- 
lan 1993). Furthermore, using metalearning to combine multiple learning methods 
hierachically (sometimes called stacked generalization; Chan and Stolfo \[1993\], and 
Wolpert \[1992\]), according to the JAM (Java Agents for Metalearning) model (Stolfo et 
al. 1997), produced equivalent results. However, this may be due to the limited size 
of our supervised ata. 
5. Supervised Learning: Method and Results 
In this section, we evaluate the models produced by the three supervised learning 
methods. These methods are applied to combine the linguistic indicators computed 
over the medical discharge summaries in order to distinguish between states and 
events. Then, the methods are applied to indicators computed over novels in order to 
distinguish between culminated and nonculminated events. At the end of this section, 
these results are compared to one another, and to an informed baseline classification 
method. 
The two data sets are summarized in Table 7. Table 8 illustrates the schema of 
inputs for supervised learning. There are a total of 14 continuous attributes for the 
two binary learning problems. All attributes are proportions except frequency, which 
is a positive integer. This data is available at http://www.cs.columbia.edu/-evs/ 
VerbData/. 
608 
Siegel and McKeown Improving Aspectual Classification 
Table 7 
Two classification problems on different data sets. 
Stativity Completedness 
Corpus 3,224 medical discharge summaries 10 novels 
Corpus size 1,159,891 words 846,913 words 
Parsed clauses 97,973 75,289 
Training clauses 739 (634 events) 307 (196 culminated) 
Testing clauses 739 (619 events) 308 (195 culminated) 
Verbs in test set 222 204 
Clauses excluded be-, have-clauses stative clauses 
Unsupervised results N/A stativity (see Section 6) 
Table 8 
Schema of inputs for supervised learning. Fourteen continuous attributes for two binary 
learning problems: stativity and completedness. 
Linguistic Indicator stativity completedness 
Class yes..no yes..no 
manner adverb 0.00..0.29 0.00..0.23 
duration in-PP 0.00..0.13 0.00..0.12 
continuous adverb 0.00..1.00 0.00..0.33 
temporal adverb 0.00..0.40 0.00..0.97 
not or never 0.47..1.00 0.58..1.00 
duration for-PP 0.00..0.15 0.00..1.00 
perfect 0.00..0.35 N/A 
perfect (not progressive) N/A 0.00..0.50 
past/pres participle 0.00..1.00 0.33..1.00 
evaluation adverb 0.00..0.46 0.00..0.95 
no subject 0.00..1.00 0.00..1.00 
past tense 0.00..1.00 0.00..1.00 
present tense 0.00..1.00 0.00..1.00 
frequency 1..2,131 1..13,882 
not progressive 0.00..1.00 0.00..0.50 
For both classification problems, we show that individual indicators correlate with 
aspectual class, but attain limited classification accuracy when used alone. Supervised 
learning is then used to combine indicators, improving classification performance and 
providing linguistic insights. The results of unsupervised learning are given in Sec- 
tion 6. 
Classification performance is evaluated according to a variety of performance mea- 
sures, since some applications weigh certain classes more heavily than others (Brodley 
1996; Cardie and Howe 1997). An alternative to evaluation based on overall accu- 
racy is to measure the recall values for the dominant and nondominant (i.e., majority 
and minority) categories eparately. A favorable recall trade-off is achieved if the re- 
call of the nondominant category can be improved with no loss in overall accuracy 
when compared against some baseline (Cardie and Howe 1997). Achieving such a 
trade-off is nontrivial; it is not possible, for example, for an uninformed approach that 
assigns everything to the dominant category. A favorable recall trade-off presents an 
advantage for applications that weigh the identification of nondominant instances, e.g., 
nonculminated clauses, more heavily. For example, correctly identifying the use of for 
depends on identifying the aspectual class of the clause it modifies (see Section 2.3). A 
system that surmnarizes the duration of events which incorrectly classifies She ran (for 
609 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 4 
a minute) as culminated will not detect hat for a minute describes the duration of the 
run event. As another example, it is advantageous for a medical system that retrieves 
patient diagnoses to identify stative clauses, since there is a correspondence b tween 
states and medical diagnoses. 
Classification performance is evaluated over verb instances, that is, clauses in 
which the verb appears as the main verb. 5 Because of this, as discussed further in 
Section 5.4 below, the same verb may appear multiple times in the training and testing 
sets. This measure is beneficial in several ways: 
? Measured classification performance r flects the true distribution of the 
verbs--some are more frequent than others. 
? Ambiguous verbs may appear with multiple aspectual categories, 
reflecting the true distribution of the data. 
? In related work, clausal constituents other than the verb can be 
incorporated tohelp resolve ambiguity and alleviate verb sparsity (Siegel 
1998a, 1998b). 
5.1 States versus Events 
Our experiments distinguishing states and events were performed across a corpus 
of 3,224 medical discharge summaries, with a total of 1,159,891 words. A medical 
discharge summary describes the symptoms, history, diagnosis, treatment, and out- 
come of a patient's visit to the hospital. Each summary consists of unstructured text, 
divided into several sections with titles such as: "History of Present Illness," and 
"Medical Summary." The text under four of these titles was extracted and parsed with 
the English Slot Grammar, resulting in 97,973 clauses that were parsed fully, with no 
self-diagnostic errors (ESG produced error messages on some of this corpus' com- 
plex sentences). Other sections in the summaries were ignored since they report the 
numerical results of certain medical tests, interspersed with incomplete sentences. 
Be and have, the two most popular verbs, covering 31.9% of the clauses in this 
corpus, are handled separately from all other verbs. Clauses with be as their main 
verb, composing 23.9% of the corpus, always denote a state. Therefore, we can focus 
our efforts on the remaining clauses. Clauses with have as their main verb, composing 
8.0% of the corpus, are highly ambiguous, and have been addressed separately by 
considering the direct object of such clauses (Siegel 1998a, 1998b). 
5.1.1 Manual Marking for Supervised Data. As a basis for evaluating our approach, 
1,851 clauses from the parsed corpus were manually marked according to their fun- 
damental stativity. In contrast to the entire parsed corpus (97,973 clauses), each clause 
in this set of supervised ata had to be judged by a linguist. This subset was selected 
uniformly from clauses in the corpus that had main verbs other than be and have. As 
a linguistic test for marking, each clause was tested for readability with What happened 
was . . . .  Manual labeling followed a strict set of linguistically motivated guidelines 
in order to ascertain fundamental spectual class. Modifiers that result in aspectual 
transformations, such as durativefor-PPs, and in exceptions, uch as not, were ignored. 
A comparison between human markers for this test was performed over a different 
corpus, and is reported below in Section 5.2.1. 
5 For evaluation over sets of unique verbs, see Siegel (1998b). 
610 
Siegel and McKeown Improving Aspectual Classification 
Table 9 
Indicators discriminate between states and events. 
Linguistic Indicator Stative Mean Event Mean T-test P-value 
:frequency 932.89 667.57 0.0000 
not or never 4.44% 1.56% 0.0000 
temporal adverb 1.00% 2.70% 0.0000 
no subject 36.05% 57.56% 0.0000 
past/pres participle 20.98% 15.37% 0.0005 
duration in-PP 0.16% 0.60% 0.0018 
perfect 2.27% 3.44% 0.0054 
present tense 11.19% 8.94% 0.0901 
progressive 1.79% 2.69% 0.0903 
manner adverb 0.00% 0.03% 0.1681 
evaluation adverb 0.69% 1.19% 0.1766 
past tense 62.85% 65.69% 0.2314 
duration for-PP 0.59% 0.61% 0.8402 
continuous adverb 0.04% 0.03% 0.8438 
Because of manually identified parsing problems (verb or direct object incorrectly 
identified), 373 clauses were rejected. This left 1,478 clauses, which were divided 
equally into training and testing sets of 739 clauses each. 
Figure 1 (see Section 4) shows the system overview with details regarding the 
medical discharge summary corpus used in this study. As this shows, the values for 
linguistic indicators are computed across the entire parsed corpus. This is a fully 
automatic process. Then, the 739 training examples are used to derive a mechanism, 
e.g., a decision tree, for combining multiple indicators. The combination of indicators 
achieves an increase in classification performance. This increase in performance is then 
validated over the 739 unseen test cases. 
5.1.2 Upper and Lower Bounds in Accuracy. Of clauses with main verbs other than 
be and have, 83.8% are events. Therefore, simply classifying every verb as an event 
achieves an accuracy of 83.8% over the 739 test cases. However, this approach classifies 
all state clauses incorrectly, achieving a stative recall of 0.0%. This method serves as 
a baseline for comparison, since we are attempting to improve over an uninformed 
approach. 6 
One limitation to our approach places an upper bound on classification accuracy. 
Our approach examines only the main verb, since linguistic indicators are computed 
for verbs only. For example, a verb occurring three times as an event and twice as 
a state will be misclassified at least two of the five times. This limits classification 
accuracy to a maximum of 97.4% over the test cases due to the presence of verbs with 
multiple classes. The ramifications of this limitation are explored below in Section 5.4. 
5.1.3 Individual  Indicators. The values of the 14 indicators listed in Table 9 were 
computed, for each verb, across the 97,973 parsed clauses from our corpus of medical 
discharge summaries. As described in Section 3, each indicator has a unique value for 
each verb, which corresponds to the frequency of the aspectual marker with the verb 
(except verb frequency,  which is an absolute measure over the corpus). 
6 Similar baselines for comparison have been used for many classification problems (Duda and Hart 
1973), e.g., part-of-speech tagging (Church 1988; Allen 1995). 
611 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 4 
The second and third columns of Table 9 show the average value for each indicator 
over stative and event clauses, as measured over the training examples (which exclude 
be and have). These values are computed solely over the 739 training cases in order to 
avoid biasing the classification experiments in the sections below, which are evaluated 
over the unseen test cases. For example, for the not~never indicator, stative clauses 
have an average value of 4.44%, while event clauses have an average value of 1.56%. 
This makes sense, since diagnoses are often ruled out in medical discharge summaries, 
e.g., The patient was not hypertensive, but procedures that were not done are not usually 
mentioned, e.g., ?An examination was not performed. 
The differences in stative and event means are statistically significant (p < .01) 
for the first seven of the 14 indicators listed in Table 9. The fourth column shows 
the results of t-tests that compare indicator values over stative verbs to those over 
event verbs for each indicator. For example, there is less than a 0.05% chance that the 
differences between stative and event means for the first seven indicators listed is due 
to chance. The differences in average value for the bottom seven indicators were not 
confirmed to be significant with this small sample size (739 training examples). 
A positive correlation between indicator value and verb class does not necessarily 
mean an indicator can be used to increase classification accuracy over the baseline 
of 83.8%. This is because of the dominance of events among the testing examples; 
a threshold to distinguish verbs that correctly classifies more than half of each class 
will have an accuracy lower than the baseline if the number of states correctly clas- 
sified is less than the number of events misclassified. To examine this, each indica- 
tor was tested individually for its ability to improve classification accuracy over the 
baseline by establishing the best classification threshold over the training data. The 
performance of each indicator was validated over the testing data using the same 
threshold. 
Only the frequency indicator succeeded in significantly improving classification 
accuracy. Both frequency and occurrences with not or never improved classification 
accuracy on the training data over the baseline obtained by classifying all clauses 
as events. To validate this improved accuracy, the thresholds established over the 
training set were used over the test set, with resulting accuracies of 88.0% and 84.0%, 
respectively. Binomial tests show the first of these, but not the second, to be a significant 
improvement over the baseline of 83.8%. 
This improvement in accuracy was achieved simply by discriminating the pop- 
ular verb show as a state, but classifying all other verbs as events. Although many 
domains may primarily use show as an event, in its appearances in medical discharge 
smnmaries, such as His lumbar puncture showed evidence of white cells, show primarily 
denotes a state. This observation illustrates the importance of empirical techniques for 
lexical knowledge acquisition. 
5.1.4 Indicators Combined with Learning. All three machine learning methods uc- 
cessfully combined indicator values, improving classification accuracy over the base- 
line measure. As shown in Table 10, the decision tree's accuracy was 93.9%, GP's func- 
tion trees had an average accuracy of 91.2% over seven runs, and logistic regression 
achieved an 86.7% accuracy (Baseline 2 is discussed below in Section 5.4). Binomial 
tests showed that both the decision tree and GP achieved a significant improvement 
over the 88.0% accuracy achieved by the frequency indicator alone. These results 
show that machine learning methods can successfully combine multiple numerical 
indicators to improve verb classification accuracy. 
The increase in the number of stative clauses correctly classified, i.e., stative recall, 
illustrates an even greater improvement over the baseline. As shown in Table 10, stative 
612 
Siegel and McKeown Improving Aspectual Classification 
Table 10 
Comparison of three learning methods, optimizing for accuracy, and two performance 
baselines, distinguishing states from events. 
Overall Accuracy States Events 
Recall Precision Recall Precision 
Decision tree 93.9% 74.2% 86.4% 97.7% 95.1% 
GP (7 runs) 91.2% 47.4% 97.3% 99.7% 90.7% 
Logistic 86.7% 34.2% 68.3% 96.9% 88.4% 
Baseline 1 83.8% 0.0% 100.0% 100.0% 83.8% 
Baseline 2 94.5% 69.2% 95.4% 99.4% 94.3% 
Table 11 
Comparing training and test performance on three learning methods, distinguishing states 
from events. 
Training Accuracy Testing Accuracy 
Decision tree 96.3% 93.9% 
GP 93.4% 91.2% 
Logistic 88.8% 86.7% 
Baseline 85.8% 83.8% 
recalls of 74.2%, 47.4%, and 34.2% were achieved by the three learning methods, as 
compared to the 0.0% stative recall achieved by Baseline 1, while only a small loss 
in recall over event clauses was suffered. The baseline does not classify any stative 
clauses correctly because it classifies all clauses as events. This difference in recall is 
more dramatic than the accuracy improvement because of the dominance of event 
clauses in the test set. 
Overfitting was moderate for each of the three supervised learning algorithms. 
As shown in Table 11, each learning method's performance over the training data 
was about two points higher than that over the test data. This corresponds to a two- 
point difference in baseline performance, which is due to a higher proportion of event 
clauses in the training data. 
The thresholds established to discriminate the outputs of GP's function trees gener- 
alize well to unseen data. When inducing these function trees with the GA, the training 
set is used to form the tree, and to select a threshold that best discriminates between 
verbs of the different classes. There is the potential that a threshold determined over 
the training cases will not generalize well when evaluated over the test cases. To test 
this, for each of the seven function trees generated by the GA to distinguish between 
states and events, the best threshold was selected over the test cases. For five of the 
function trees, there was no threshold that increased classification accuracy beyond 
that attained by the threshold established over the training cases. For the other two, 
a threshold was found that allowed for one more of the 739 test cases to be correctly 
classified. 
In the remainder of this section, we compare the resulting models of the three 
supervised learning method and contrast he ways in which they combine indicators. 
Logistic Regression. Logistic regression successfully combined the 14 linguistic indi- 
cators, achieving an accuracy of 86.7%, as shown in Table 10. This is a significant 
improvement over the baseline accuracy of 83.8%, as measured with a binomial test. 
Furthermore, a stative recall of 34.2% was achieved. 
613 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 4 
Table 12 
Weights produced by logistic regression to distinguish between stative and event verbs. 
Linguistic Indicator Logistic Weight T-test P-value 
manner adverb 11.04744 0.1681 
duration in-PP 0.06209624 0.0018 
continuous adverb - 0.04168417 0.8438 
temporal adverb 0.02127572 0.0000 
not or never 0.01714499 0.0000 
durationfor-PP - 0.01019155 0.8402 
perfect 0.009528091 0.0054 
past/pres participle 0.006981148 0.0005 
evaluation adverb 0.005695407 0.1766 
no subject 0.002742867 0.0000 
past tense 0.002586572 0.2314 
present tense 0.002409898 0.0901 
frequency - 0.001264895 0.0000 
not progressive - 0.0009369231 0.0903 
The particular weighting scheme resulting from logistic regression for this data ef- 
fectively integrates a decision tree type rule, along with the usual weighting of logistic 
regression. This is illustrated in Table 12, which shows the weights automatically de- 
rived by logistic regression for each of the 14 linguistic indicators. The value assigned 
to the manner adverb indicator, 11.04744, far outweighs the other 13 weights. At first 
glance, it may appear that this weighting scheme favors the manner adverb indicator 
over all other indicators. However, as shown in Table 13, manner adverb indicator 
values are 0.0% for all verbs in the training set except he eight indicated, all of which 
denote vents. Therefore, the large weight assigned to the manner adverb indicator is 
only activated for those verbs, which are therefore ach classified as events, regardless 
of the remaining 13 indicator values. For all other verbs, the remaining 13 indicator 
values determine the classification. 
This rule cannot increase accuracy over the baseline without the remaining 13 
indicators, since it does not positively identify any states--it only identifies events, 
which are all correctly classified by the baseline. Therefore, it is only useful because 
the overall model also correctly identifies ome stative clauses. 
Genetic Programming. GP successfully combined the 14 linguistic indicators, achieving 
an average accuracy of 91.2%, as shown in Table 10. This is a significant improvement 
over the baseline accuracy of 83.8%, according to a binomial test. Furthermore, a stative 
recall of 47.4% was achieved. 
GP improved classification performance by emphasizing a different set of indica- 
tors than those emphasized by logistic modeling. Figure 3 shows an example function 
tree automatically generated by the GA, which achieved 92.7% accuracy. Note that this 
classification performance was attained with a subset of only five linguistic indicators: 
duration in-PP, progressive, not or never, past tense, and frequency. Two of these are 
ranked lowest by logistic regression: frequency and progressive. Furthermore, manner 
adverb, ranked highest by logistic regression, is not incorporated in this function tree 
at all. This may be because this indicator only applies to a small number of verbs, as 
shown in Table 13, and because an/f-rule such as that captured by logistic regression is
difficult o encode with a function tree with no conditional functions. Overall, we can 
conclude that multiple proper subsets of linguistic indicators are useful for aspectual 
classification if combined with the correct model. 
614 
Siegel and McKeown Improving Aspectual Classification 
(/ (+ (+ (* (/ DurationInPP (+ Progressive (+ NotNever NotNever))) (+ 
Progressive 75)) (/ (* (+ Progressive PastTense) Progressive) 
NegFrequency)) NotNever) DurationInPP) 
Figure 3 
Example function tree designed by a genetic algorithm to distinguish between stative and 
event verbs, achieving 92.7% accuracy. 
Table 13 
Linguistic rule discovered by logistic regression. 
If frequency with verbs this Frequency in then 
manner adverbs is ... applies to: Training Set classify as: 
> 0.0% adjust 1 Event 
continue 16 
decline 2 
decrease 4 
improve 5 
increase 4 
progress 2 
resolve 7 
0.0% all other verbs 699 depending on other 13 indicators 
Decision Tree Induction. Decision tree induction successfully combined the 14 linguistic 
indicators, achieving the highest accuracy of the three supervised learning algorithms 
tested, 93.9%, as shown in Table 10. This is a significant improvement over the baseline 
accuracy of 83.8%, as measured with a binomial test. Furthermore, a stative recall of 
74.2% was achieved. The top portion of the tree created with recursive partitioning 
is shown in Figure 2 (in Section 4.2, where it is explained). Note that the root node 
simply distinguishes the stative verb show with the frequency indicator, as described 
in Section 5.1.3. 
To achieve this increase in classification performance, the decision tree divided the 
training cases into relatively small partitions of verbs. Table 14 shows the distribution 
of training case verbs examined by the highlighted tree node in Figure 2. As seen 
by tracing the path from the root to the highlighted node, these are the verbs with 
frequency less than 2,013 across the corpus, and modified by not or never at least 3.48% 
of the time. From this subset, the highlighted node distinguishes the three verbs with 
frequency at least 314, shown in capitals in Table 14, as states. This is correct for all 
19 instances of these three verbs, and does not misclassify any event verbs. 
This example illustrates a benefit of distinguishing verbs based on indicator values 
computed over large corpora. Most of the verbs in Table 14 appear in the training 
set a small number of times, so it would be difficult for a classification system to 
generate rules that apply to these individual verbs. Rather, since our system draws 
generalizations over the indicator values of verbs, it identifies tative verbs without 
misclassifying any of the event verbs shown. 
Classification performance is equally competitive without he frequency indicator. 
Since frequency is the only indicator that can increase accuracy by itself, and since it is 
the first discriminator f the decision tree, it may appear that :frequency highly dom- 
inates the set of indicators. This could be problematic, since the relationship between 
verb frequency and verb category may be particularly domain dependent, in which 
case frequency could be less informative when applied to other domains. However, 
when decision tree induction was employed to combine only the 13 indicators other 
615 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 4 
Table 14 
Verb distribution in the partition of training examples orted to the decision tree node 
highlighted in Figure 2. The three stative verbs shown in capitals are distinguished at this 
node, with no event verbs misclassified. 
Events :  
get 3 talk 1 persue 1 drive 1 
transfuse 2 suggest 1 provide 1 drink 1 
respond 2 subside 1 pass 1 document 1 
lose 2 sleep 1 notice 1 detect 1 
live 2 retract 1 load 1 change 1 
interfere 2 repair 1 limit 1 achieve 1 
breathe 2 relieve 1 lift 1 regain 1 
visualize 1 recognize 1 help 1 
tell 1 radiate 1 explain 1 
States: 
FEEL 12 associate 3 want 1 
know 4 remember 2 support 1 
APPEAR 4 believe 2 indicate 1 
REQUIRE 3 accompany 2 desire 1 
concern 1 
account 1 
Table 15 
Indicators discriminate between culminated and nonculminated vents. 
Linguistic Indicator Culminated Mean Nonculminated Mean T-test P-value 
perfect 7.87% 2.88% 0.0000 
temporal adverb 5.60% 3.41% 0.0000 
manner adverb 0.19% 0.61% 0.0008 
progressive 3.02% 5.03% 0.0031 
past/pres participle 14.03% 17.98% 0.0080 
no subject 30.77% 26.55% 0.0241 
duration in-PP 0.27% 0.06% 0.0626 
present tense 17.18% 14.29% 0.0757 
duration for-PP 0.34% 0.49% 0.1756 
continuous adverb 0.10% 0.49% 0.2563 
:frequency 345.86 286.55 0.5652 
not or never 3.41% 3.15% 0.6164 
evaluation adverb 0.46% 0.39% 0.7063 
past tense 53.62% 54.36% 0.7132 
than frequency, the resulting decision tree achieved 92.4% accuracy and 77.5% stative 
recall. Therefore, our results are not entirely dependent on the f requency indicator. 
5.2 Culminated versus Noncu lminated  Events 
In medical discharge summaries, nonculminated event clauses are rare. Therefore, 
our experiments for classification according to completedness are performed across a 
corpus of 10 novels, comprising 846,913 words. These novels were parsed with the 
English Slot Grammar, resulting in 75,289 clauses that were parsed fully, with no self- 
diagnostic errors. The values of the 14 indicators listed in Table 15 were computed, 
for each verb, across the parsed clauses. Note that in this section, the perfect indicator 
differs in that we ignore occurrences of the perfect in clauses that are also in the 
progressive, since any progressive clause can appear in the perfect, e.g., I have been 
painting. 
616 
Siegel and McKeown Improving Aspectual Classification 
5.2.1 Manual Marking for Supervised Data. To evaluate the performance of our sys- 
tem, we manually marked 884 clauses from the parsed corpus according to their aspec- 
tual class. These 884 were selected evenly across the corpus from parsed clauses that 
do not have be as the main verb, since we are testing a distinction between events. 
Of these, 109 were rejected because of manually identified parsing problems (verb 
or direct object incorrectly identified), and 160 were rejected because they described 
states. This left 615 event clauses over which to evaluate classification performance. 
The division into training and test sets was derived such that the distribution of classes 
was equal between the two sets. This precaution was taken because preliminary ex- 
periments indicated ifficulty in demonstrating a significant increase in classification 
accuracy for completedness. This process resulted in 307 training cases (196 culmi- 
nated) and 308 test cases (195 culminated). Since 63.3% of test cases are culminated 
events, simply classifying every clause as culminated achieves an accuracy of 63.3% 
over the 308 test cases (Baseline 1A). This method serves as a baseline for compari- 
son. 
We used linguistic tests that were selected for this task by Passonneau (1988) from 
the constraints and entailments listed in Tables 2 and 3. First, the clause was tested for 
stativity with What happened was . . . .  Then, as an additional check, we tested with the 
following rule: if a clause can be read in a pseudocleft, i  is an event, e.g., What itsparents 
did was run off, versus *What we did was know what is on the other side. Second, if a clause 
in the past progressive necessarily entails the past tense reading, the clause describes 
a nonculminated event. For example, We were talking just like men (nonculminated) 
entails that We talked just like men, but The woman was building a house (culminated) does 
not necessarily entail that The woman built a house. The guidelines described above in 
Section 5.1 were used in order to test for fundamental spectual class. 
Cross-checking between linguists shows high agreement. In particular, in a pilot 
study manually annotating 89 clauses from the corpus of novels, two linguists agreed 
81 times (i.e., 91%). Informal analysis suggests the remaining disagreement could be 
further divided in half by a few simple refinements of the annotation protocol. Fur- 
thermore, of 57 clauses agreed to be events, 46 were annotated in agreement with 
respect o completedness. 
The verb say, which is a frequent point, i.e., nonculminated and nonextended, 
poses a challenge for manual marking. Points are misclassified by the test for com- 
pletedness described above since they are nonextended and therefore cannot be placed 
in the progressive. Therefore, say, which occurs nine times in the test set, was marked 
incorrectly as culminated. After some initial experimentation, we switched the class 
of each occurrence of say in our supervised ata to nonculminated. This change to say 
made the class distribution slightly uneven between training and test data. 
5.2.2 Individual Indicators. The second and third columns of Table 15 show the av- 
erage value for each indicator over culminated and nonculminated event clauses, as 
measured over the training examples. For example, for the perfect ense indicator, cul- 
minated clauses have an average value of 7.87%, while nonculminated clauses have 
an average value of 2.88%. These values were computed solely over the 307 training 
cases in order to avoid biasing the classification experiments in the sections below, 
which are evaluated over the unseen cases. 
The differences in culminated and nonculminated means are statistically significant 
(p < .05) for the first six of the 14 indicators listed in Table 15. The fourth column shows 
the results of t-tests that compare indicator values over culminated verbs to those over 
nonculminated verbs. For example, there is less than a 0.05% chance that the differences 
between culminated and nonculminated means for the first six indicators listed is due 
617 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 4 
Table 16 
Comparison of four learning methods, optimized for accuracy, and three performance 
baselines distinguishing culminated from nonculminated vents. 
Overall Accuracy Culminated Nonculminated 
Recall Precision Recall Precision 
CART 74.0% 86.2% 76.0% 53.1% 69.0% 
Logistic 70.5% 83.1% 73.6% 48.7% 62.5% 
Logistic 2 67.2% 81.5% 71.0% 42.5% 57.1% 
GP (4 runs) 68.6% 77.3% 74.2% 53.6% 57.8% 
Decision tree 68.5% 86.2% 70.6% 38.1% 61.4% 
Baseline 1A 63.3% 100.0% 63.3% 0.0% 100.0% 
Baseline 1B 49.0% 46.4% 63.3% 53.6% 36.7% 
Baseline 2 70.8% 94.9% 69.8% 29.2% 76.7% 
to chance. The differences in average value for the bottom eight indicators were not 
confirmed to be significant with this small sample size (307 training examples). 
For completedness, no individual indicator used in isolation was shown to signif- 
icantly improve classification accuracy over the baseline. 
5.2.3 Indicators Combined  wi th  Learning. When distinguishing according to com- 
pletedness, both CART and logistic regression successfully combined indicator values, 
improving classification accuracy over the baseline measure. As shown in Table 16, 
classification accuracies were 74.0% and 70.5%, respectively. A binomial test showed 
each to be a significant improvement over the 63.3% accuracy achieved by Baseline 1A. 
Although the accuracies attained by GP and decision tree induction, 68.6% and 68.5% 
respectively, are also higher than that of Baseline 1A, based on a binomial test this is 
not significant. However, this may be due to our small test sample size. 
The increase in the number of nonculminated clauses correctly classified, i.e., non- 
culminated recall, illustrates a greater improvement over the baseline. As detailed in 
Table 16, nonculminated recalls of 53.1%, 48.7%, 53.6%, and 38.1% were achieved by the 
learning methods, as compared to the 0.0% nonculminated recall achieved by Baseline 
1A. Baseline 1A does not classify any nonculminated clauses correctly because it clas- 
sifies all clauses as events. This difference in recall is more dramatic than the accuracy 
improvement because of the dominance of culminated clauses in the test set. Note that 
it is possible for an uninformed approach to achieve the same nonculminated recall 
as GP, 53.6%, by arbitrarily classifying 53.6% of all clauses as nonculminated, and the 
rest as culminated. However, as shown in Table 16, the average performance of such 
a method (Baseline 1B) loses in comparison to GP, for example, in overall accuracy 
(49.0%) and nonculminated precision (36.7%). 
All three supervised learning methods highly prioritized the perfect indicator. 
The induced decision tree uses the perfect indicator as its first discriminator, logistic 
regression ranked the perfect indicator as fourth out of 14 (see Table 17), and one 
function tree created by GP includes the perfect indicator as one of five indicators used 
together to increase classification performance (see Figure 4). Furthermore, asshown in 
Table 15, the perfect indicator tied with the temporal adverb indicator as most highly 
correlated with completedness, according to t-test results. This is consistent with the 
fact that, as discussed in Section 2.1, the perfect indicator is strongly connected to 
completedness on a linguistic basis. 
GP maintained classification performance while emphasizing a different set of 
indicators than those emphasized by logistic regression. Figure 4 shows an example 
618 
Siegel and McKeown Improving Aspectual Classification 
Table 17 
Weights produced by logistic regression to distinguish between culminated and 
nonculminated verbs. Contrast with Table 12. 
Linguistic Indicator Logistic Weight T-test P-value 
duration in-PP -0.1207664 0.0626 
manner adverb 0.03808262 0.0008 
evaluation adverb 0.03212381 0.7063 
perfect -0.02304221 0.0000 
temporal adverb -0.01643347 0.0000 
not or never -0.01212703 0.6164 
not progressive -0.01059269 0.0031 
no subject -0.006891114 0.0241 
past/pres participle -0.004127672 0.0080 
past tense 0.002484739 0.7132 
present tense 0.00218274 0.0757 
continuous adverb -0.001775534 0.2563 
duration for-PP 0.0001747421 0.1756 
frequency -0.0000916167 0.5652 
(+ (- (- (+ (/ NoSubject Frequency) TemporalAdv) (- 83 Perfect)) (/ (/ 
NoSubject Frequency) Frequency)) (- (+ NotProgressive NotProgressive) (- 
60 Perfect))) 
Figure 4 
Example function tree designed by a genetic algorithm to distinguish between culminated and 
nonculminated verbs, achieving 69.2% accuracy and 62.8% nonculminated recall. 
function tree automatically generated by GP, which achieved 69.2% accuracy. Note 
that, as for stativity, this classification performance was attained with a subset of 
only five linguistic indicators: no subject, frequency, temporal adverb, perfect, and 
not progressive. (However, only two of these appeared in the example function tree 
for stativity shown in Figure 2: frequency and progressive.) Since multiple proper 
subsets of indicators succeed in improving classification accuracy, this shows that 
some indicators are mutually correlated. 
5.3 Comparing Learning Results Across Classification Tasks 
As shown above, learning methods uccessfully produced models that were special- 
ized for the classification task. In particular, the same set of 14 indicators were com- 
bined in different ways, successfully improving classification performance for both 
stativity and completedness, and revealing linguistic insights for each. 
However, it is difficult to determine which learning method is the best for verb 
classification in general, since their relative ranks differ across classification task and 
evaluation criteria. The relative accuracies of the three supervised learning procedures 
rank in opposite orders when comparing the results in classification according to 
stativity (Table 10) to results in classification according to completedness (Table 16). 
Furthermore, when measuring classification performance as the recall of the nondom- 
inant class (stative and nonculminated, respectively), the rankings are also conflicting 
when comparing results for the two classification tasks. The difficulties in drawing 
conclusions about the relative performance of learning techniques are discussed in 
Section 4.4. 
The same two linguistic indicators were ranked in the top two positions for both 
aspectual distinctions by logistic regression. As shown in Tables 17 and 12, which give 
the weights automatically derived by logistic regression for each of the 14 linguistic 
619 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 4 
indicators, the manner adverb and duration in-PP indicators are in the top two slots for 
both weighting schemes, corresponding to the two aspectual distinctions. This may 
indicate that these two indicators are universally useful for aspectual classification, 
at least when modeling with logistic regression. However, the remaining rankings of 
linguistic indicators differ greatly between the two weighting schemes. 
5.4 Indicators versus Memorizing Verb Aspect 
In this work, clauses are classified by their main verb only. Therefore, disambiguating 
between multiple aspectual senses of the same verb is not possible, since other parts 
of the clause (e.g., verb arguments) are not available as a source of context with which 
to disambiguate. Thus, the improvement in accuracy attained reveals the extent o 
which, across the corpora examined, most verbs are dominated by one sense. 
A competing baseline approach would be to simply memorize the most frequent 
aspectual category of each verb in the training set, and classify verbs in the test set 
accordingly. In this case, test verbs that did not appear in the training set would be 
classified according to majority class. However, classifying verbs and clauses according 
to numerical indicators has several important advantages over this baseline: 
? Handles rare or unlabeled verbs. The results we have shown serve to 
estimate classification performance over unseen verbs that were not 
included in the supervised training sample. Once the system has been 
trained to distinguish by indicator values, it can automatically classify 
any verb that appears in unlabeled corpora, since measuring linguistic 
indicators for a verb is fully automatic. This also applies to verbs that are 
underrepresented in the training set. For example, as discussed in 
Section 5.1.4, one node of the resulting decision tree trained to 
distinguish according to stativity identifies 19 stative test cases without 
misclassifying any of 27 event est cases with verbs that occur only one 
time each in the training set. 
? Success when training doesn't include test verbs. To test this, all test 
verbs were eliminated from the training set, and logistic regression was 
trained over this smaller set to distinguish according to completedness. 
The result is shown in Table 16 (logistic 2). Accuracy remained higher 
than Baseline 1A (Baseline 2 is not applicable), and the recall trade-off is 
felicitous. 
? Improved performance. Memorizing majority aspect does not achieve as 
high an accuracy as the linguistic indicators for completedness, nor does 
it achieve as wide a recall trade-off for both stativity and completedness. 
These results are indicated as the second baselines (Baseline 2) in 
Tables 10 and 16, respectively. 
? Classifiers output scalar values. This allows the trade-off between recall 
and precision to be selected for particular applications by selecting the 
classification threshold. For example, in a separate study, optimizing for 
F-measure resulted in a more dramatic trade-off in recall values as 
compared to those attained when optimizing for accuracy (Siegel 1998b). 
Moreover, such scalar values can provide input to systems that perform 
reasoning on fuzzy or uncertainty knowledge. 
? Expandable framework. One form of expansion is that additional 
indicators can be integrated by measuring the frequencies of additional 
620 
Siegel and McKeown Improving Aspectual Classification 
aspectual markers. Furthermore, indicators measured over multiple 
clausal constituents (e.g., main verb-object pairs) alleviate verb ambiguity 
and sparsity and improve classification performance (Siegel 1998b). 
Manual analysis reveals linguistic insights. As summarized below in 
Section 9, our analysis reveals linguistic insights that can be used to 
inform future work. 
6. Unsupervised Learning 
Unsupervised methods for clustering words have been developed that do not require 
manually marked examples (Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown 1993; Schfitze 1992). 
These methods automatically determine the number of groups and the number of 
verbs in each group. 
This section evaluates an approach to clustering verbs developed and implemented 
by Hatzivassiloglou, based on previous work for semantically clustering adjectives 
(Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown 1993; Hatzivassiloglou 1997). This system automat- 
ically places verbs into semantically related groups based on the distribution of co- 
occurring direct objects. Such a system avoids the need for a set of manually marked 
examples for the training process. Manual marking is time consuming and domain de- 
pendent, requires linguistic expertise, and must be repeated on a corpus representing 
each new domain. 
The clustering approach differs from our approach combining linguistic indicators 
in two significant ways. First, the method semantically groups words in a general 
sense--qt is not designed or intended to group words according to any particular 
semantic distinction such as stativity or completedness. Second, this method measures 
a co-occurrence r lation not embodied by any of the 14 linguistic indicators presented 
in this article: the direct object. Note, however, that there are several advantages to 
linguistic indicators that measure the frequency of linguistic phenomena such as the 
progressive over measuring the frequencies of open-class words (Siegel 1998b). 
The clustering algorithm was evaluated over the corpus of novels, which, as shown 
in Table 7, has 75,289 parsed clauses. Clauses were eliminated from this set if they had 
no direct object, or if the direct object was a clause, a proper noun, or a pronoun, or 
was misspelled. This left 14,038 distinct verb-object pairs of varying frequencies. 
Because the direct object is an open-class category (noun), occurrences of any 
particular verb-object pair are sparse as compared to the markers measured by the 
linguistic indicators. For example, make dinner occurs only once among the parsed 
clauses from the corpus of novels, but make occurs 34 times in the progressive. For 
this reason, the clustering algorithm was evaluated over a set of frequent verbs only: 
56 verbs occurred more than 50 times each in the set of verb-object pairs. Of these, 
the 19 shown in Figure 5 were selected as an evaluation set because of the natural 
semantic groups they fall into. The groupings hown, which do not pay heed to as- 
pectual classification i  particular, were established manually, but are not used by the 
automatic grouping algorithm. 
Figure 6 shows the output of the unsupervised system. Seven groups were created, 
each with two to four verbs. The grouping algorithm used by this system is designed 
for data that is not as sparse with respect o the frequencies of verb-object pairs, 
e.g., data from a larger corpus. Thus, this partition is not representative of the full 
power of the approach, and a larger amount of data could improve it significantly. For 
more detail on the clustering algorithm and further results see Hatzivassiloglou and 
McKeown (1993) and Hatzivassiloglou (1997). 
621 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 4 
1. sell(27) buy(20) acquire(8) 
2. push(28) pull(45) 
3. raise(68) lower(24) 
4. leave(160) enter(78) 
5. know(164) forget(50) learn(51) 
6. love(18) hate(16) like(ll2) 
7. want(60) need(69) require(57) demand(15) 
Figure 5 
The set of verbs manually selected for evaluating unsupervised clustering, with frequencies 
shown. The grouping shown here was established manually. 
I. *hate *like pull 
2. lower raise 
3. demand *know *love *want 
4. buy sell 
5. enter forget learn 
6. acquire *need *require 
7. leave push 
Figure 6 
Verb groupings created automatically by an unsupervised learning algorithm developed and 
implemented by Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown (1993) and Hatzivassiloglou (1997) applied 
over the corpus of 10 novels. Stative verbs are shown with an asterisk, and event verbs 
without. 
The algorithm clearly discriminated event verbs from stative verbs. 7 In Figure 6, 
stative verbs are shown with an asterisk; event verbs are shown without. Three of the 
groups are dominated by stative verbs, and the other four groups are composed en- 
tirely of event verbs. Each stative verb is found in a group with 70.2% states, averaged 
across the 7 stative verbs, and each event verb is found in a group with 82.6% events, 
averaged across the 12 event verbs. This is an improvement  over an uninformed base- 
line system that randomly creates groups of two or more verbs each, which would 
achieve average precisions of 63.2% and 36.8%, respectively. 
We can draw two important conclusions from this result. First, unsupervised learn- 
ing is a viable approach for classifying verbs according to particular semantic distinc- 
tions such as stativity. Second, co-occurrence distributions between the verb and direct 
7 The algorithm also grouped verbs according to semantic relatedness in general, as can be seen by 
comparing the manual and automatic groupings. Further analysis of such results are given by 
Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown (1993). 
622 
Siegel and McKeown Improving Aspectual Classification 
object inform the aspectual classification of verbs. This is an additional source of in- 
formation beyond the 14 linguistic indicators we combine with supervised learning. 
7. Related Work 
The aspectual classification of a clause has thus far been primarily approached from a 
knowledge-based perspective. For example, Pustejovsky's generative l xicon describes 
semantic interactions between clausal constituents hat effect aspectual class (Puste- 
jovsky 1991). Additionally, Resnik (1996) demonstrates the influence of implicit direct 
objects on aspectual classification. 
The application of automatic orpus-based techniques to aspectual classification 
is in its infancy. Klavans and Chodorow (1992) pioneered the application of statistical 
corpus analysis to aspectual classification by placing verbs on a scale according to the 
frequency with which they occur with certain aspectual markers from Table 2. This 
way, verbs are automatically ranked according to their "degree of stativity." 
Machine learning has become instrumental in the development of robust natural 
language understanding systems in general (Cardie and Mooney 1999). For example, 
decision tree induction has been applied to word sense disambiguation (Black 1988), 
determiner prediction (Knight et al 1995), coordination parsing (Resnik 1993), syn- 
tactic parsing (Magerman 1993), and disambiguating clue phrases (Siegel 1994; Siegel 
and McKeown 1994; Litman 1994). An overview of psycholinguistic ssues behind 
learning for natural language problems in particular is given by Powers and Turk 
(1989). Models resulting from machine induction have beeen manually inspected to 
discover linguistic insights for disambiguating clue words (Siegel and McKeown 1994). 
However, machine learning techniques have not previously been applied to aspectual 
disambiguation. 
Previous efforts have applied machine induction methods to coordinate corpus- 
based linguistic indicators in particular, for example, to classify adjectives according 
to markedness (Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown 1995), to perform accent restoration 
(Yarowsky 1994), for sense disambiguation problems (Luk 1995), and for the automatic 
identification of semantically related groups of words (Pereira, Tishby, and Lee 1993; 
Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown 1993; Schi.itze 1992). 
8. Future Work 
Parallel bilingual corpora are potential sources of supervised examples for training 
and testing aspectual classification systems. For example, since many languages have 
explicit markings corresponding to completedness (as described in Section 2.6), the 
category of a clause can be determined by its translation. 
Additional machine learning methods hould be evaluated for combining linguis- 
tic indicators. For example, neural networks are especially suited for combining nu- 
merical inputs, and Naive Bayes models are especially suited for additive concepts. 
Also, iteratively refining the model (e.g., for logistic regression) may be an important 
way to eliminate indicators that do not help for a particular classification problem and 
to eliminate redundancy between indicators that correlate highly with one another. 
Machine learning techniques may be able to automatically determine how best to 
measure linguistic indicators, if trained over a large supervised sample. For example, 
previous work has measured indicators by applying a symbolic expression induced by 
GP to a subset of clauses in a corpus (Siegel and McKeown 1996). This way, interactions 
between markers in a clause can be automatically measured. In principle, machine 
learning techniques could further generalize these methods by automatically inducing 
623 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 4 
an algorithm that scans a corpus dynamically, depending on what it sees as it processes 
clauses. This could automatically select relevant markers as well as relevant portions 
of the corpus for a particular input clause. 
9. Conclusions 
While individual inguistic indicators have predictive value, they are predictively in- 
complete. Such incompleteness i  due to sparsity and noise when computing indicator 
values over a corpus of limited size, and is also a consequence of the linguistic behav- 
ior of certain indicators. However, incomplete indicators can complement one another 
when placed in combination. 
Machine learning has served to illustrate the potential of 14 linguistic indicators 
by showing that they perform well in combination for two aspectual classification 
problems. This potential was not clear when evaluating indicators individually. For 
stativity, decision tree induction achieved an accuracy of 93.9%, as compared to the 
uninformed baseline's accuracy of 83.8%. Furthermore, GP and logistic regression also 
achieved improvements over the baseline. For completedness, CART and logistic re- 
gression achieved accuracies of 74.0% and 70.5%, as compared to the uninformed 
baseline's accuracy of 63.3%. These improvements in classification performance are 
more dramatically illustrated by favorable trade-offs between recall scores achieved 
for both classification problems. Such results are profitable for tasks that weigh the 
identification of the less frequent class more heavily. 
This evaluation was performed over unrestricted sets of verbs occurring across 
two corpora. The system can automatically classify all verbs appearing in a corpus, 
including those that have not been manually classified for supervised training data. 
Therefore, we have demonstrated a much-needed full-scale method for aspectual clas- 
sification that is readily expandable. Since minimal overfitting was demonstrated with 
only a small quantity of manually supervised ata required, this approach is easily 
portable to other domains, languages, and semantic distinctions. 
The results of learning are linguistically viable in two respects. First, learning au- 
tomatically produces models that are specialized for different aspectual distinctions; 
the same set of 14 indicators are combined in different ways according to which clas- 
sification problem is targeted. Second, automatic learning often derives linguistically 
informative insights. We have shown several such insights revealed by inspecting the 
models produced by learning, which are summarized here: 
? Examining the logistic regression model for classification according to 
stativity revealed a decision tree type of rule incorporated with the 
normal weighting scheme. 
? Verb frequency distinguishes stative verbs within multiple subsets of 
verbs. When applied to all verbs in a medical corpus, it identifies 
occurrences of show. Furthermore, examining an example node of the 
decision tree that distinguishes according to stativity revealed that verb 
frequency discriminates 19 stative clauses with 100.0% precision from the 
node's partition of 60 training cases. 
? Several proper subsets of the linguistic indicators prove independently 
useful for aspectual classification when combined with an appropriate 
model. This is illustrated by the fact that certain models reveal 
combinations of small sets of indicators that improved classification 
performance. For example, GP results for both classification tasks 
624 
Siegel and McKeown Improving Aspectual Classification 
incorporated a subset of only five indicators each. In particular, manner 
adverb, which ranked highest by logistic regression, is not incorporated 
in the example function tree induced by GP. This may be because this 
indicator only applies to a small number of verbs, as shown in Table 13, 
and because an/f-rule such as that captured by logistic regression is
difficult o encode with a function tree with no conditional primitives. 
Learning methods discovered that some indicators are particularly useful 
for both classification tasks. For example, the same two indicators were 
weighted most heavily by logistic regression for both tasks: duration 
in-PP and manner adverb. 
However, in general, learning methods emphasized different linguistic 
indicators for different classification tasks. For example, decision tree 
induction used frequency as the main discriminator to classify clauses 
according to stativity, while the perfect indicator was the main 
discriminator for classification according to completedness. 
Comparing the ability of learning methods to combine linguistic indicators is dif- 
ficult, since they rank differently depending on the classification task and evaluation 
criteria. For example, the relative accuracies of the three supervised learning proce- 
dures rank in opposite orders when comparing the results for stativity to the results 
for completedness. 
The unsupervised grouping of verbs provides an additional method for aspectual 
classification according to stativity. Co-occurrence distributions between the verb and 
direct object inform the aspectual classification of verbs. This provides information 
beyond the 14 linguistic indicators that can also be derived automatically. However, 
due to the sparsity intrinsic to pairs of open-class categories such as verb-object pairs, 
this approach was only evaluated over a small set of frequent verbs. 
Acknowledgments 
Judith Klavans was very helpful in our 
formulation of the linguistic techniques in
this work, and Alexander Chaffee, Vasileios 
Hatzivassiloglou, and Dekai Wu in the 
results evaluation methods. Vasileios 
Hatzivassiloglou designed and implemented 
the clustering of verbs described in 
Section 6. For comments on earlier drafts of 
this work, we would like to thank those 
people mentioned, as well as David Evans, 
Hongyan Jing, Min-Yen Kan, Dragomir 
Radev, and Barry Schiffman. Finally, we 
would like to thank Andy Singleton for the 
use of his GPQuick software. 
This research was supported in part by 
the Columbia University Center for 
Advanced Technology in High Performance 
Computing and Communications in 
Healthcare (funded by the New York State 
Science and Technology Foundation), the 
Office of Naval Research under contract 
N00014-95-1-0745, and the National Science 
Foundation under contract GER-90- 
24069. 
References 
Allen, Franklin and Risto Karjalainen. 1995. 
Using genetic algorithms to find technical 
trading rules. Technical Report, Rodney L. 
White Center For Financial Research. 
Allen, James. 1995. Natural Language 
Understanding. Benjamin/Cummings, 
Redwood City, CA. 
Baker, R. J. and J. A. Nelder. 1989. The GLIM 
System, Release 3: Generalized Linear 
Interactive Modeling. Numerical 
Algorithms Group, Oxford. 
Black, Ezra. 1988. An experiment in
computational discrimination ofEnglish 
word senses. IBM Journal of Research and 
Development, 2(32). 
Breiman, Leo, Jerome H. Friedman, 
Richard A. Olshen, and Charles J. Stone. 
1984. Classification and Regression Trees. 
Wadsworth, Belmont. 
Brodley, Carla E. 1996. Applying 
classification algorithms in practice. In 
Statistics and Computing. 
Cardie, Claire and Nicholas Howe. 1997. 
Improving minority class prediction using 
625 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 4 
case-specific feature weights. In D. Fisher, 
editor, Proceedings ofthe Fourteenth 
International Conference on Machine 
Learning. Morgan Kaufmann. 
Cardie, Claire and Raymond J. Mooney. 
1999. Guest editors' introduction: 
Machine learning and natural language. 
Machine Learning, 1-3(34). 
Chan, Philip K. and Sal J. Stolfo. 1993. 
Toward multistrategy parallel and 
distributed learning in sequence analysis. 
In Proceedings ofthe First International 
Conference on Intelligent Systems for 
Molecular Biology. 
Church, Ken. 1988. A stochastic parts 
program and noun phrase parser for 
unrestricted text. In Proceedings ofthe 2nd 
Conference for Applied Natural Language 
Processing, pages 136-143. 
Cohen, William W. 1995. Fast effective rule 
induction. In Proceedings ofthe 12th 
International Conference on Machine 
Learning, pages 115-123. 
Cramer, Nichael L. 1985. A representation 
for the adaptive generation of simple 
sequential programs. In J. Grefenstette, 
editor, Proceedings ofthe \[First\] International 
Conference on Genetic Algorithms. Lawrence 
Erlbaum. 
Dorr, Bonnie J. 1992. A two-level knowledge 
representation formachine translation: 
lexical semantics and tense/aspect. In 
James Pustejovsky and Sabine Bergler, 
editors, Lexical Semantics and Knowledge 
Representation. Springer Verlag, Berlin. 
Dowty, David R. 1979. Word Meaning and 
Montague Grammar. D. Reidel, Dordrecht. 
Duda, Richard O. and Peter E. Hart. 1973. 
Pattern Class~cation and Scene Analysis. 
Wiley, New York. 
Fayyad, Usama M. and Keki B. Irani. 1992. 
On the handling of continuous-valued 
attributes in decision tree generation. 
Machine Learning, 8. 
Friedman, Jerome H. 1977. A recursive 
partitioning decision rule for 
non-parametric classification. IEEE 
Transactions on Computers. 
Goldberg, David. 1989. Genetic Algorithms in 
Search, Optimization, and Machine Learning. 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 
Inc., Reading, MA. 
Hatzivassiloglou, Vasileios. 1997. Automatic 
Acquisition of Lexical Semantic Knowledge 
from Large Corpora: The Identi~cation f
Semantically Related Words, Markedness, 
Polarity, and Antonymy. Ph.D. thesis, 
Columbia University. 
Hatzivassiloglou, Vasileios and Kathleen R. 
McKeown. 1993. Towards the automatic 
identification of adjectival scales: 
clustering adjectives according to 
meaning. In Proceedings ofthe 31st Annual 
Meeting, pages 172-182, Columbus, OH, 
June. Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 
Hatzivassiloglou, Vasileios and Kathleen R. 
McKeown. 1995. A quantitative 
evaluation of linguistic tests for the 
automatic prediction of semantic 
markedness. In Proceedings ofthe 33rd 
Annual Meeting, pages 197-204, Boston, 
MA, June. Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 
Hitzeman, Janet, Marc Moens, and Claire 
Grover. 1994. Algorithms for analysing 
the temporal structure of discourse. 
Technical Report, University of 
Edinburgh. 
Holland, John. 1975. Adaptation in Natural 
and Art~cial Systems. The University of 
Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI. 
Hwang, Chung Hee and Lenhart K. 
Schubert. 1991. Interpreting temporal 
adverbials. Technical Report, University 
of Rochester. 
Klavans, Judith L. 1994. Linguistic tests over 
large corpora: aspectual classes in the 
lexicon. Technical Report, Columbia 
University Dept. of Computer Science. 
Klavans, Judith L. and Martin Chodorow. 
1992. Degrees of stativity: the lexical 
representation f verb aspect. In 
Proceedings ofthe 14th International 
Conference on Computation Linguistics. 
Knight, K., I. Chander, M. Haines, 
V. Hatzivassiloglou, E. Hovy, M. Iida, 
S. K. Luk, R. Whitney, and K. Yamada. 
1995. Filling knowledge gaps in a 
broad-coverage mtsystem. In Proceedings 
of the International Joint Conference on 
ArtiJicial Intelligence. 
Koza, John R. 1992. Genetic Programming: On 
the Programming of Computers by Means of 
Natural Selection. MIT Press, Cambridge, 
MA. 
Litman, Diane J. 1994. Classifying cue 
phrases in text and speech using machine 
learning. In Proceedings of the Twelfth 
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 
Menlo Park, CA, July. AAAI Press. 
Luk, Alpha K. 1995. Statistical sense 
disambiguation with relatively small 
corpora using dictionary definitions. In 
Proceedings ofthe 33rd Annual Meeting, 
Columbus, OH, June. Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 
Magerman, David H. 1993. Parsing as 
statistical pattern recognition. Technical 
Report, IBM. 
Masand, Brij. 1994. Optimizing confidence 
of text classification by evolution of 
626 
Siegel and McKeown Improving Aspectual Classification 
symbolic expressions. In K. Kinnear, 
editor, Advances in Genetic Programming. 
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
McCord, Michael C. 1990. SLOT 
GRAMMAR: A system for simpler 
construction of practical natural language 
grammars. In R. Studer, editor, 
International Symposium on Natural 
Language and Logic. Springer Verlag. 
Mitchell, Tom M. 1997. Machine Learning. The 
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., New York. 
Moens, Marc and Mark Steedman. 1988. 
Temporal ontology and temporal 
reference. Computational Linguistics, 14(2). 
Olsen, Mari B. and Philip Resnik. 1997. 
Implicit object constructions and the 
(in)transitivity continuum. In Proceedings 
of the 33rd Regional Meeting of the Chicago 
Linguistics Society, April. 
Passonneau, Rebecca J. 1988. A 
computational model of the semantics of 
tense and aspect. Computational 
Linguistics, 14(2). 
Pereira, Fernando, Naftali Tishby, and 
Lillian Lee. 1993. Distributional clustering 
of English words. In Proceedings ofthe 31st 
Annual Meeting, pages 183-190, 
Columbus, OH, June. Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 
Powers, David M. W. and Christopher C. R. 
Turk. 1989. Machine Learning of Natural 
Language. Springer-Verlag. 
Pustejovsky, James. 1991. The syntax of 
event structure. Cognition, 41(103):47-92. 
Pustejovsky, James. 1995. The Generative 
Lexicon. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Quinlan, Jim R. 1986. Induction of decision 
trees. Machine Learning, 1(1):81-106. 
Quinlan, Jim R. 1993. C4.5: Programs for 
Machine Learning. Morgan Kaufmann, San 
Mateo, CA. 
Resnik, Philip. 1993. Semantic lasses and 
syntactic ambiguity. In Proceedings ofthe 
ARPA Workshop on Human Language 
Technology, March. 
Resnik, Philip. 1996. Selectional constraints: 
An information-theoretic model and its 
computational realization. Cognition, (61). 
Schfitze, Hinrich. 1992. Dimensions of 
meaning. In Proceedings ofSupercomputing. 
Schubert, Lenhart K. and Chung Hee 
Hwang. 1990. Picking reference events 
from tense trees: A formal, implementable 
theory of English tense-aspect semantics. 
Technical Report, University of Rochester. 
Siegel, Eric V. 1994. Competitively evolving 
decision trees against fixed training cases 
for natural anguage processing. In 
K. Kinnear, editor, Advances in Genetic 
Programming. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Siegel, Eric V. 1997. Learning methods for 
combining linguistic indicators to classify 
verbs. In Proceedings ofthe Second 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing, Providence, RI, 
August. 
Siegel, Eric V. 1998a. Disambiguating verbs 
with the WordNet category of the direct 
object. In Proceedings ofthe Usage of 
WordNet in Natural Language Processing 
Systems Workshop, Montreal, Canada. 
Siegel, Eric V. 1998b. Linguistic Indicators for 
Language Understanding: Using Machine 
Learning Methods to Combine Corpus-based 
Indicators for Aspectual Classification of 
Clauses. Ph.D. thesis, Columbia University. 
Siegel, Eric V. 1999. Corpus-based linguistic 
indicators for aspectual classification. In
Proceedings ofthe 37th Annual Meeting. 
Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 
Siegel, Eric V. and Kathleen R. McKeown. 
1994. Emergent linguistic rules from 
inducing decision trees: disambiguating 
discourse clue words. In Proceedings ofthe 
Twelfth National Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence, Menlo Park, CA, July. AAAI 
Press. 
Siegel, Eric V. and Kathleen R. McKeown. 
1996. Gathering statistics to aspectually 
classify sentences with a genetic 
algorithm. In K. Oflazer and H. Somers, 
editors, Proceedings ofthe Second 
International Conference on New Methods in 
Language Processing, Ankara, Turkey, 
September, Bilkent University. 
Sjantner, T. J. and D. E. Duffy. 1989. The 
Statistical Analysis of Discrete Data. 
Springer-Verlag, New York. 
Stolfo, Salvatore, Andreas L. Prodromidis, 
Shelley Tselepis, Wenke Lee, and Wei Fan. 
1997. JAM: Java agents for meta-learning 
over distributed atabases. Technical 
Report, Columbia University. 
Stys, Malgorzata E. 1991. Parallel science 
texts in English and Polish: Problems of 
language and communication. Technical 
Report, Warsaw University. Master's 
thesis. 
Syswerda, Gibert. 1989. Uniform crossover 
in genetic algorithms. In J. D. Schaffer, 
editor, Proceedings ofthe Third International 
Conference on Genetic Algorithms. Morgan 
Kaufmarm. 
Tackett, Walter A. 1993. Genetic 
programming for feature discovery and 
image discrimination. In Proceedings ofthe 
Fifth International Conference on Genetic 
Algorithms, San Mateo, CA. Morgan 
Kaufmann. 
Tackett, Walter A. and Aviram Carmi. 1994. 
The donut problem: Scalability, 
627 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 4 
generalization a d breeding policies in 
genetic programming. In K. Kinnear, 
editor, Advances in Genetic Programming. 
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Vendler, Zeno. 1967. Verbs and times. In 
Linguistics in Philosophy. CorneU 
University Press, Ithaca, NY. 
Wiebe, Janyce M., Thomas P. O'Hara, 
Thorsten Ohrstr6m-Sandgren, a d 
Kenneth J. McKeever. 1997. An empirical 
approach to temporal reference resolution. 
In Proceedings ofthe Second Conference on 
Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing, Providence, RI, August. 
Wolpert, David H. 1992. Stacked 
generalization. Neural Networks, 5. 
Yarowsky, David. 1994. Decision lists for 
lexical ambiguity resolution: Application 
to accent restoration i Spanish and 
French. In Proceedings ofthe 32nd Annual 
Meeting, San Francisco, CA, June. Morgan 
Kaufmann. Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 
628 
