Columbia?s Newsblaster: New Features and Future Directions
Kathleen McKeown, Regina Barzilay, John Chen, David Elson, David Evans,
Judith Klavans, Ani Nenkova, Barry Schiffman and Sergey Sigelman
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
1214 Amsterdam Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10027
kathy@cs.columbia.edu
Abstract
Columbia?s Newsblaster tracking and summa-
rization system is a robust system that clus-
ters news into events, categorizes events into
broad topics and summarizes multiple articles
on each event. Here we outline our most cur-
rent work on tracking events over days, produc-
ing summaries that update a user on new infor-
mation about an event, outlining the perspec-
tives of news coming from different countries
and clustering and summarizing non-English
sources.
1 Introduction
Columbia?s Newsblaster1 provide news updates on a
daily basis from news published on the Internet; it crawls
news sites, categorizes stories into six broad areas, groups
news into stories on the same event, and generates a sum-
mary of the multiple articles describing each event. In ad-
dition to demonstrating the robustness of current summa-
rization and tracking technology, Newsblaster also serves
as a research environment in which we explore new di-
rections and problems. Currently, we are exploring the
tasks of multilingual summarization where input sources
are drawn frommultiple languages and a summary is gen-
erated in English on the same event (Figure 1), tracking
events across days and generating summaries that update
the user on what is new, and editing generated summaries
to improve fluency and accuracy. Our focus here is on
editing references to people, improving coherency of the
summary and ensuring that references are accurate. Edit-
ing is particularly important as we add multilingual capa-
bilities, given the errors inherent in machine translation.
1http://newsblaster.cs.columbia.edu
2 Multilingual Tracking and
Summarization
The multilingual version of Columbia Newsblaster is
built upon the English version of Columbia Newsblaster,
sharing the same structure and components. To add mul-
tilingual capability, the system first crawls web sites in
foreign languages, and stores both the language and en-
coding for the files. To extract the article text from the
HTML pages, we use a new article extraction component
using language-independent statistical features computed
over text blocks along with a machine learning compo-
nent to classify text blocks as one of ?Article Text?, ?Ti-
tle?, ?Image?, ?Image Caption?, or ?Other?. The article
extraction component has been trained and tested on En-
glish, Japanese, and Russian data, but is also being suc-
cessfully applied to French, Spanish, German, and Ital-
ian data. We plan to train the article extractor on other
languages (Chinese, Arabic, Korean, Spanish, German,
French, etc.) in the near future.
To cluster multilingual documents with English doc-
uments, we use the existing Newsblaster English doc-
ument clustering module. Non-English documents are
translated for clustering after the article extraction phase.
We use simple and fast document translation techniques
for clustering if available, since we potentially process
thousands of documents for a language for each run. We
have developed simple dictionary lookup techniques for
translation for clustering for Japanese and Russian; for
other languages we use an interface to the Systran trans-
lation system via Babelfish. We plan on adding Arabic
translation to the system in the near future.
Summarization is performed using the same summa-
rization strategies in Newsblaster. We are experimenting
with different methods for improving summary quality
when translation of text is noisy. For example, when an
input cluster contains both English and foreign sources,
we weight the English higher in cases where we deter-
mine it is representative of both the English and foreign
                                                               Edmonton, May-June 2003
                                                            Demonstrations , pp. 15-16
                                                         Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 2003
Figure 1: Multilingual Version
input documents. We are also experimenting with meth-
ods for determining similarity across documents using
different levels of translation.
3 Different Perspectives
When news media report on international issues, they re-
flect the perspectives of their own countries. In the past,
Newsblaster has included all international sources as in-
put to its summaries. Recently, we have added a feature
of ?international perspectives? to the system. In addition
to the universal summary for a particular event, which
includes all international sources, Newsblaster now gen-
erates separate summaries for each country, which may
illustrate unique biases or disagree on facts. The News-
blaster interface allows users to view any pair of sum-
maries side by side to compare different perspectives.
4 Summary Rewrite
Newsblaster also currently includes a module for rewrit-
ing summaries to achieve better readability. References
to people are rewritten so that the first mention includes
the person?s full name and a selected description and later
mentions are restricted to last name only. In addition to
improving readability, the rewritten version of the sum-
mary is usually shorter than the version before rewrite,
since multiple verbose descriptions of the same entity are
discarded. These changes can be seen when comparing
the summary sentence with the original document via a
link from the summary using a proxy.
5 Event Tracking and Updates
Newsblaster currently identifies events within a single
day; a new set of clusters is generated each day. We have
designed a new module for tracking events across days,
allowing the system to relate stories published on one day
to closely related stories on other days. In this way, the
user can more easily track events of interest as they un-
fold. The typical approach for tracking events across days
represents each event as one monolithic set of stories. We
have focused instead on a model where events on one day
can divide into related sub-events on the next day. For ex-
ample, a set of stories about the start of the Iraq war is an
event that can branch into multiple sets of stories, each set
representing a different facet of the war. We are currently
determining an appropriate evaluation of this approach as
well as investigating different possible interfaces.
If a user is tracking events across days, it is more useful
to have a summary that provides updates on what is new
as opposed to a summary of similarities across all days.
We have built a prototype update summarizer that scans
new articles extracted by the system and compares these
new articles with a background cluster on the same event.
The summarizer will provide the user with a summary of
only important new developments. As the tracking mod-
ule locates new articles, it will pass these to the update
summarizer, which will determine what, if anything, has
changed. This summarizer uses more syntactic and se-
mantic information about the articles to determine nov-
elty than is used in our other summarization strategies and
thus, efficiency is a challenge. We will demo these com-
ponents in a separately fromNewsblaster as they have not
yet been integrated in the development version.
