Proceedings of HLT/EMNLP 2005 Demonstration Abstracts, pages 10?11,
Vancouver, October 2005.
NooJ: A Linguistic Annotation System For Corpus Processing 
 
 
Max Silberztein 
LASELDI 
Universit? de Franche-Comt? 
Besan?on, 25000 France 
max.silberztein@univ-fcomte.fr 
 
1 Introduction 
NooJ is a new corpus processing system, similar 
to the INTEX software,1 and designed to replace 
it. NooJ allows users to process large sets of 
texts in real time. Users can build, accumulate 
and manage sophisticated concordances that cor-
respond to morphological and syntactic gram-
mars organized in re-usable libraries. 
 
One characteristic of NooJ is that its corpus 
processing engine uses large-coverage linguistic 
lexical and syntactic resources. This allows 
NooJ users to perform sophisticated queries that 
include any of the available morphological, lexi-
cal or syntactic properties. In comparison with  
INTEX, NooJ uses a new technology (.NET), a 
new linguistic engine, and was designed with a 
new range of applications in mind. 
2 A new software architecture 
NooJ?s architecture is based on the .NET ?Com-
ponent programming? technology, which goes a 
step beyond the Object-Oriented approach (Sil-
berztein 2004). This architecture gives it several 
advantages, including: 
 
(1) it allows NooJ to read any document that can 
be managed on the user?s computer. For in-
stance, on a typical MS-Windows computer, 
NooJ can process corpora in 100+ file formats, 
including all variants of ASCII, ISO and Uni-
code, HTML, RTF, XML, MS-WORD, etc. 
                                                          
1 Cf. (Silberztein 1999a) for a description of the INTEX 
toolbox, and (Silberztein 1999b) for a description of its 
application as a corpus processing system. See various 
INTEX WEB sites for references and information on its 
applications, workshops and communities: 
http://intex.univ-fcomte.fr and the NooJ WEB site for a 
description of NooJ: http://www.nooj4nlp.net. 
 
(2) it allows other .NET applications to access 
all NooJ?s public methods via its software com-
ponent library. For instance, a programmer can 
easily run a NooJ method to extract sequences of 
texts that match a NooJ grammar from a docu-
ment that is currently opened in the current ap-
plication (e.g. MS-WORD). 
3 A new linguistic engine  
As a corpus processing system, NooJ?s most 
important characteristic is its linguistic engine, 
which is based on an annotation system. An an-
notation is a pair (position, information) that 
states that at a certain position in the text, a se-
quence is associated with a certain piece of in-
formation. NooJ processes texts that are 
annotated; annotations are stored in each text?s 
annotation structure which is synchronized with 
the text buffer. Text annotations that are repre-
sented as XML tags can be easily imported to 
NooJ; for instance, importing the XML text: 
 
<N Hum> Mr. John Smith </N> 
 
will produce an annotated text in which the se-
quence ?Mr. John Smith? is annotated with the 
tag ?N+Hum? (annotation category ?N?; prop-
erty ?Hum?). NooJ also provides several power-
ful tools to annotate texts: 
 
-- NooJ?s morphological parser is capable of 
analyzing complex word forms, such as Hungar-
ian words and Germanic compounds, as well as 
tokenizing Asian languages. The morphological 
parser annotates complex word forms as se-
quences of annotations. For instance, the con-
tracted word form ?don?t? is associated with a 
sequence of two annotations: <do,V+Aux+PR> 
and <not,ADV+Neg>. 
10
 
-- NooJ?s lexical parser can process the inflec-
tion of large dictionaries for simple and com-
pound words. For instance, the English 
dictionary contains 100,000+ simple words and 
70,000+ compound nouns. NooJ contains large-
coverage dictionaries for Arabic, Armenian, 
Chinese, Danish, English, French,  Hungarian, 
Italian and Spanish. In general, running NooJ?s 
lexical parser results in adding multiple lexical 
annotations to a text. The annotation system can 
represent all types of lexical ambiguities, such as 
between compounds and sequences of simple 
words (e.g. ?round table?), overlapping or em-
bedded compounds (e.g. ?round table mat?), etc. 
 
-- NooJ?s local grammars are Recursive Transi-
tion Networks; they allow users to recognize 
certain sequences of texts, and to associate them 
with annotations. NooJ?s graphical editor con-
tains a dozen development tools to edit, test and 
debug local grammars, to organize them in li-
braries, and to apply them to texts, either as que-
ries or to add (or filter out) annotations. 
 
NooJ?s query system and parsers can access any 
previously inserted annotation. For instance, the 
following query includes references to word 
forms (e.g. ?mind?) as well as to two annota-
tions (written between brackets): 
 
(the + these) <N+Hum> <lose> 
their (mind + temper) 
 
<N+Hum> matches all sequences in the text that 
are associated with an ?N? annotation with prop-
erty ?Hum?; these annotations might have been 
added by NooJ?s lexical parser (e.g. for the word 
?director?), or by a local grammar used to rec-
ognize human entities (e.g. for the sequence 
?head of this company?). Similarly, <lose> 
matches all sequences of the text that are associ-
ated with an annotation whose lemma is ?lose?; 
these annotations might have been added by the 
lexical parser (for all conjugated forms of ?to 
lose?, e.g. ?lost?), or by a local grammar that 
recognizes compound tenses, e.g. ?have not yet 
lost?. When all resulting matching sequences, 
e.g. ?These men have not yet lost their mind?, 
have been indexed, they can be annotated, and 
their annotation is then instantly available either 
for other queries or for further cascaded parsing. 
 
Annotated texts can be used to build complex 
concordances, annotate or color texts, perform a 
syntactic or semantic analysis, etc. 
 
NooJ?s linguistic engine, dictionaries and 
grammars are multilingual; that should allow 
users to implement translation functionalities. 
4 Conclusion 
Although NooJ has just come out and its 
technology is quite new, it is already being used 
by several research teams in a variety of pro-
jects. See the proceedings of the ?Eight 
INTEX/NooJ workshop? at NooJ?s WEB site: 
http://www.nooj4nlp.net. 
5 Demo 
Participants will use NooJ in order to build a 
named-entity recognizer from the ground up. 
Participants will learn how to apply a simple 
query to a corpus and build its corresponding 
concordance. Then I will demonstrate the build-
ing of a local grammar with NooJ?s graphical 
editor, followed by a presentation of the organi-
zation of local grammars in re-usable libraries 
that can be shared and integrated into larger 
grammars. 
References  
Silberztein Max. 1999. INTEX: a finite-state trans-
ducer toolbox. In Theoretical Computer Science 
#233:1, pp. 33-46. 
Silberztein Max. 1999. Indexing large corpora with 
INTEX. In Computer and the Humanities #33:3. 
Silberztein Max, 2004. NooJ: an Object-Oriented 
Approach. In INTEX pour la linguistique et le trai-
tement automatique des langues. C. Muller, J. 
Royaut?, Max Silberztein eds. Cahiers de la MSH 
Ledoux, Presses Universitaires de Franche-
Comt?., pp. 359-369. 
 
11
