Towards Emotion Prediction in Spoken Tutoring Dialogues
Diane Litman
Dept. of Computer Science
LRDC, Univ. of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh PA, 15260, USA
litman@cs.pitt.edu
Kate Forbes
LRDC, Univ. of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh PA, 15260, USA
forbesk@pitt.edu
Scott Silliman
LRDC, Univ. of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh PA, 15260, USA
scotts@pitt.edu
Abstract
Human tutors detect and respond to student
emotional states, but current machine tutors do
not. Our preliminary machine learning experi-
ments involving transcription, emotion annota-
tion and automatic feature extraction from our
human-human spoken tutoring corpus indicate
that the spoken tutoring system we are devel-
oping can be enhanced to automatically predict
and adapt to student emotional states.
1 Introduction
Connections between learning and emotion are well-
documented (Coles, 1999), and studies have shown con-
siderable benefits of spoken tutoring (Hausmann and Chi,
2002). Human tutors can respond to both the content of
student speech and the manner with which it is spoken
(e.g. ?confidently? or ?uncertainly?), but most intelligent
tutoring dialogue systems are text-based and thus limited
in their ability to recognize such learning states (Rose and
Freedman, 2000; Rose and Aleven, 2002). Building spo-
ken dialogue tutoring systems has great potential benefit,
for speech is the most natural and easy to use form of
natural language interaction, and it supplies a rich source
of prosodic and acoustic information about the speaker?s
current mental state, which can be used to monitor the
pedagogical effectiveness of student-computer interac-
tions. The success of computer-based tutoring systems
could increase if they predicted and adapted to student
emotional states, e.g. reinforcing positive states, while
rectifying negative states (Evens, 2002).
Although (Ang et al, 2002; Litman et al, 2001; Bat-
liner et al, 2000) have hand-labeled naturally-occurring
utterances in a variety of corpora for various emotions,
then extracted acoustic, prosodic and lexical features and
used machine-learning techniques to develop predictive
models, little work to date has addressed emotion detec-
tion in computer-based educational settings. In this paper
we describe preliminary annotation of positive, negative,
and neutral emotions in a human-human tutoring corpus
and discuss the results of pilot machine learning experi-
ments whose goal is to develop computational models of
specific emotional states (Section 3) for use in a spoken
dialogue system (Section 2).
2 The ITSPOKE System and Corpus
We are developing a spoken dialogue system, called IT-
SPOKE (Intelligent Tutoring SPOKEn dialogue system),
which uses as its ?back-end? the text-based Why2-Atlas
dialogue tutoring system (VanLehn et al, 2002). In
Why2-Atlas, a student types an essay answering a quali-
tative physics problem and a computer tutor then engages
him/her in dialogue to provide feedback, correct mis-
conceptions, and elicit more complete explanations, after
which the student revises his/her essay, thereby ending
the tutoring or causing another round of tutoring/essay
revision. To date we have interfaced the Sphinx2 speech
recognizer with stochastic language models trained from
example user utterances, and the Festival speech synthe-
sizer for text-to-speech, to the Why2-Atlas back-end, and
are adapting the knowledge sources needed by the spoken
language components; e.g. we have developed a set of
dialogue-dependent language models using 4551 student
utterances from the Why2-Atlas 2002 human-computer
typed corpus and will enhance them using student utter-
ances from our human-human spoken corpus.
Our human-human spoken corpus contains spoken dia-
logues collected via a web interface supplemented with a
high quality audio link, where a human tutor performs the
same task as ITSPOKE and Why2-Atlas. Our subjects
are U. Pittsburgh students who have taken no college level
physics and are native speakers of (Amer.) English. Our
experimental procedure, taking roughly 7 hours/student
over 1-2 sessions, is as follows: students 1) take a pretest
measuring their physics knowledge, 2) read a small doc-
ument of background material, 3) use the web and voice
interface to work through up to 10 training problems with
the human tutor, and 4) take a post-test similar to the
pretest. We have to date collected 63 dialogues (1290
minutes of speech from 4 females and 4 males) and tran-
scribed 20 of them. A corpus example is shown in Fig-
ure 1, containing the problem, the student?s essay, and an
annotated excerpt from the subsequent dialogue.
PROBLEM: If a car is able to accelerate at 2 m/s2, what accel-
eration can it attain if it is towing another car of equal mass?
ORIGINAL ESSAY: If the car is towing another car of equal
mass, the maximum acceleration would be the same because
the car would be towed behind and the friction caused would
only be by the front of the first car.
. . . dialogue excerpt at 6.5 minutes into session . . .
TUTOR: Now this law that force is equal to mass times accel-
eration, what?s this law called? This is uh since this it is a very
important basic uh fact uh it is it is a law of physics. Um you
have you have read it in the background material. Can you re-
call it?
STUDENT: Um no it was one of Newton?s laws but I don?t
remember which one. (laugh) (EMOTION=NEGATIVE)
TUTOR: Right, right, that is Newton?s second law of motion.
STUDENT: Ok, because I remember one, two, and three,
but I didn?t know if there was a different name (EMO-
TION=POSITIVE)
TUTOR: Yeah that?s right. You know Newton was a genius and
uh he looked at a large number of experiments and experimen-
tal data that was available and from that he could come to this
general law...
STUDENT: mm-hm (EMOTION=NEUTRAL)
Figure 1: Human-Human Spoken Corpus Example
3 Predicting Emotional Speech
For this pilot study, we annotated 14 transcribed dia-
logues from 7 students, 2 dialogues per student. First,
turn boundaries were manually annotated (based on con-
sensus labelings from two coders). Each turn was
then manually annotated for speaker affect (by a sin-
gle coder) using three general categorizations: negative
(e.g.?uncertain?, ?frustration?), positive (e.g. ?confident?,
?certain?), or neutral/indeterminate, as shown in Figure 1.
Table 1 shows the distribution of our labeled turns.
neutral positive negative total
248 167 141 553
Table 1: Labeled Turn Counts: ITSPOKE Pilot Corpus
We next conducted experiments using the RIPPER (Co-
hen, 1996) rule induction machine learning program,
which takes as input the classes to be learned (e.g. our
emotion annotations), the names and possible values in
a feature set (discussed below), and training examples,
each specifying its class and feature values (e.g. the la-
beled student turns in our pilot corpus), then outputs a
classification model for classifying future examples, ex-
pressed as an ordered set of if-then rules. RIPPER?s ?set-
valued? features allow us to represent the speech recog-
nizer?s best hypothesis and/or the turn transcription as a
set of words, and its rule output is an intuitive way to gain
insight into our data.
For our first pilot machine learning experiment, our
feature set consisted of SUBJECT ID and PROBLEM ID,
both representing system state, TURN START-TIME (rel-
ative to start of dialogue) and TURN DURATION, both
representing timing information, TEXT IN TURN (tran-
scription), and NUMBER OF WORDS IN TURN. Figure 2
presents the ruleset that was learned for this classifica-
tion task. For example, the first learned rule states that
if the duration of the turn is greater than 0.65 seconds
and the transcribed text of the turn contains the lexical
item ?I?, then the turn is predicted to be labeled EMO-
TION=NEGATIVE. The estimated mean error and stan-
dard error of this ruleset is 33.03% +/- 2.45%, based on
25-fold cross-validation.
if (duration   0.65)  (text has ?I?) then neg
else if (duration   2.98) then neg
else if (duration   0.93)  (startTime   297.62) then pos
else if (text has ?right?) then pos
else neutral
Figure 2: All-Features Ruleset for Emotion Prediction
For comparison, our feature set in our second pilot
machine learning experiment consisted of just TEXT IN
TURN. The ruleset learned for this classification task con-
tained 21 rules; Figure 3 presents an (ordered) excerpt1.
Estimated mean error and standard error of this ruleset is
39.03% +/- 2.40%, based on 25-fold cross-validation.
if (text has ?I?)  (text has ?don?t?) then neg
else if (text has ?um?)  (text has ?  hn  ?) then neg
else if (text has ?the?)  (text has ?  fs  ?) then neg
else if (text has ?right?) then pos
else if (text has ?so?) then pos
else if (text has ?(laugh)?)  (text has ?that?s?) then pos
else neutral
Figure 3: Text-Feature Ruleset for Emotion Prediction
Although both these error rates are still fairly high,
they are a significant improvement over a majority class
1  hn  = human noise (e.g. sighs and coughs), and  fs  =
false start (e.g. ?I th- think?)
baseline that always predicts the majority class in our cor-
pus (neutral/indeterminate) - which has an error rate of
55.69%. Moreover, many of the learned rules contain
features that are intuitively associated with the predicted
emotion; for example, disfluencies such as false starts are
often associated with negative emotions such as ?uncer-
tainty?, as are lexical items such as ?um? used in combi-
nation with human noises such as sighs.
4 Future Directions
Even using a small corpus classified by one coder and
predicted using only a handful of features, our results
suggest that there are indeed features that can automati-
cally distinguish emotions in tutoring dialogues. We will
next explore the utility of a wider variety of features rep-
resenting many knowledge sources (including acoustic,
prosodic, lexical, syntactic, semantic, discourse, and lo-
cal and global contextual dialogue features), using abla-
tion studies. We will perform our learning using and com-
paring large corpora of both human-human and human-
computer data for training and testing, and will evaluate
our results using a variety of metrics (e.g. recall, pre-
cision, and F-measure). We will also investigate a va-
riety of emotion annotations with the goal of producing
a reliable annotation scheme for the emotions associated
with our tutoring domain. Previous studies have shown
low inter-annotator reliability (around 70%, Kappa val-
ues around 0.47 (Narayanan, 2002)), which originates
partly in vague descriptions of the emotions to be labeled.
Finally, we hope to use this work to demonstrate that
enhancing a spoken dialogue tutoring system to automat-
ically predict and then dynamically respond to student
emotional states will measurably improve system perfor-
mance. Our enhancements will be motivated by tutor-
ing literature (Evens, 2002; Aist et al, 2002) that ad-
dresses how a tutor might make use of such information
if it could be inferred, as well as by looking at how the
human tutor actually responded to emotionally labeled
turns. Our methodology will build on previous adaptive
(non-tutoring) dialogue systems (see (Litman and Pan,
2002)); however, our system will predict and adapt to
both problematic and positive dialogue situations in tu-
toring.
Acknowledgments
This research is supported by the NSF under Grant No.
9720359 to the Center for Interdisciplinary Research on
Constructive Learning Environments (CIRCLE) at the
University of Pittsburgh and Carnegie-Mellon University.
References
G. Aist, B. Kort, Rob R.lly, J. Mostow, and R. Pi-
card. 2002. Experimentally augmenting an intelli-
gent tutoring system with human-supplied capabilities:
Adding human-provided emotional scaffolding to an
automated reading tutor that listens. In Proc. of ITS.
J. Ang, R. Dhillon, A. Krupski, E.Shriberg, and A. Stol-
cke. 2002. Prosody-based automatic detection of an-
noyance and frustration in human-computer dialog. In
Proc. ICSLP.
A. Batliner, R. Huber, H. R. Niemann, E. No?th, J. Spilker,
and K. Fischer. 2000. The recognition of emotion. In
Proc. of the ISCA Workshop on Speech and Emotion.
William Cohen. 1996. Learning trees and rules with set-
valued features. In Proc. of AAAI.
G. Coles. 1999. Literacy, emotions, and the brain. Read-
ing Online, March 1999.
M. Evens. 2002. New questions for Circsim-Tutor. Pre-
sentation at the 2002 Symposium on Natural Language
Tutoring, University of Pittsburgh.
Robert Hausmann and Michelene Chi. 2002. Can a com-
puter interface support self-explaining? The Interna-
tional Journal of Cognitive Technology, 7(1).
Diane J. Litman and Shimei Pan. 2002. Designing and
evaluating an adaptive spoken dialogue system. User
Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 12.
D. Litman, J. Hirschberg, and M. Swerts. 2001. Predict-
ing user reactions to system error. In Proc.of ACL.
S. Narayanan. 2002. Towards modeling user behavior in
human-machine interaction: Effect of errors and emo-
tions. In Proc. of ISLE.
C. P. Rose and V. Aleven. 2002. Proc. of the ITS 2002
workshop on empirical methods for tutorial dialogue
systems. Technical report, San Sebastian, Spain, June.
C. P. Rose and R. Freedman. 2000. Building dialogue
systems for tutorial applications. Technical Report FS-
00-01 (Working Notes of the Fall Symposium), AAAI.
K. VanLehn, P. Jordan, C. Rose?, D. Bhembe, M. Bo?ttner,
A. Gaydos, M. Makatchev, U. Pappuswamy, M. Rin-
genberg, A. Roque, S. Siler, R. Srivastava, and R. Wil-
son. 2002. The architecture of Why2-Atlas: A coach
for qualitative physics essay writing. In Proc. of ITS.
ITSPOKE: An Intelligent Tutoring Spoken Dialogue System
Diane J. Litman
University of Pittsburgh
Department of Computer Science &
Learning Research and Development Center
Pittsburgh PA, 15260, USA
litman@cs.pitt.edu
Scott Silliman
University of Pittsburgh
Learning Research and Development Center
Pittsburgh PA, 15260, USA
scotts@pitt.edu
Abstract
ITSPOKE is a spoken dialogue system that
uses the Why2-Atlas text-based tutoring sys-
tem as its ?back-end?. A student first types a
natural language answer to a qualitative physics
problem. ITSPOKE then engages the student
in a spoken dialogue to provide feedback and
correct misconceptions, and to elicit more com-
plete explanations. We are using ITSPOKE
to generate an empirically-based understanding
of the ramifications of adding spoken language
capabilities to text-based dialogue tutors.
1 Introduction
The development of computational tutorial dialogue sys-
tems has become more and more prevalent (Aleven and
Rose, 2003), as one method of attempting to close the
performance gap between human and computer tutors.
While many such systems have yielded successful evalu-
ations with students, most are currently text-based (Evens
et al, 2001; Aleven et al, 2001; Zinn et al, 2002; Van-
Lehn et al, 2002). There is reason to believe that speech-
based tutorial dialogue systems could be even more ef-
fective. Spontaneous self-explanation by students im-
proves learning gains during human-human tutoring (Chi
et al, 1994), and spontaneous self-explanation occurs
more frequently in spoken tutoring than in text-based tu-
toring (Hausmann and Chi, 2002). In human-computer
tutoring, the use of an interactive pedagogical agent that
communicates using speech rather than text output im-
proves student learning, while the visual presence or ab-
sence of the agent does not impact performance (Moreno
et al, 2001). In addition, it has been hypothesized that
the success of computer tutors could be increased by rec-
ognizing and responding to student emotion. (Aist et al,
2002) have shown that adding emotional processing to
a dialogue-based reading tutor increases student persis-
tence. Information in the speech signal such as prosody
has been shown to be a rich source of information for
predicting emotional states in other types of dialogue in-
teractions (Ang et al, 2002; Lee et al, 2002; Batliner et
al., 2003; Devillers et al, 2003; Shafran et al, 2003).
With advances in speech technology, several projects
have begun to incorporate basic spoken language capabil-
ities into their systems (Mostow and Aist, 2001; Fry et al,
2001; Graesser et al, 2001; Rickel and Johnson, 2000).
However, to date there has been little examination of the
ramifications of using a spoken modality for dialogue tu-
toring. To assess the impact and evaluate the utility of
adding spoken language capabilities to dialogue tutoring
systems, we have built ITSPOKE (Intelligent Tutoring
SPOKEn dialogue system), a spoken dialogue system
that uses the Why2-Atlas conceptual physics tutoringsys-
tem (VanLehn et al, 2002) as its ?back-end.? We are
using ITSPOKE as a platform for examining whether
acoustic-prosodic information can be used to improve the
recognition of pedagogically useful information such as
student emotion (Forbes-Riley and Litman, 2004; Lit-
man and Forbes-Riley, 2004), and whether speech can
improve the performance evaluations of dialogue tutoring
systems (e.g., as measured by learning gains, efficiency,
usability, etc.) (Rose? et al, 2003).
2 Application Description
ITSPOKE is a speech-enabled version of the Why2-
Atlas (VanLehn et al, 2002) text-based dialogue tutoring
system. As in Why2-Atlas, a student first types a nat-
ural language answer to a qualitative physics problem.
In ITSPOKE, however, the system engages the student
in a spoken dialogue to correct misconceptions and elicit
more complete explanations.
Consider the screenshot shown in Figure 1. ITSPOKE
first poses conceptual physics problem 58 to the student,
as shown in the upper right of the figure. Next, the
Figure 1: Screenshot during ITSPOKE Human-Computer Spoken Dialogue
user types in a natural language essay answer (as shown
in the essay box in the middle right of Figure 1), and
clicks ?SUBMIT.? ITSPOKE then analyzes the essay, af-
ter which the spoken dialogue with the student begins.
During the dialogue, the system and student discuss
a solution to the problem relative to the student?s es-
say explanation, using spoken English. At the time the
screenshot was generated, the student had just said ?free
fall.? After each system or student utterance, the system
prompt, or the system?s understanding of the student?s re-
sponse, respectively, are added to the dialogue history (as
shown in the dialogue box in the middle left of Figure 1).1
At some point later in the dialogue, the system will
eventually ask the student to edit the typed essay explana-
tion. The system will then either express satisfaction and
end the tutoring for the current problem, or continue with
another round of spoken dialogue interaction and typed
essay revision. Upon completing the problem, the stu-
dent is presented with an example of an ideal essay.
Another excerpt with ITSPOKE is shown in Figure 2.
1The ?Tell Tutor? box is used for typed student login only.
3 System Architecture
The architecture of ITSPOKE is shown in Figure 3. Stu-
dent speech is digitized from microphone input and sent
to the Sphinx2 automatic speech recognizer. Sphinx2?s
best hypothesis is then sent to Why2-Atlas for syntactic
and semantic analysis (Rose?, 2000), discourse and do-
main processing (Jordan et al, 2003), and finite-state di-
alogue management (Rose? et al, 2001). The tutor?s text
output is sent to the Cepstral text-to-speech system, and
played through a speaker or headphone.
ITSPOKE is implemented in Python and acts as a
proxy server between the Why2-Atlas server and client.
ITSPOKE monitors the XML being sent between the two
and decides what text should be spoken and when to lis-
ten. After speech recognition, ITSPOKE submits what it
thinks the student said to Why2-Atlas (as if the student
had typed it). Sphinx2?s C API is tied into Python by us-
ing SWIG to generate a Python wrapper API. Cepstral?s
speech synthesis engine is currently run out of process
using a fork/exec, but we plan to use SWIG to tie its C
API into Python in the future. For speed, we have in-
ITSPOKE: I didn?t understand. What force acts on all objects
within close proximity to earth?
STUDENT: uh the force of gravity
ITSPOKE: Fine. Besides the Earth?s gravitational force, are
there any other forces acting on the person, keys, and elevator
after the release?
STUDENT: no
ITSPOKE: Yep. Thus, keep in mind that after the release, the
only force on the person, keys, and elevator is the force of grav-
ity. If gravity is the only force acting on an object, will it be
moving or staying still?
STUDENT: it will be moving
ITSPOKE: Fine. Not only are the person, keys, and elevator
moving, they have only gravitational forces on them. When an
object is falling and has only gravitational force on it, it is said
to be in what?
STUDENT: freefall
ITSPOKE: Good. Thus, after the release the only force on
the keys and man is the downward force of earth?s gravity, so
they are in freefall. Before the release, what is the relationship
between the man?s velocity and the keys? velocity?
STUDENT: they?re equal
Figure 2: ITSPOKE Excerpt (3.5 minutes into session)
Figure 3: The Architecture of ITSPOKE
stalled Sphinx2 and Cepstral on the ITSPOKE machine.
The dashed line in the figure reflects that Why2-Atlas can
be installed on a different machine, although we are cur-
rently running it on the same machine.
4 Performance Analysis
A formal evaluation comparing ITSPOKE and other tu-
toring methods began in November 2003, and is still on-
going. Subjects are University of Pittsburgh students who
have taken no college physics and are native speakers of
American English. Our experimental procedure, taking
roughly 4 hours/student, is as follows: students 1) read a
small document of background material, 2) take a pretest
measuring their physics knowledge, 3) use ITSPOKE to
work through 5 physics problems, and 4) take a post-test
similar to the pretest.
As of March 2004, we have collected 80 dialogues
from 16 students (21 total hours of speech, mean dialogue
time of 17 minutes). An average dialogue contains 21.3
student turns and 26.3 tutor turns. The mean student turn
length is 2.8 words (max=28, min=1).2
ITSPOKE uses 56 dialogue-state dependent language
models for speech recognition; 43 of these 56 models
have been used to process the data collected to date.3
These stochastic language models were initially trained
using 4551 typed student utterances from a 2002 eval-
uation of Why2-Atlas, then later enhanced with spo-
ken utterances obtained during ITSPOKE?s pilot testing.
For the 1600 student turns that we have collected, IT-
SPOKE?s current Word Error Rate is 31.2%. While this is
the traditional method of evaluating speech recognition,
semantic rather than transcription accuracy is more useful
for dialogue evaluation as it does not penalize for word
errors that are unimportant to overall utterance interpre-
tation. Semantic analysis based on speech recognition
is the same as based on perfect transcription 92% of the
time. An average dialogue contains 1.4 rejection prompts
(when ITSPOKE is not confident of the speech recogni-
tion output, it asks the user to repeat the utterance), and
.8 timeout prompts (when the student doesn?t say any-
thing within a specified time frame, ITSPOKE repeats its
previous question).
5 Summary
The goal of ITSPOKE is to generate an empirically-based
understanding of the implications of using speech instead
of text-based dialogue tutoring, and to use these results
to build an improved version of ITSPOKE. We are cur-
rently analyzing our corpus of dialogues with ITSPOKE
to determine whether spoken dialogues yield increased
performance compared to text with respect to a variety
of evaluation metrics, and whether acoustic-prosodic fea-
tures only found in speech can be used to better predict
pedagogically useful information such as student emo-
tions. Our next step will be to modify the dialogue man-
ager inherited from Why2-Atlas to use new tutorial strate-
gies optimized for speech, and to enhance ITSPOKE to
predict and adapt to student emotion. In previous work
on adaptive (non-tutoring) dialogue systems (Litman and
Pan, 2002), adaptation to problematic dialogue situations
measurably improved system performance.
Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by NSF Grant Nos.
9720359, 0328431 and 0325054, and by the Office of
2Word count is estimated from speech recognition output.
3The remaining language models correspond to physics
problems that are not being tested in the current evaluation.
Naval Research. Thanks to Kurt VanLehn and the Why2-
Atlas team for the use and modification of their system.
References
G. Aist, B. Kort, R. Reilly, J. Mostow, and R. Picard.
2002. Experimentally augmenting an intelligent tutor-
ing system with human-supplied capabilities: Adding
Human-Provided Emotional Scaffolding to an Auto-
mated Reading Tutor that Listens. In Proc. of Intel-
ligent Tutoring Systems.
V. Aleven and C. P. Rose. 2003. Proc. of the AIED 2003
Workshop on Tutorial Dialogue Systems: With a View
toward the Classroom.
V. Aleven, O. Popescu, and K. Koedinger. 2001.
Towards tutorial dialog to support self-explanation:
Adding natural language understanding to a cognitive
tutor. In J. D. Moore, C. L. Redfield, and W. L. John-
son, editors, Proc. of Articial Intelligence in Educa-
tion, pages 246?255.
J. Ang, R. Dhillon, A. Krupski, E.Shriberg, and A. Stol-
cke. 2002. Prosody-based automatic detection of an-
noyance and frustration in human-computer dialog. In
Proc. of ICSLP.
A. Batliner, K. Fischer, R. Huber, J. Spilker, and E. Noth.
2003. How to find trouble in communication. Speech
Communication, 40:117?143.
M. Chi, N. De Leeuw, M. Chiu, and C. Lavancher.
1994. Eliciting self-explanations improves under-
standing. Cognitive Science, 18:439?477.
L. Devillers, L. Lamel, and I. Vasilescu. 2003. Emotion
detection in task-oriented spoken dialogs. In Proc. of
ICME.
M. Evens, S. Brandle, R. Chang, R. Freedman, M. Glass,
Y. Lee, L. Shim, C. Woo, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhou,
J. Michaeland, and Allen A. Rovick. 2001. Circsim-
tutor: An Intelligent Tutoring System Using Natural
Language Dialogue. In Proc. Midwest AI and Cogni-
tive Science Conference.
K. Forbes-Riley and D. Litman. 2004. Predicting
emotion in spoken dialogue from multiple knowledge
sources. In Proc. Human Language Technology Con-
ference and North American Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
J. Fry, M. Ginzton, S. Peters, B. Clark, and H. Pon-Barry.
2001. Automated tutoring dialogues for training in
shipboard damage control. In Proc. SIGdial Workshop
on Discourse and Dialogue.
A. Graesser, N. Person, and D. Harter et al 2001. Teach-
ing tactics and dialog in Autotutor. International Jour-
nal of Articial Intelligence in Education.
R. Hausmann and M. Chi. 2002. Can a computer inter-
face support self-explaining? The International Jour-
nal of Cognitive Technology, 7(1).
P. Jordan, M. Makatchev, and K. VanLehn. 2003. Ab-
ductive theorem proving for analyzing student expla-
nations. In Proc. Articial Intelligence in Education.
C.M. Lee, S. Narayanan, and R. Pieraccini. 2002. Com-
bining acoustic and language information for emotion
recognition. In Proc. of ICSLP.
D. J. Litman and K. Forbes-Riley. 2004. Annotating stu-
dent emotional states in spoken tutoring dialogues. In
Proc. SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue.
D. J. Litman and S. Pan. 2002. Designing and evaluating
an adaptive spoken dialogue system. User Modeling
and User-Adapted Interaction, 12.
R. Moreno, R.E. Mayer, H. A. Spires, and J. C. Lester.
2001. The case for social agency in computer-based
teaching: Do students learn more deeply when they
interact with animated pedagogical agents. Cognition
and Instruction, 19(2):177?213.
J. Mostow and G. Aist. 2001. Evaluating tutors that lis-
ten: An overview of Project LISTEN. In K. Forbus and
P. Feltovich, editors, Smart Machines in Education.
J. Rickel and W. L. Johnson. 2000. Task-oriented col-
laboration with embodied agents in virtual worlds. In
J. Cassell, J. Sullivan, S. Prevost, and E. Churchill, ed-
itors, Embodied Conversational Agents.
C. P. Rose?, P. Jordan, M. Ringenberg, S. Siler, K. Van-
Lehn, and A. Weinstein. 2001. Interactive conceptual
tutoring in Atlas-Andes. In Proc. Articial Intelligence
in Education.
C. P. Rose?, D. Litman, D. Bhembe, K. Forbes, S. Silli-
man, R. Srivastava, and K. VanLehn. 2003. A com-
parison of tutor and student behavior in speech versus
text based tutoring. In Proc. HLT/NAACL Workshop:
Building Educational Applications Using NLP.
C. P. Rose?. 2000. A framework for robust sentence level
interpretation. In Proc. North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Lingusitics.
I. Shafran, M. Riley, and M. Mohri. 2003. Voice signa-
tures. In Proc. of Automatic Speech Recognition and
Understanding.
K. VanLehn, P. W. Jordan, C. Rose?, D. Bhembe,
M. Bo?ttner, A. Gaydos, M. Makatchev, U. Pap-
puswamy, M. Ringenberg, A. Roque, S. Siler, R. Sri-
vastava, and R. Wilson. 2002. The architecture of
Why2-Atlas: A coach for qualitative physics essay
writing. In Proc. Intelligent Tutoring Systems.
C. Zinn, J. D. Moore, and M. G. Core. 2002. A 3-tier
planning architecture for managing tutorial dialogue.
In Proc. Intelligent Tutoring Systems.
A Comparison of Tutor and Student Behavior in Speech Versus Text Based
Tutoring
Carolyn P. Rose?, Diane Litman, Dumisizwe Bhembe, Kate Forbes, Scott Silliman,
Ramesh Srivastava, Kurt VanLehn
Learning Research and Development Center, University of Pittsburgh,
3939 O?Hara St., Pittsburgh, PA 15260
rosecp,bhembe,forbesk,scotts,rcsriva@pitt.edu
litman,vanlehn@cs.pitt.edu
Abstract
This paper describes preliminary work in ex-
ploring the relative effectiveness of speech ver-
sus text based tutoring. Most current tuto-
rial dialogue systems are text based (Evens et
al., 2001; Rose and Aleven, 2002; Zinn et
al., 2002; Aleven et al, 2001; VanLehn et al,
2002). However, prior studies have shown con-
siderable benefits of tutoring through spoken
interactions (Lemke, 1990; Chi et al, 1994;
Hausmann and Chi, 2002). Thus, we are cur-
rently developing a speech based dialogue sys-
tem that uses a text based system for tutoring
conceptual physics (VanLehn et al, 2002) as
its ?back-end?. In order to explore the relative
effectiveness between these two input modal-
ities in our task domain, we have started by
collecting parallel human-human tutoring cor-
pora both for text based and speech based tu-
toring. In both cases, students interact with the
tutor through a web interface. We present here
a comparison between the two on a number
of features of dialogue that have been demon-
strated to correlate reliably with learning gains
with students interacting with the tutor using
the text based interface (Rose? et al, submitted).
1 Introduction
This paper describes preliminary work in exploring the
relative effectiveness of speech versus text based tuto-
rial dialogue systems. Tutorial dialogue is a natural way
to provide students with a learning environment that ex-
hibits characteristics that have been shown to correlate
with student learning gains, such as student activity. For
example, it has been demonstrated that generating words
rather than simply reading them promotes subsequent re-
call of those words (Slamecka and Graf, 1978). (Chi
et al, 1994) notes that there is a general momentum in
the science education literature toward the importance
of talking, reflecting and explaining as ways to learn
(Lemke, 1990). Moreover, encouraging student self-
explanation, which includes both generating inferences
from material they have read and relating new material to
old material, has been shown to correlate with learning
(Chi et al, 1981; Chi et al, 1994; Renkl, 1997; Press-
ley et al, 1992). In a further study, prompting students
with zero content prompts to encourage them to self-
explain was also associated with student learning (Chi et
al., 2001). A second important advantage to dialogue is
that it affords the tutor the opportunity to tailor instruc-
tion to the needs of the student. While human tutors may
not always choose to tailor their instruction to the indi-
vidual characteristics of the knowledge state of their stu-
dents, tutors who ignore signs of student confusion may
run the risk of preventing learning (Chi, 1996). (Rose? et
al., submitted) explore the benefits of tutor adaptation by
comparing learning gains for naive learners and review
learners in a human tutoring condition and a non-adaptive
reading condition.
In recent years tutorial dialogue systems have be-
come more and more prevalent, most of which are text
based (Evens et al, 2001; Rose and Aleven, 2002; Zinn
et al, 2002; Aleven et al, 2001; VanLehn et al, 2002).
Many of these systems have yielded successful evalu-
ations with students (Rose? et al, 2001; Heffernan and
Koedinger, 2002; Ashley et al, 2002; Graesser et al,
2001a). However, while the majority of current tutorial
dialogue systems are text based, there is reason to believe
that speech based tutorial dialogue systems could be more
effective.
Prior studies have shown considerable benefits of
human-human tutoring through spoken interactions
(Lemke, 1990; Chi et al, 1994). (Hausmann and Chi,
2002) has shown that spontaneous self-explanation oc-
curs much more frequently in spoken tutoring then in
text based tutoring, suggesting that typing requires ad-
ditional cognitive capacity and thus reduces the cogni-
tive resources available for spontaneous self-explanation.
Other research projects (Mostow and Aist, 2001; Fry
et al, 2001) have shown that basic spoken natural lan-
guage capabilities can be implemented quite effectively
in computer tutoring systems. Moreover, speech con-
tains prosodic and acoustic information which has been
shown to improve the accuracy of predicting emotional
states (Ang et al, 2002; Batliner et al, 2000) and user
responses to system errors (Litman et al, 2001) that are
useful for triggering system adaptation. We are thus cur-
rently developing a speech based dialogue system that
uses a text based system (VanLehn et al, 2002) as its
?back-end?. These systems and their goals will be dis-
cussed in Section 2.
We expect that the different modalities used by these
systems (e.g. text based vs speech based) will display
interesting differences with respect to the characteristics
of dialogue interaction that may determine their relative
merits with respect to increasing student performance.
Although human-computer data from the speech based
system is not yet available for comparison, we have col-
lected parallel human-human corpora both for text based
and speech based tutoring, as discussed in Sections 3-4,
and these corpora already display similarities and differ-
ences with respect to features of their dialogue interac-
tions, as discussed in Section 5, that are wholly modality
based and that will likely be displayed to an even greater
extent in the comparable human-computer data.
2 Why2-Atlas and ITSPOKE Dialogue
Systems
Why2-Atlas is a text based intelligent tutoring dialogue
system (Rose? et al, 2002a; VanLehn et al, 2002). The
goal of Why2-Atlas is to provide a platform for testing
whether deep approaches to natural language process-
ing elicit more learning than shallower approaches, for
the task domain of qualitative physics explanation gen-
eration. Using Why2-Atlas, the activity in which stu-
dents engage is answering deep reasoning questions in-
volving topics in conceptual physics. One such question
that we used is, ?A lightweight car and a massive truck
have a head-on collision. On which vehicle is the im-
pact force greater? Which vehicle undergoes the greater
change in its motion? Explain.? This is an appropriate
task domain for pursuing questions about the benefits of
tutorial dialogue for learning because questions like this
one are known to elicit robust, persistent misconceptions
from students, such as ?heavier objects exert more force.?
(Hake, 1998; Halloun and Hestenes, 1985). We designed
a set of 10 essay questions to use as training problems.
Two physics professors and a computer science profes-
sor worked together to select a set of expectations (i.e.,
correct propositions that the tutors expected students to
include in their essays) and potential misconceptions as-
sociated with each question. Additionally, they agreed
on an ideal essay answer for each problem. In Why2-
Atlas, a student first types an essay answering a qualita-
tive physics problem. A computer tutor then engages the
student in a natural language dialogue to provide feed-
back, correct misconceptions, and to elicit more complete
explanations. The first version of Why2-Atlas was de-
ployed and evaluated with undergraduate students in the
spring of 2002; the system is continuing to be actively
developed (Graesser et al, 2002).
We are currently developing a speech-enabled version
of Why2-ATLAS, called ITSPOKE (Intelligent Tutor-
ing SPOKEn dialogue system), that uses the Why2-Atlas
system as its ?back-end?. To date we have interfaced
the Sphinx2 speech recognizer (Huang et al, 1993) with
stochastic language models trained from example user ut-
terances, and the Festival speech synthesizer (Black and
Taylor, 1997) for text-to-speech, to the Why2-Atlas back-
end. The rest of the needed natural language process-
ing components, e.g. the sentence-level syntactic and
semantic analysis modules (Rose?, 2000), discourse and
domain level processors (Makatchev et al, 2002), and a
finite-state dialogue manager (Rose? et al, 2001), are pro-
vided by a toolkit that is part of the Why2-Atlas back-
end. The student speech is digitized from microphone
input, while the tutor?s synthesized speech is played to
the student using a speaker and/or headphone. We are
now in the process of adapting the knowledge sources
needed by the spoken language components to our ap-
plication domain. For example, we have developed a set
of dialogue dependent language models using the exper-
imental human-computer typed corpus (4551 student ut-
terances) obtained during the Why2-Atlas 2002 evalua-
tion. Our language models will soon be enhanced using
student utterances from our parallel human-human spo-
ken language corpus.
One goal of the ITSPOKE system is simply replacing
text based dialogue interaction with spoken dialogue in-
teraction and leaving the rest of the Why2-Atlas back-end
unchanged, in order to test the hypothesis that student
self-explanation (which leads to greater learning (Haus-
mann and Chi, 2002)) might be easier to achieve in spo-
ken dialogues. This hypothesis is discussed further in
Section 5. Although not the focus of this paper, an-
other goal of the ITSPOKE system is to take full ad-
vantage of the speech modality. For example, speech
contains rich acoustic and prosodic information about
the speaker?s current emotional state that isn?t present
in typed dialogue. Connections between learning and
emotion have been well documented (Coles, 1999), so it
seems likely that the success of computer-based tutoring
systems could be greatly increased if they were capable
of predicting and adapting to student emotional states,
e.g. reinforcing positive states, while rectifying nega-
tive states (Evens, 2002). Preliminary machine learn-
ing experiments involving emotion annotation and au-
tomatic feature extraction from our corpus suggest that
ITSPOKE can indeed be enhanced to automatically pre-
dict and adapt to student emotional states (Litman et al,
2003).
3 Typed Human-Human Tutoring Corpus
The Why2-Atlas Human-Human Typed Tutoring Cor-
pus is a collection of typed tutoring dialogues between
(human) tutor and student collected via typed interface,
which the tutor plays the same role that Why2-Atlas
is designed to perform. The experimental procedure is
as follows: 1) students are given a pretest measuring
their knowledge of physics, 2) students are asked to read
through a small document of background material, 3) stu-
dents work through a set of up to 10 Why2-Atlas training
problems with the human tutor, and 4) students are given
a post-test that is similar to the pretest. The entire ex-
periment takes no more than 15 hours per student, and is
usually performed in 1-3 sessions of no more than 4 hours
each. Data collection began in the Fall 2002 semester and
is continuing in the Spring 2003 semester. The subjects
are all University of Pittsburgh students who have never
taken any college physics courses. One tutor currently
participates in the study.
As in the Why2-Atlas system, when the tutoring ses-
sion then begins, the student first types an essay answer-
ing a qualitative physics problem. Once the student sub-
mits his/her essay, the tutor then engages the student in a
typed natural language dialogue to provide feedback and
correct misconceptions, and to elicit more complete ex-
planations. This instruction is in the form of a dialogue
between the student and the tutor through a text based
chat interface with student and tutor in separate rooms.
At key points in the dialogue, the tutor asks the student
to revise the essay. This cycle of instruction and revision
continues until the tutor is satisfied with the student?s es-
say. A sample tutoring dialogue from the Why2-Atlas
typed human-human tutoring corpus is displayed in Fig-
ure 1.
The tutor was instructed to cover the expectations for
each problem, to watch for the specific set of expectations
and misconceptions associated with the problem, and to
end the discussion of each problem by showing the ideal
essay to the student. He was encouraged to avoid lectur-
ing the student and to attempt to draw out the student?s
own reasoning. He knew that transcripts of his tutoring
would be analyzed. Nevertheless, he was not required to
follow any prescribed tutoring strategies. So his tutoring
style was much more naturalistic than in previous stud-
ies such as the BEE study (Rose? et al, 2001) in which
two specific tutoring styles, namely Socratic and Didac-
tic, were contrasted. The results of that study revealed a
trend for students in the Socratic condition to learn more
than those in the Didactic condition. A further analysis
of the corpus collected during the BEE study (Core et
al., 2002) verified that the Socratic dialogues from the
BEE study were more interactive than the Didactic ones.
The biggest reliable difference between the two sets of
tutoring dialogues was the percentage of words spoken
by the student, i.e, number of student words divided by
total number of words. The Didactic dialogues contained
on average 26% student words, whereas the Socratic di-
alogues contained 33% student words. On average with
respect to percentage of student words, the dialogues in
our text based human tutoring corpus were more like the
Didactic dialogues from the BEE study, with average per-
centage of student text being 27%. Nevertheless, because
the tutor was not constrained to follow a prescribed tutor-
ing style, the level of interactivity varied widely through-
out the transcripts, at times being highly Socratic, and at
other times being highly Didactic.
Pre and post tests were used to measure learning gains
to be used for evaluating the effectiveness of various fea-
tures of tutorial dialogue found in our corpora. Thus, we
developed two tests: versions A and B, which were iso-
morphic to one another. That is, the problems on test A
and B differed only in the identities of the objects (e.g.,
cars vs. trucks) and other surface features that should not
affect the reasoning required to solve them. Each ver-
sion of the test (A and B) consisted of 40 multiple choice
questions. Each multiple choice question was written to
address a single expectation covered in the training prob-
lems. Some students were not able to complete all 10
problems before they reached the end of their participa-
tion time. Thus, they took the post-test after only working
through a subset of the training problems.
4 Spoken Human-Human Tutoring
Corpus
The ITSPOKE Human-Human Spoken Tutoring Corpus
is a parallel collection of spoken tutoring dialogues col-
lected via a web interface supplemented with a high qual-
ity audio link, where a human tutor performs the same
task that our ITSPOKE system is being designed to per-
form. The experimental procedure used to collect the cor-
pus is exactly the same as the procedure used to gather
the Why2-Atlas Human-Human Corpus: the same tutor
is used, the same subject pool1 is used, the same pre-test
and post-test are used, and the same set of physics prob-
1We assigned a greater percentage of students to the text
based condition as part of a separate experiment. Thus, the text
based corpus is larger than the speech based corpus.
PROBLEM: Suppose that you released 3 identical balls of clay in a vacuum at exactly the same instant. They would all hit the
ground at the same instant. Now you stick two of the balls together, forming one ball that is twice as heavy as the remaining,
untouched clay ball. Both balls are released in a vacuum at exactly the same instant. Which ball hits the ground first?
ESSAY: Both balls will hit the ground at the same time. The balls are in free fall (only gravitational forces). The ratio of the
masses and weight are equal.
. . . excerpt from 2 minutes into a typed dialogue . . .
Tutor1: You have correctly said the balls are in free fall. What do you conclude from this fact?
Student1: There is no air resistance and the balls? accelerations are constant in regards to one another
Tutor2: Right, so the conclusion is that they both have the same acceleration, the free fall acceleration. Now you have to show
that time taken by them to reach the ground will be the same. How do you do that?
Student2: F (net forces) / mass = f/m because F = m*a therefore ratio should equal one another
Tutor3: But that does not tell you anything about the time taken. What physical quantities will determine the time taken. Will the
initial velocity of the balls matter?
Student3: yes, assuming starting at rest? sorry, kind of at a loss at the moment
Tutor4: The initial velocity will matter, and here they both have the same initial velocity, zero. What else, will the height through
wich they fall matter?
Student4: not so much as long as they are both dropped from the same height
Tutor5: Height of fall will determine the time of fall, and here the height of fall is the same for both the balls. Now on the basis of
these facts can you conclude about the time taken by them to reach the ground?
Student5: since initial velocities are equal and the height of falls are equal, then the time taken is equal
Tutor6: How about acceleration, if they had different accelerations, even if they fall through the same height and have same initial
velocity , will they reach the ground at the same time?
Student6: no...
Tutor7: Right...
Figure 1: Excerpt from Human-Human Typed Dialogue Corpus
lems are used. Only the modality differs. In particular,
once the tutoring session begins and the student submits
his/her typed essay, the tutor and student then discuss the
student?s essay using spoken English. In contrast to the
text condition, where strict turn-taking is enforced, in the
spoken condition, interruptions and overlapping speech
are common. An example excerpt from the corpus is
shown in Figure 2. Note that turns ending in ?-? indi-
cate speech overlapping with the following turn. Even-
tually, the student will edit his/her typed explanation. As
in the text condition, the tutor then either expresses satis-
faction and ends the tutoring for the current problem, or
continues with another round of spoken dialogue interac-
tion and typed essay revision. As in the text condition,
students are presented with the ideal essay answer for a
problem upon completing that problem.
5 Differences between Typed and Spoken
Human-Tutoring
(Rose? et al, submitted) presents an analysis to uncover
which aspects of the tutorial dialogue were responsible
for its effectiveness in the text based condition. Longer
student answers to tutor questions reveal more of a stu-
dent?s reasoning. Very short answers, i.e., 10 words or
less, are normally composed of a single clause at most.
Longer, multi-clausal answers have the potential to com-
municate many more inter-connections between ideas.
Thus, if a tutor is attending to and responding directly
to the student?s revealed knowledge state, it would be
expected that the effectiveness of the tutor?s instruction
would increase as average student turn length increases.
To test this prediction, we computed a linear regression
of the sequence of student turn lengths over time for each
student in the text based condition in order to obtain an in-
tercept and a slope, since student turn lengths have been
observed to decline on average over the course of their
PROBLEM: If a car is able to accelerate at 2 m/s2, what acceleration can it attain if it is towing another car of equal mass?
ESSAY: If the car is towing another car of equal mass, the maximum acceleration would be the same because the car would be
towed behind and the friction caused would only be by the front of the first car.
. . . excerpt from 6.5 minutes into spoken dialogue . . .
Tutor1: So twice the mass multiplied by the acceleration should be equal to the force which you have already determined as the
mass of the first car times the acceleration. So essentially you are dividing it by two and that gives you the uh acceleration by
twice the because mass has become twice. Now this law that force is equal to mass times acceleration, what?s this law called?
This is uh since this it is a very important basic uh fact uh it is it is a law of physics. Um you have you have read it in the
background material. Can you recall it?
Student1: Um no it was one of Newton?s laws-
Tutor2: Right, right-
Student2: but I don?t remember which one. (laugh)
Tutor3: That-
Student3: he I-
Tutor4: is Newton?s second law of motion.
Student4: Ok, because I remember one, two, and three, but I didn?t know if there was a different name
Tutor5: Yeah that?s right you know Newton was a genius and-
Student5: (laugh)-
Tutor6: uh he looked at a large number of experiments and experimental data that was available and from that he could come to
this general law and it is known as Newton?s second law of motion. Um many many other scientists before him had seen all
this data which was collected by scientists but had not concluded this. Now it looks very simple but to come to a conclusion
from a mass of data was something which required the genius of Newton.
Student6: mm hm
Tutor7: So now you will give Newton full credit isn?t it? (laugh)
Student7: (laugh)
Figure 2: Excerpt from Human-Human Spoken Dialogue Corpus.
interaction with the turn. We then computed a multiple
regression with pre-test score, intercept, and gradient as
independent variables and post test score as the depen-
dent variable. We found a reliable correlation between
intercept and learning, with pre-test scores and gradients
regressed out (R=.836; p   .05). This result is consistent
with (Core et al, 2002) where percentage of student talk
is strongly correlated with learning. Consistent with this,
we found a strong and reliable correlation between ra-
tio of student words to tutor words and learning2. We
computed a correlation between ratio of student words to
tutor words and post-test score after pre-test scores were
regressed out (R=.866, p   .05).
One of our current research objectives is to compare
2Note that ratio of student words to tutor words is number
of student words divided by number of tutor words, whereas
percentage of student words is number of student words divided
by total number of words
the relative effectiveness of speech based and text based
tutoring. Thus, when we have enough speech data, we
would like to compare learning gains between the speech
and text based conditions to test whether or not speech
based tutoring is more effective than text based tutoring.
We also plan to test whether the same features that cor-
relate with learning in the text based condition also cor-
relate with learning in the speech based condition. Since
both average student turn length and overall ratio of stu-
dent words to tutor words correlated strongly with learn-
ing gains in the text based condition, in this paper we
compare these two measures between the text based tutor-
ing condition and the speech based tutoring condition, but
not yet in connection with learning gains in the speech-
based corpus.
Since strict turn taking was not enforced in the speech
condition, turn boundaries were manually annotated
(based on consensus labellings from two coders) when ei-
ther (1) the speaker stopped speaking and the other party
in the dialogue began to speak, (2) when the speaker
asked a question and stopped speaking to wait for an an-
swer, or (3) when the other party in the dialogue inter-
rupted the speaker and the speaker paused to allow the
other party to speak.
Currently, 13 students have started the typed human-
human tutoring experiment, 7 of whom have finished.
We have so far collected 78 typed dialogues from the
text based condition, 69 of which were used in our anal-
ysis. 9 students have started the spoken human-human
tutoring experiment, 6 of whom have finished. Thus, we
have collected 63 speech based dialogues (1290 minutes
of speech from 4 female and 4 male subjects), and have
transcribed 25 of them. We hope to have an analysis cov-
ering all of our data in both conditions by the time of the
workshop.
As shown in Table 1, analysis of the data that has
been collected and transcribed to date is already show-
ing interesting differences between the ITSPOKE (spo-
ken) and WHY2-ATLAS (text) corpora of human-human
dialogues. The #trns columns show mean and standard
deviation for the total number of turns taken by the stu-
dents or tutor in each problem dialogue, while the next
pair of columns show the mean and standard deviation
for the total number of words spoken or typed by the stu-
dents or tutor (#wds) in each problem dialogue. The last
pair of columns show mean and standard deviation for the
average number of student or tutor words per turn in each
problem dialogue.
Due to the fact that data is still being collected for both
corpora (and the fact that the speech corpus also requires
manual transcription), the sizes of the two data sets rep-
resented in the table differ somewhat. However, even at
this early stage in the development of both corpora, these
figures already show that the style of the interactions are
very different in each modality. In particular, in spoken
tutoring, both student and tutor take more turns on av-
erage than in text based tutoring, but these spoken turns
are on average shorter. Moreover, in spoken tutoring both
student and tutor on average use more words to commu-
nicate than in text based tutoring. Another interesting dif-
ference is that although in the speech condition both stu-
dent and tutor take more turns, students finish the speech
condition in less time. In particular, on average, students
in the text based tutoring condition require 370.58 min-
utes to finish the training problems, with a standard devi-
ation of 134.29 minutes, students in the speech condition
require only 159.9 minutes on average, with a standard
deviation of 58.6 minutes. We measured the statistical re-
liability of the difference between the two measures that
correlated reliably with learning in the text-based condi-
tion. A 2-tailed unpaired t-test indicates that this differ-
ence is significant (t(30)=8.99, p   .01). There are also
similarities across the two conditions. In particular, a 2-
tailed unpaired t-test shows that the relative proportion
of student and tutor word or turns do not differ signifi-
cantly on average across the two modalities (t(13)=1.225,
p=.242). As an illustration, Table 2 shows mean and stan-
dard deviation for the ratios of the total number of student
and tutor words (#Swds/#Twds) and turns (#Strns/#Ttrns)
in each problem dialogue3.
Average student turn length is significantly lower in
the speech based condition (t(13) = 4.5, p   .001). This
might predict that speech based tutoring may be less ef-
fective than text based tutoring. However, since ratio of
student words to tutor words does not differ significantly,
this would predict that learning will also not differ sig-
nificantly between conditions. Total number of words
uttered in the speech condition is larger than in the text
based condition as are total number of turns. This dif-
ference between the two conditions will likely be even
more pronounced in the human-computer comparison,
due to noisy student input that results from use of au-
tomatic speech recognition. For example, clarifications
and corrections made necessary by this will likely lead
to an increase in dialogue length. More careful analy-
sis is required to determine whether this means that more
self-explanation took place overall in the speech based
condition. If so, this would predict that the speech based
condition would be more effective for learning than the
text based condition. Thus, much interesting exploration
is left to be done after we have collected enough speech
data to compute a reliable comparison between the two
conditions.
6 Current Directions
Currently we are continuing to collect data both in the
speech and text based human tutoring conditions. Since
human tutors differ with each other with respect to both
their tutoring styles and their conversational styles, we
plan to collect data using several different human tutors
in order to test the robustness of our comparisons between
speech and text based human tutoring. Another possible
direction for further inquiry would be to contrast natural-
istic speech (where strict turn taking is not enforced, as
in this data collection effort), with a speech condition in
which strict turn taking is enforced, in order to separate
the effects of speech on learning from the effects of alter-
native turn taking policies.
As discussed in Section 2, we are currently develop-
ing both text based and speech based human-computer
tutorial systems. Our ultimate goal is to test the relative
effectiveness of speech versus text based computer tutors.
We expect differences both between text and speech con-
3Note that strict-turn taking is enforced in the text condition,
but not in the speech condition.
Table 1: Student and Tutor Characteristics in Human-Human Speech and Text Conditions
#trns #wds Avg#wds/trn
Condition Participant Mean STD Mean STD Mean STD
Speech Student 47.49 25.95 264.18 125.47 5.72 1.35
Text Student 9.71 6.79 146.72 57.96 13.39 5.55
Speech Tutor 46.94 20.90 1199.14 605.87 26.78 14.20
Text Tutor 11.03 7.04 391.85 136.89 39.04 6.23
Table 2: Student-Tutor Word and Turn Ratios in Speech and Text Conditions
Speech Condition Text Condition
#Swds/#Twds #Strns/#Ttrns #Swds/#Twds #Strns/#Ttrns
Mean STD Mean STD Mean STD Mean STD
0.29 0.15 0.99 0.15 0.37 0.08 0.81 0.15
ditions in the human-computer data and between human-
human and human-computer data. One of our first tasks
will thus be to use the baseline version of ITSPOKE
described in Section 2 to generate a corpus of human-
computer spoken dialogues, using a process comparable
to the human-human corpus collection described here.
This will allow us to 1) compare the ITSPOKE human-
human and human-computer corpora 2) compare the IT-
SPOKE human-computer spoken corpus with a compa-
rable Why2-Atlas text corpus, e.g. by expanding on the
just described pilot study of the two human-human cor-
pora, and 3) use the ITSPOKE human-computer corpus
to guide the development of a new version of ITSPOKE
that will attempt to increase its performance, by taking
advantage of information that is only available in speech,
and modifying its behavior in other ways to respect the
interaction differences in item 2.
7 Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Office of Naval Re-
search, Cognitive Science Division under grant number
N00014-0-1-0600 and by NSF grant number 9720359 to
CIRCLE.
References
V. Aleven, O. Popescu, and K. Koedinger. 2001.
Towards tutorial dialog to support self-explanation:
Adding natural language understanding to a cognitive
tutor. In J. D. Moore, C. L. Redfield, and W. L. John-
son, editors, Proceedings of Articial Intelligence in
Education, pages 246?255.
J. Ang, R. Dhillon, A. Krupski, E.Shriberg, and A. Stol-
cke. 2002. Prosody-based automatic detection of an-
noyance and frustration in human-computer dialog. In
Proc. ICSLP.
K. D. Ashley, R. Desai, and J. M. Levine. 2002. Teach-
ing case-based argumentation concepts using didactic
arguments vs. didactic explanations. In Proceedings
of the Intelligent Tutoring Systems Conference, pages
585?595.
A. Batliner, R. Huber, H. R. Niemann, E. No?th, J. Spilker,
and K. Fischer. 2000. The recognition of emotion. In
Proc. of the ISCA Workshop on Speech and Emotion.
A. Black and P. Taylor. 1997. Festival speech synthesis
system: system documentation (1.1.1). Human Com-
munication Research Centre Technical Report 83, Uni-
versity of Edinburgh.
M. Chi, N. de Leeuw, M. Chiu, and C. LaVancher.
1981. Eliciting self-explanations improves under-
standing. Cognitive Science, 18(3).
Michelene Chi, Nicholas De Leeuw, Mei-Hung Chiu, and
Christian Lavancher. 1994. Eliciting self-explanations
improves understanding. Cognitive Science, 18:439?
477.
M. T. H. Chi, S. A. Siler, H. Jeong, T. Yamauchi, and
R. G. Hausmann. 2001. Learning from human tutor-
ing. Cognitive Science, (25):471?533.
M. T. H. Chi. 1996. Learning processes in tutoring. Ap-
plied Cognitive Psychology, 10:S33?S49.
G. Coles. 1999. Literacy, emotions, and the brain. Read-
ing Online, March 1999.
M. Core, J. D. Moore, and C. Zinn. 2002. Initiative in
tutorial dialogue. In Proceedings of the ITS Workshop
on Empirical Methods for Tutorial Dialogue Systems,
pages 46?55.
M. Evens, S. Brandle, R. Chang, R. Freedman, M. Glass,
Y. H. Lee, L. S. Shim, C. W. Woo, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhou,
J. A. Michaeland, and A. A. Rovick. 2001. Circsim-
tutor: An intelligent tutoring system using natural lan-
guage dialogue. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Midwest
AI and Cognitive Science Conference, MAICS 2001,
pages 16?23, Oxford, OH.
M. Evens. 2002. New questions for Circsim-Tutor. Pre-
sentation at the 2002 Symposium on Natural Language
Tutoring, University of Pittsburgh.
J. Fry, M. Ginzton, S. Peters, B. Clark, and H. Pon-Barry.
2001. Automated tutoring dialogues for training in
shipboard damage control. In Proc. 2nd SigDial Work-
shop on Discourse and Dialogue.
A. Graesser, N. Person, and D. Harter et al 2001a.
Teaching tactics and dialog in Autotutor. International
Journal of Articial Intelligence in Education.
A. Graesser, K. Vanlehn, TRG, and NLT Group. 2002.
Why2 report: Evaluation of why/atlas, why/autotutor,
and accomplished human tutors on learning gains for
qualitative physics problems and explanations. Tech-
nical report, LRDC Tech Report, University of Pitts-
burgh.
R. R. Hake. 1998. Interactive-engagement versus tra-
ditional methods: A six-thousand student survey of
mechanics test data for introductory physics students.
American Journal of Physics, 66(64).
I. A. Halloun and D. Hestenes. 1985. The initial knowl-
edge state of college physics students. American Jour-
nal of Physics, 53(11):1043?1055.
Robert Hausmann and Michelene Chi. 2002. Can a com-
puter interface support self-explaining? The Interna-
tional Journal of Cognitive Technology, 7(1).
N. T. Heffernan and K. R. Koedinger. 2002. An intelli-
gent tutoring system incorporating a model of an expe-
rienced tutor. In Proceedings of the Intelligent Tutor-
ing Systems Conference, pages 596?608.
X. D. Huang, F. Alleva, H. W. Hon, M. Y. Hwang, K. F.
Lee, and R. Rosenfeld. 1993. The SphinxII speech
recognition system: An overview. Computer, Speech
and Language.
J. L. Lemke. 1990. Talking Science: Language, Learn-
ing and Values. Ablex, Norwood, NJ.
D. Litman, J. Hirschberg, and M. Swerts. 2001. Predict-
ing user reactions to system error. In Proc.of ACL.
Diane Litman, Kate Forbes, and Scott Silliman. 2003.
Towards emotion prediction in spoken tutoring dia-
logues. Submitted.
M. Makatchev, P. Jordan, and K. VanLehn. 2002. Dis-
course processing for explanatory essays in tutorial ap-
plications. In Proceedings of the 3rd SIGdial Work-
shop on Discourse and Dialogue.
J. Mostow and G. Aist. 2001. Evaluating tutors that lis-
ten: An overview of Project LISTEN. In K. Forbus and
P. Feltovich, editors, Smart Machines in Education.
M. Pressley, E. Wood, V. E. Woloshyn, V. Martin,
A. King, and D. Menke. 1992. Encouraging mind-
ful use of prior knowledge: Attempting to construct
explanatory answers facilitates learning. Educational
Psychologist, 27:91?109.
A. Renkl. 1997. Learning from worked-out examples:
A study on individual differences. Cognitive Science,
21(1):1?29.
C. P. Rose and V. Aleven. 2002. Proc. of the ITS 2002
workshop on empirical methods for tutorial dialogue
systems. Technical report, San Sebastian, Spain, June.
C. P. Rose?, J. D. Moore, K. VanLehn, and D. Allbritton.
2001. A comparative evaluation of socratic versus di-
dactic tutoring. In Proceedings of the 23rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pages
869?874.
C. P. Rose?, P. Jordan, M. Ringenberg, S. Siler, K. Van-
Lehn, and A. Weinstein. 2001. Interactive conceptual
tutoring in atlas-andes. In Proceedings of Articial In-
telligence in Education, pages 256?266.
C. P. Rose?, D. Bhembe, A. Roque, S. Siler, R. Srivas-
tava, and K. Vanlehn. 2002a. A hybrid language un-
derstanding approach for robust selection of tutoring
goals. In Proceedings of the Intelligent Tutoring Sys-
tems Conference, pages 552?561.
C. P. Rose?, K. VanLehn, and The Natural Language Tu-
toring Group. Submitted. Is human tutoring always
more effective than reading. In Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society.
C. P. Rose?. 2000. A framework for robust sentence
level interpretation. In Proceedings of the First Meet-
ing of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 1129?1135.
N. J. Slamecka and P. Graf. 1978. The generation ef-
fect: Delineation of a phenomenon. Journal of Exper-
imental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory,
(4):592?604.
K. VanLehn, P. Jordan, C. Rose?, D. Bhembe, M. Bo?ttner,
A. Gaydos, M. Makatchev, U. Pappuswamy, M. Rin-
genberg, A. Roque, S. Siler, R. Srivastava, and R. Wil-
son. 2002. The architecture of Why2-Atlas: A coach
for qualitative physics essay writing. In Proc. of ITS.
Claus Zinn, Johanna D. Moore, and Mark G. Core. 2002.
A 3-tier planning architecture for managing tutorial di-
alogue. In Proceedings Intelligent Tutoring Systems,
Sixth International Conference (ITS 2002), Biarritz,
France, June.
