Enhanced Free Text Access to Anatomically-Indexed Data
Gail Sinclair
Informatics Division
University of Edinburgh
80 South Bridge
Edinburgh, UK EH1 1HN
carols@dai.ed.ac.uk
Bonnie Webber
Informatics Division
University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh, UK EH8 9LW
bonnie.webber@ed.ac.uk
Duncan Davidson
MRC Human Genetics Unit
Western General Hospital
Crewe Road
Edinburgh, UK EH4 2XU
duncan.davidson@hgu.mrc.ac.uk
Abstract
We describe our use of an existing re-
source, the Mouse Anatomical Nomen-
clature, to improve a symbolic interface
to anatomically-indexed gene expression
data. The goal is to reduce user effort in
specifying anatomical structures of inter-
est and increase precision and recall.
1 Introduction
Language Technology (LT) resources are time-
consuming and expensive to develop, and appli-
cations rarely have the luxury of calling upon re-
sources specially designed for the task at hand. For
LT applications in developmental biology such as
robust interfaces to anatomically-indexed gene ex-
pression data and text mining tools to assist in build-
ing such databases, resources already exist in the
form of anatomical nomenclatures for several model
organisms including mouse, zebrafish, drosophila
and human. (Others may follow.) These nomen-
clatures have been developed by biologists for biol-
ogists, to record in a clear, intuitive and structured
way the structures that can be distinguished at each
stage of an embryo?s development. The challenge
for LT applications in developmental biology is to
stretch them to serve other purposes as well.
In this paper, we describe how we have taken one
of these anatomical nomenclatures (mouse) and ex-
tracted from it a new resource to facilitate free text
access to anatomically-indexed data. The techniques
we have used are applicable to anatomical nomen-
clatures for other model organisms as well.
The paper is organised as follows: In Section 2,
we describe the Mouse Atlas, which is the particular
context for the interface we are developing. Sec-
tion 3 describes what we are doing to reduce the
amount of effort a user has to expend in specifying
anatomical structures of interest to them. In Sec-
tion 4, we describe how what we did to reduce user
effort also serves to provide a clearer display of the
results of searching. Then in Sections 5 and 6, we
describe what we are doing to increase the precision
and recall of user queries.
2 The Mouse Atlas
The Mouse Atlas, developed by researchers at the
Medical Research Council?s Human Genetics Unit
(MRC HGU) in Edinburgh, is a 3D atlas of mouse
embryo development (http://genex.hgu.mrc.ac.uk).
Anatomical structures within each of the 26 Theiler
Stages of embryo development are labelled, and 3D
reconstructions of each stage can be displayed in
transverse, frontal, sagittal or arbitrary planes.
The Mouse Atlas is now being used to support in-
dexing of gene expression data, allowing the results
of gene expression experiments to be indexed with
respect to where genes are expressed in the devel-
oping embryo. There are at least two ways of using
anatomy to index gene expression data. In spatial
indexing, data is associated directly with volume el-
ements, voxels of the anatomical model. In symbolic
indexing, gene expression data is associated with a
label specifying a pre-defined region of the embryo.
A database of spatially indexed gene expres-
sion data (the EMAGE database) is being devel-
oped at the MRC HGU. A database of symboli-
cally indexed gene expression data (the Gene Ex-
pression Database or GXD) is being developed
by the Jackson Laboratory in Bar Harbor, Maine
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                            the Biomedical Domain, Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 45-52.
                         Proceedings of the Workshop on Natural Language Processing in
(http://www.informatics.jax.org). Indexing in the
GXD uses the Mouse Anatomical Nomenclature, a
set of 26 trees of anatomical terms (one tree per
Theiler Stage) structured primarily by part-whole re-
lations (and some set-member relations).
The root node of each Theiler Stage tree corre-
sponds to the entire embryo at that stage, while other
nodes correspond to organ systems, subsystems,
spatially-localised parts of subsystems, or anatom-
ical structures. Each node within a tree has a la-
bel (its component term), but component terms are
not meant to serve as unique designators: the only
thing guaranteed to denote an anatomical structure
uniquely is the sequence of component terms that
comprises a path from the root node. Thus paths
(and only paths) can serve as keys for symbolic in-
dexing of data. For example the component term
CRANIAL labels both a child of GANGLION (i.e.,
ganglia located in the head) and a child of NERVE
(i.e., nerves located in the head). The path to this
latter child
EMBRYO.ORGANSYSTEM.NERVOUSSYSTEM.
CENTRALNERVOUSSYSTEM.NERVE.
CRANIAL.TRIGEMINALV
uniquely denotes the trigeminal, or fifth cranial,
nerve1 within the Theiler Stage denoted by its root
and is used as a key for relevant data.
For accessing gene expression data, both spatial
and symbolic means are again both possible. An
elegant spatial interface is being completed at the
MRC HGU, that pairs an active window contain-
ing a view of the embryo stage of interest, with a
window containing the corresponding nomenclature
tree2. Clicking at a point in the embryo view high-
lights the most specific corresponding node of the
nomenclature being displayed (i.e., sub-trees of a
node can be either hidden or exploded). Similarly,
clicking on a term in the nomenclature highlights the
corresponding structure within the embryo along the
plane currently being displayed. A screen-shot from
the interface is shown in Figure 2. On the left of the
figure is an outline frontal drawing of the embryo, on
which a sagittal section plane is marked in red. The
centre panel shows a digital, sagittal section through
1Full stop is used to separate component names along a path.
2http://genex.hgu.mrc.ac.uk/Resources/GXDQuery1
the volumetric embryo model with the delineated
left dorsal aorta coloured blue. The correspond-
ing component term is highlighted on the Mouse
Anatomical Nomenclature on the right. Users can
access the gene expression data on the highlighted
structure by another mouse click.
The current project aims at improving symbolic
access to gene expression data by providing a robust
free-text interface. In the current GXD interface3 ,
users can tree-walk through the Mouse Anatomical
Nomenclature for a given stage, to find the anatomi-
cal structure whose associated gene expression data
is of interest to them, or they can enter a term which
is matched against single component names, with all
possible substring matches returned for the user to
choose among.
Problems exist with both forms of access. It is
well known that navigating through a tree is tedious.
A more subtle problem arises from anatomy being
forced into a tree-structure that it doesn?t have. This
leads to structures being divided and the resulting
sub-structures realised in different parts of the tree ?
for example, the endocardial tube is divided into one
part that is a daughter of COMMON ATRIAL CHAM-
BER (i.e., its location), and another part which is a
daughter of OUTFLOW TRACT. So appearing to find
a structure of interest by a tree-walk, in addition to
being tedious, doesn?t by itself guarantee the user
that s/he has found it all.
In contrast, access by sub-string matching on in-
dividual component terms has problems of both re-
call and precision. A user may enter a string that
matches nothing (0% recall): (1) it may be neither a
component term nor a substring within a component
term ? e.g., while HEART is a common synonym
for the modifier ?cardiac? (and a component term
in its own right) and CARDIAC MUSCLE is a compo-
nent term, the string ?heart muscle? yields no match;
or (2) it may span multiple component terms in the
nomenclature ? e.g., while GLAND is a component
term, and PITUITARY is the component term of one
of its children (i.e., a member of the set of glands),
the string ?pituitary gland? yields no match. Or the
opposite may happen: 100% recall with low preci-
sion. For example, a search on ?hindbrain? yields
22 matches, while ?mesenchyme? yields as many as
3http://www.informatics.jax.org/menus/expression menu
Figure 1: Screen shot of Mouse Atlas interface, displaying a Theiler Stage 14 embryo.
1056 matches.
The current project aims to provide a robust free
text interface that will avoid these and other prob-
lems, (1) reducing the effort that a user needs to
expend in finding anatomical structures of inter-
est; (2) better organising search results; (3) improv-
ing recall by reducing the number of times that no
match is found; and (4) improving precision over
that which is possible using substring matching on
individual component names. To do this, we have
been extracting from the Mouse Anatomical Nomen-
clature another resource comprising a set of Natu-
ral Language (NL) phrases that uniquely denote the
parts of the embryo. To expand this set, we have
semi-automatically culled other anatomical speci-
fiers from a textbook on developmental anatomy
made available to us in electronic form. The inter-
esting challenges this has posed are described in the
remainder of the paper.
3 Reducing User Effort
As already noted, component terms in the Mouse
Anatomical Nomenclature (as in those for other
model organisms) are not unique designators for
anatomical structures: the only unique designators
are path specifications. Thus technically, the only
way a user can uniquely select an anatomical struc-
ture of interest is to enter the entire path name (or to
find it through navigating an embryo stage tree down
from its root).
However, there are developmentally valid no-
tions of uniqueness with respect to which some
of the 1416 component terms associated with the
13737 nodes in the 26 Theiler Stage trees of the
Mouse Anatomical Nomenclature can be taken to be
unique.4
The first such notion of uniqueness can be as-
sociated with an anatomical structure that develops
by some Theiler Stage j and then persists under
the same name through subsequent stages. In the
Mouse Anatomical Nomenclature, this situation cor-
responds, first off, to path specifications that differ
only in their root note (which designates the embryo
4The size of Theiler Stage trees ranges from 3 nodes in stage
2 (early development) to 1739 nodes in stage 26 (pre-birth),
with the average size being 528 nodes.
at the corresponding Theiler Stage). If the compo-
nent term at the leaf does not occur elsewhere in the
nomenclature outside this path specification, then
this component name can be classified as unique.
This notion of uniqueness was found to hold
of 1017 of the 1416 component terms, including
CARDIOGENIC PLATE, CRANIUM, etc. This meant
that approximately 11200 nodes were covered, with
somewhat over 2500 still remaining. These 1017
component terms could potentially be used to access
gene expression data associated with some or all of
the Theiler Stages through which the uniquely des-
ignated structure exists, except for a problem that we
will mention shortly.
The second notion of uniqueness is an extension
of the first. Before anatomical structures are fully
formed, they tend to be referred to by names that de-
note the same anatomical structure but also convey
that it is not fully formed ? for example, the FU-
TURE FOREBRAIN. Such component terms can be
linked with the component term of the structure they
develop into, treating the two together as a unique
designator across the extended sequence of Theiler
Stages. A user seeking gene expression data for the
FOREBRAIN without specifying a particular Theiler
Stage, could then select from stages 15-16, which
contain the FUTURE FOREBRAIN, as well as from
stages 17-26, which contain the FOREBRAIN.
In some cases, finding such terms is easy ? specif-
ically, when paths in adjacent stages differ only in
their root node and their potentially co-designating
leaf terms. In other cases, the process is complicated
by the fact that their containing anatomical struc-
tures are themselves developing and changing. This
creates additional differences in paths that should
be taken to co-designate in this lineage sense. The
difference may simply be in the particular compo-
nent term associated with a non-terminal node ? e.g.
FUTURE FOREBRAIN is a child of FUTURE BRAIN
in stages 15-16, while FOREBRAIN descends from
BRAIN in stages 17-26. These cases can be iden-
tified by verifying that the intermediate structures
are themselves in a lineage relation. But the paths
may also differ in length, the earlier stage path be-
ing longer than its corresponding path in the next
stage. This is because the earlier stage specifies the
tissue from which the structure is developing from ?
for example, the fibula develops from the lower leg
mesenchyme. So the path
EMBRYO.LIMB.HINDLIMB.LEG.LOWERLEG.
MESENCHYME.FIBULA
is a unique designator in Stage23, becoming
EMBRYO.LIMB.HINDLIMB.LEG.LOWERLEG.
FIBULA
in Stages 24 to 26. To recognise such cases, we
need to analyse what nodes contribute to differences
in path length and decide whether two component
terms co-specify on that basis.
Again, when these patterns are encountered, the
component names, providing they are not involved
in any other initial tree paths, can be classified as
being unique, further reducing the number of names
to be disambiguated. So far 44 of these lineage pat-
terns have been identified, further eliminating ap-
proximately 118 from the set of ambiguous compo-
nent terms.
The third notion of uniqueness that can be used
for identifying component terms that can serve as
unique designators can be called group uniqueness.
For example, although the component term TOOTH
appears in different path specifications, whose corre-
sponding internal nodes are not pairwise equivalent
? e.g.
EMBRYO.ORGAN SYSTEM.VISCERAL
ORGAN.ALIMENTARY SYSTEM.ORAL
REGION.LOWER JAW.TOOTH
EMBRYO.ORGAN SYSTEM.VISCERAL
ORGAN.ALIMENTARY SYSTEM.ORAL
REGION.UPPER JAW.TOOTH
where LOWER JAW does not co-specify with UPPER
JAW, the pairwise different nodes may correspond to
structures whose anatomical/developmental proper-
ties can, in the context of gene expression, be con-
sidered the same. This notion of group uniqueness
was found to hold of nine component terms, cover-
ing approximately 260 of the remaining nodes.
Before moving from individual component terms
that turn out to be unique designators for anatomi-
cal structures, to short sequences of such terms, we
need to point out a separate problem in actually us-
ing them in a user interface. The problem follows
from a design decision made in the development of
these anatomical nomenclatures that supports their
intended use by biologists as clear and succinct
structural descriptions of an embryo. Specifically,
while an individual component term may turn out
to be a unique specifier with respect to the Nomen-
clature, outside the context of its tree path, it may
not signify to a biologist what it is intended to. For
example, while the term LOOP has been found to
uniquely denote the same anatomical structure as
EMBRYO.ORGAN SYSTEM.VISCERAL ORGAN.
ALIMENTARY SYSTEM.GUT.MIDGUT.LOOP
a biologist would never simply use ?loop? to refer
to the the loop of the midgut. Similarly, while the
term DISTAL uniquely designates the same anatom-
ical structure as
EMBRYO.LIMB.FORELIMB.JOINT.
RADIO-ULNARJOINT.DISTAL
?distal? on its own is not how any biologist would
refer to the joint of the radius and ulna bones that is
furthest from the shoulder.
For the interface we are developing, we need to
replace these albeit unique component terms with
phrases that are more natural to use in specifying
these structures.
Turning now to component terms that are not
unique in any of the senses discussed so far, it still
does not appear to be the case that a user need en-
ter an entire path specification to refer to its associ-
ated anatomical structure. In many cases, a sub-path
specification of two, or in some cases, three compo-
nent terms appears sufficient to specify the anatom-
ical structure of interest.
To find where shorter sub-paths would serve as
a source of unique designators, we enumerated all
sub-paths from nodes with a non-unique associated
component term (either leaf or internal node) to
the root of their corresponding Theiler Stage tree
(i.e., paths being specified in child-parent order).
This revealed many cases where a unique two- or
three-component path specification would disam-
biguate an otherwise ambiguous term, and allowed
us to cover another 156 component terms via the 2-
component terms and 50 via the 3-component terms.
This has left only 58 of the original 1416 component
terms (and 1159 corresponding nodes in the Nomen-
clature out of the original 13737) for us to inves-
tigate other methods of finding unique designators
for.
The question is what Natural Language phrases
these multi-component terms correspond to, since it
is such phrases that would be used in an interface,
not sequences of component terms. Slight varia-
tions in what the parent-child relations correspond
to mean there are three different phrasal patterns for
two-component sub-paths: (1) In cases where the
child and parent nodes are in a part-whole relation
and both are realised as nouns ? e.g., a child with
component term CAPSULE descending from a par-
ent LENS, or a parent CORTEX or a parent OVARY
EMBRYO.ORGANSYSTEM.SENSORYORGAN
.EYE.LENS.CAPSULE
EMBRYO.ORGANSYSTEM.VISCERAL ORGAN.
RENAL/URINARYSYSTEM.METANEPHROS.
EXCRETORY COMPONENT.CORTEX.
CAPSULE
EMBRYO.ORGAN SYSTEM.VISCERAL ORGAN.
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM.FEMALE.
OVARY.CAPSULE
the multi-component term can be realised as a
phrase CHILD OF PARENT, generating the three
uniquely specifying phrases ?capsule of lens?, ?cap-
sule of cortex? and ?capsule of ovary?. Alterna-
tively, a natural phrase of the form PARENT CHILD,
(i.e. ?lens capsule?, ?cortex capsule? and ?ovary
capsule? can also be constructed as a natural way
of describing the anatomical structure that the path
denotes.
(2) In cases where the child and parent nodes are
in a part-whole relation, but the component term as-
sociated with the child is an adjective such as LEFT,
UPPER or ANTERIOR, then the pattern CHILD PAR-
ENT can be used to form an appropriate phrase. For
example, the path specification
EMBRYO.ORGANSYSTEM.CARDIOVASCULAR
SYSTEM.VENOUSSYSTEM.VENACAVA.
INFERIOR
can be accessed by the phrase ?inferior vena cava?.
(3) In cases where the child and parent nodes are
in a set-instance relation, as in the case of
EMBRYO.ORGAN SYSTEM.VISCERAL ORGAN.
ALIMENTARY SYSTEM.ORAL REGION.
GLAND.PITUITARY
again the pattern CHILD PARENT can be used to
form an appropriate phrase ? for example ?pituitary
gland? in this case. Phrases thus formed from multi-
component sub-paths may again be unique with re-
spect to an interval of Theiler Stages, or with respect
to lineage within the Theiler Stages, or with respect
to a group.
4 Improving the Display of Search Results
Currently, within the interface to the Gene Expres-
sion Database, one can search for an anatomical
structure of interest within a single tree or across all
stages. A query across all Theiler Stages (TS) results
in a list of all stages with a matching component, and
associated with each stage is a path specification ter-
minating at a matching component name. This does
not easily enable the user to locate the specific entity
they are interested in. If the term is not unique, then
the results contain all possible anatomical structures
the query could represent. For example, a sub-string
match on the phrase ?lumen? results in
4 TS12 term(s) matching query ?lumen?:
future spinal cord;neural tube;neural lumen
foregut diverticulum;lumen
hindgut diverticulum;lumen
midgut;lumen
5 TS13 term(s) matching query ?lumen?:
future spinal cord;neural tube;neural lumen
foregut diverticulum;lumen
hindgut diverticulum;lumen
midgut;lumen
foregut-midgut junction;lumen
7 TS14 term(s) matching query ?lumen?:
future spinal cord;neural tube;neural lumen (future
spinal canal, spinal canal)
hindgut diverticulum;lumen
midgut;lumen
foregut-midgut junction;lumen
rest of foregut;lumen
foregut;pharyngeal region;lumen
otic pit;lumen
10 TS15 term(s) matching query ?lumen?:
optic recess (lumen of optic stalk)
future spinal cord;neural tube;neural lumen (future
spinal canal, spinal canal)
hindgut diverticulum;lumen
midgut;lumen
pharynx;lumen
foregut-midgut junction;lumen
hindgut;lumen
rest of foregut;lumen
foregut;oesophageal region;lumen
otic pit;lumen
Locating an entity of interest amongst all these tree
paths can be an arduous task. Even if the term is
unique, the same entry will be repeated across mul-
tiple stages, leading to a visual search problem.
An alternative, cleaner way of presenting search
results is to take the matching component terms as
the primary display key and associate it with a list
of stages where its corresponding path specification
occurs. For non-unique search queries such as the
example above, this displays as
future spinal cord; neural tube; neural lumen:
Stages 12, 13, 14, 15, ...
foregut diverticulum; lumen:
Stages 12, 13
hindgut diverticulum; lumen:
Stages 12, 13, 14, 15, ...
midgut;lumen:
Stages 12, 13, 14, 15, ...
foregut-midgut junction; lumen:
Stages 13, 14, 15, ...
rest of foregut; lumen:
Stages 14, 15, ...
otic pit; lumen:
Stages 14, 15, ...
optic recess:
Stages 15, ...
pharynx; lumen:
Stages 15, ...
foregut; oesophageal region; lumen:
Stages 15, ...
foregut; pharyngeal region; lumen:
Stages 14
We will, of course, have to verify that this form
of display better facilitates users finding the struc-
ture(s) and stage(s) of interest to them.
5 Increasing Precision
The introduction of phrases based on more than
one component term within the Mouse Anatomy
Nomenclature significantly reduces the number of
irrelevant matches compared to searches based on
a single comonent term.
To continue our example with CAPSULE from
Section 3, the current situation is that no results
will be found if ?cortex capsule? is entered as a
search query. If the user then simply searches for
?capsule? across all stages, 31 instances will be re-
turned. However, although all sub-paths leading to
CORTEX.CAPSULE are returned, the other 87% of
the results are irrelevant to the user?s intention. If
the multi-component terms are included as uniquely
designating replacements of existing terms, 100%
recall would be maintained, while increasing preci-
sion to 100% percent.
As there is some systematicity involving parent
and child component terms, these terms can be auto-
matically generated. Within the nomenclature there
are three typical patterns. These can be formalised
as:
  the child being a descriptor of the parent e.g.
superior vena cava
  the child being a part of the parent e.g. ovary
capsule or capsule of ovary
  the child being a member of the parent set e.g.
pituitary gland.
Of course, recognising which tree path belongs to
which of the patterns above requires biological ex-
pertise, but once identified new terms can be gener-
ated that are more likely to be used naturally to re-
fer to the relevant anatomical components. Once in
place these new terms can increase recall, with high
precision.
6 Increasing Recall
While the Mouse Anatomical Nomenclature was de-
signed to specify every anatomical structure within
the developing mouse embryo, it does not contain
all the terms that developmental biologists might use
to refer to anatomical entities. Although some syn-
onyms have been explicitly recorded in the nomen-
clature, no attempt has been made to be exhaustive.
In order to increase the recall of user searches
for anatomical structures, we have undertaken to in-
crease the number and range of synonyms for ele-
ments of the nomenclature, by semi-automatically
Figure 2: Schematic of a Theiler Stage 20 embryo
analysing texts likely to contain terms related to the
developmental anatomy of the mouse.
To demonstrate the potential value of this ap-
proach, we first manually reviewed the short tex-
tual description that accompanies each Theiler stage
within the Mouse Atlas, highlighting the main fea-
tures of the stage ? for example, this text accompa-
nies the schematic of TS20 (Figure 6):
The handplate (anterior footplate) is no
longer circular but develops angles which
correspond to the future digits. The poste-
rior footplate is also distinguishable from
the lower part of the leg. It is possible
to see the pigmentation of the pigmented
layer of the retina through the transparent
cornea. The tongue and brain vesicles are
clearly visible.
We collected all the noun phrases (NPs) that could
potentially refer to an anatomical structure and
found, within the  1400 words comprising the de-
scriptions, 25 anatomical terms that were not in-
cluded in the nomenclature either as component
terms or as synonyms for component terms. Since
the same people wrote these textual descriptions as
developed the Nomenclature, it shows how difficult
it is to record all terms used for anatomical structures
without systematic effort.
To support such a systematic effort, we have
been applying basic text analysis software to
a textbook on developmental anatomy (Kaufman
and Bard, 1999), including a tokenizer, part-of-
speech tagger and NP chunker, the latter two from
the Language Technology Group (LTG) in Edin-
burgh (http://www.ltg.ed.ac.uk), as well as addi-
tional scripts ? in order to identify noun phrases,
from which we then extract those most likely to re-
fer to an anatomical structure. The latter have then
been discussed with our domain expert, Davidson.
Because neither the POS tagger nor the chun-
ker were specially trained for this type of techni-
cal text, their performance was rather weak. Chun-
ker output from the chapter on the heart, produced
5547 phrases, of which 2465 were considered to be
NPs. 2.4% (i.e. 74) of the 3082 claimed non-NPs
were obvious false negatives involving the terms ve-
nacava, septum primum/secundum and ductus arte-
riosus/venous. Of the terms classified as NPs, 3.7%
(i.e. 92) were found to be false positives. Most of
these errors involved words that could be classed as
verbs or nouns adjacent to true NPs, regarded as plu-
ral nouns but which, in context, were acting as verbs,
e.g. the ostium secundum forms.
From the true NPs, we removed pronouns, num-
bers, authors names, and plural terms whose singu-
lar was also present. This left 451 NPs, of which
82 were found to be exact matches for component
terms and eight, for the synonyms in the Nomencla-
ture. These were also removed, leaving 361 possible
anatomical terms not found in the Nomenclature.
We then used a common technique to reduce this
set by only considering NPs headed by or modified
by a frequent head or modifier from within the set of
component terms (Bodenreider et al, 2002). Here,
frequent meant   3 times. For example, CAROTID,
FIBROUS and ENDOCARDIAL are frequent modi-
fiers, while ARTERY, SEPTUM and TISSUE are fre-
quent head nouns. Of the 361 remaining NPs from
the heart chapter, 115 shared a high frequency head
noun with terms already in the Nomenclature, while
105 shared a high frequency modifier with terms in
the Nomenclature. We considered these 220 NPs
probable anatomical terms, with the remaining 141
being possible anatomical terms. These two sets are
now being reviewed to identify which are synonyms
for anatomical structures identified in the Nomen-
clature, which denote structures or groups of struc-
tures that have not be recorded in the Nomenclature,
which are reduced co-referring NPs, and which are
not anatomical terms after all.
7 Future Work
One result of this work has been to catch both
structural and terminological inconsistencies in the
Mouse Anatomical Nomenclature because our ex-
tractions allow biologists to easily see differences
between one branch and another or between one tree
and another in the Nomenclature.
With respect to an enhanced interface to the gene
expression data, we are now ready to take the results
of our analyses and use them to provide a potentially
more effective way of searching for relevant anatom-
ical structures and displaying the results. We have a
method to mine for additional synonyms for anatom-
ical terms, that we will apply to additional texts, ide-
ally after re-training the POS-tagger and chunker to
better reflect the types of texts we are dealing with.
Similar Nomenclatures of developmental
anatomy exist for other model organisms, including
drosophila, zebrafish and human. These too will
be used to index gene expression data for these
organisms, eventually supporting cross-species
comparison of gene expression patterns and further
understanding of development. So we believe that
developmental anatomy provides a rich domain
in which to apply (and learn to extend) Natural
Language tools and techniques.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Dr. Jonathan
Bard for supplying us with electronic versions of
two chapters from The Anatomical Basis of Mouse
Development and answering many of our questions.
References
Olivier Bodenreider, Thomas Rindflesch, and Anita Bur-
gun. 2002. Unsupervised, corpus-based method for
extending a biomedical terminology. In Proceed-
ings of the ACL Workshop on Biomedical Language,
Philadelphia PA.
Matthew H. Kaufman and Jonathan Bard. 1999. The
anatomical basis of mouse development. Academic
Press.
Grounding spatial named entities for information extraction
and question answering
Jochen L. Leidner Gail Sinclair Bonnie Webber
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh EH8 9LW
Scotland, UK
jochen.leidner@ed.ac.uk, csincla1@inf.ed.ac.uk, bonnie@inf.ed.ac.uk
Abstract
The task of named entity annotation of unseen
text has recently been successfully automated
with near-human performance.
But the full task involves more than annotation,
i.e. identifying the scope of each (continuous)
text span and its class (such as place name). It
also involves grounding the named entity (i.e.
establishing its denotation with respect to the
world or a model). The latter aspect has so far
been neglected.
In this paper, we show how geo-spatial named
entities can be grounded using geographic co-
ordinates, and how the results can be visual-
ized using off-the-shelf software. We use this
to compare a ?textual surrogate? of a newspa-
per story, with a ?visual surrogate? based on
geographic coordinates.
1 Introduction
The task of named entity annotation of unseen text
has recently been successfully automated, achiev-
ing near-human performance using machine learning
(Zheng and Su, 2002). But many applications also re-
quire grounding ? i.e., associating each classified text
span with a referent in the world or some model thereof.
The current paper discusses spatial grounding of named
entities that may be referentially ambiguous, using a min-
imality heuristic that is informed by external geographic
knowledge sources. We then apply these ideas to the cre-
ation of ?visual surrogates? for news articles.
This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 discusses
how spatial named entities can be grounded and how this
interacts with their extraction and applications. Section
3 describes a geo-spatial resolution algorithm. Section 4
shows how maps can be automatically constructed from
named-entity tagged newswire text using resolved place
names, hence introducing a new, graphical document sur-
rogate. Section 5 deals with the usefulness of grounded
named entities for question answering. Section 6 presents
some related work, and Section 7 concludes this paper.
2 Spatial Grounding
Gazetteers are large lists of names of geographic entities,
usually enriched with further information, such as their
class (e.g., town, river, dam, etc.), their size, and their
location (i.e. with respect to some relative or absolute
coordinate system such as longitude and latitude).
Appendix A identifies some publicly available sources.
UN-LOCODE is the official gazetteer by the United
Nations; it is also freely available from the UNECE Web
site1 and contains more than 36 000 locations in 234
countries (UNECE, 1998). The Alexandria Gazetteer
(Smith et al, 1996; Frew et al, 1998) is another database
of geographical entities, including both their coor-
dinates and relationships such as: in-state-of,
in-province-of, in-county-of,
in-country-of, in-region-of, part-of
and formerly-known-as.
To date, Named Entity Recognition (NER) has only
used gazetteers as evidence that a text span could be some
kind of place name (LOCATION), even though their finite
nature makes lists of names of limited use for classifica-
tion (Mikheev et al, 1999). Here we use them for spatial
grounding ? relating linguistic entities of subtype LOCA-
TION (Grishman and Sundheim, 1998) to their real-world
counterparts.
?World Atlases? and the gazetteers that index them are
not the only resources than can be used for grounding
spatial terms. In biomedicine, there are are several
brain atlases of different species, using various different
techniques, and focussing on both normal and disease
state; as well as a digital atlas of the human body
1 http://www.unece.org/cefact/locode/service/main.htm
Figure 1: Grounding an XML Ontology in Voxels: The
Mouse Atlas (Baldock et al, 1999).
based on data from the Visible Human project. Such
atlases and the nomenclatures that label their parts,
provide an important resource for biomedical research
and clinical diagnosis. For example, the Mouse Atlas
(Ringwald et al, 1994) comprises a sequence of 3D
(volumetric) reconstructions of the mouse embryo in
each of its 26 Theiler States of development. Indexing
it is an part-of hierarchy of anatomical terms (such
as embryo.organsystem.cardiovascularsystem-
.heart.atrium), called the Mouse Anatomical
Nomenclature (MAN). Each term is mapped to one or
more sets of adjacent voxels2 that constitute the term?s
denotation in the embryo. Figure 1 illustrate this linkage
(using 2D cross-sections) in the EMAGE database.3
Just as one might find it useful for information extrac-
tion or question answering to ground grographic terms
found in previously unseen text, one may also find it use-
ful to ground anatomical terms in previously unseen text.
One example of this would be in providing support for the
curation of the Gene Expression Database (GXD).4 This
support could come in the form of a named entity recog-
nizer for anatomical parts in text, with grounding against
the Mouse Atlas, using the gazetteer-like information in
the MAN.
So what is the relationship between a place name
gazetteer like UN-LOCODE and the Mouse Atlas? The
MAN is structured in a similar part-of hierarchy to
that of geographical locations:
USA embryo
California organ system
San Mateo County cardiovascular system
Redwood City heart
Because both gazetteers like UN-LOCODE and biomed-
ical atlases like the Mouse Atlas provide spatial ground-
ing for linguistic terms (Figure 2), both can be used to
reason about spatio-temporal settings of a discourse, for
instance, to resolve referential ambiguity.
2 Pixels are points in the 2D plane   x, y  ; voxels are 3D gener-
alizations of pixels   x  y  z  .
3 http://genex.hgu.mrc.ac.uk/Emage/database/intro.html
4 http://genex.hgu.mrc.ac.uk/Resources/GXDQuery1/
3 Place-Name Resolution for Information
Extraction
There are many places that share the same (Berlin, Ger-
many  Berlin, WI, USA) or similar names (York, UK
 New York, USA), usually because historically, the
founders of a new town had given it a similar or the same
name as the place they emigrated from.
When ambiguous place names are used in conversa-
tion or in text, it is usually clear to the hearer what spe-
cific referent is intended. First, speaker and hearer usu-
ally share some extra-linguistic context and implicitly ad-
here to Grice?s Cooperative Principle and the ?maxims?
that follow, which require a speaker to provide more iden-
tifying information about a location that the recipient is
believed to be unfamiliar with. Secondly, linguistic con-
text can provide clues: an accident report on the road
between Perth and Dundee promotes an interpretation of
Perth in Scotland, while an accident on the road between
Perth and Freemantle promotes an interpretation of Perth
in Western Australia. Computers, which are bound to se-
lect referents algorithmically, can exploit linguistic con-
text more easily than extra-linguistic context, but even the
use of linguistic context requires (as always) some subtle
heuristic reasoning.
Grounding place names mentioned in a text can sup-
port effective visualization ? for instance, in a multimedia
document surrogate that contains textual, video and map
elements (e.g. in a question answering scenario), where
we want to ensure that the video shows the region and the
map is centered around the places mentioned.
To make use of linguistic context in resolving am-
biguous place names, we apply two different minimal-
ity heuristics (Gardent and Webber, 2001). The first we
borrow (slightly modified) from work in automatic word
sense disambiguation (Gale et al, 1992), calling it ?one
referent per discourse?. It assumes that a place name
mentioned in a discourse refers to the same location
throughout the discourse, just as a word is assumed to
be used in the same one sense throughout the discourse.
Neither is logically necessary, and hence both are simply
interpretational biases.
The second minimality heuristic assumes that, in cases
where there is more than one place name mentioned in
some span of text, the smallest region that is able to
ground the whole set is the one that gives them their inter-
pretation.5 This can be used to resolve referential ambi-
guity by proximity: i.e., not only is the place name Berlin
taken to denote the same Berlin throughout a discourse
unless mentioned otherwise,6 but so does a Potsdam men-
5 Probably the smaller the span, the more often valid will this
heuristic be.
6 This paper is a rare exception due to its meta-linguistic na-
ture.
Gazetteer Named Entity Grounding Real World
UN-LOCODE Novosibirsk  55?02  N; 82?55  E  (Novosibirsk)
(longitude/latitude)
Mouse Atlas atrium  345, 2, 345  ; 	
		 (part of the heart)
(set of voxels)
Figure 2: Comparison between Spatial Grounding in UN-LOCODE and the Mouse Atlas.
A?
A??
C
D
E
F
G
HI
J
K
B
Places mentioned in discourse
Potential Referents
Places NOT mentioned in discourse
Figure 3: A Place-Name Resolution Method.
tioned together with a Berlin uniquely select the capital
of Germany as the likely referent from the set of all can-
didate Berlins.7
To illustrate this ?spatial minimality? heuristic, con-
sider Figure 3: Assume that a mention of place A in a
text could either refer to A

or A
 
. If the text also con-
tains terms that ground unambiguously to I, J, and K, we
assume the referent of A is A

rather than A
 
because the
former leads to a smaller spatial context.
To use this ?spatial minimality? heuristic, we start by
extracting all place names using a named entity recog-
nizer. We then look up the ?confusion set? of potential
referents for each place name, e.g. for Berlin:  Berlin,
FRG (German capital); Berlin, WI, USA; Berlin, NJ,
USA; Berlin, CT, USA; Berlin, NH, USA; Berlin, GA,
USA; Berlin, IL, USA; Berlin, NY, USA; Berlin, ND,
USA; Berlin, NJ, USA  . Each member of the set of po-
tential referents is associated with its spatial coordinates
(longitude/latitude), using a gazetteer. We then compute
the cross-product of all the confusion sets. (Each mem-
ber of the cross-product contains one potential referent
for each place name, along with its spatial coordinates.)
For each member of the cross-product, we compute the
area of the minimal polygon bounding all the potential
referents, and select as the intended interpretation, the
one with the smallest area.8 The resulting behaviour is
7 despite the fact that most places named Berlin are in the
United States
8 One can approximate this, either by computing the sum of
 Berlin; Potsdam  Berlin, FRG (Germany)
 Fairburn; Berlin  Berlin, WI, USA
 West Berlin; Bishops; Dicktown  Berlin, NJ, USA
 Kensington; Berlin; New Britain  Berlin, CT, USA
 Copperville; Berlin; Gorham  Berlin, NH, USA
 Moultrie; Berlin  Berlin, GA, USA
 Berlin; Prouty  Berlin, IL, USA
 Berlin; Berlin Center; Cherryplain  Berlin, NY, USA
 Medberry; Berlin  Berlin, ND, USA
Figure 4: Spatial Reference Resolution Using Spatial
Minimality.
shown in Figure 4: depending on contextually mentioned
other places, a different Berlin is selected.
The value of this heuristic needs to be assessed quanti-
tatively against various types of text.
In resolving anatomical designators in text, we may
employ a variation of the spatial minimality heuristic,
based on the fact that no listing will ever be complete
with respect to all the existing or new-minted synonyms
for anatomical terms.
When grounding the anatomical terms in the text
In subsequent stages until birth, cytokeratin 8
continues to be expressed in embryonic taste
buds distributed in punctuate patterns at regu-
lar intervals along rows that are symmetrically
located on both sides of the median sulcus in
the dorsal anterior developing tongue.
we find no median sulcus within the MAN, only alveo-
lar sulcus, optic sulcus, pre-otic sulcus, sulcus limitans
and sulcus terminalis. We just assume that all anatomi-
cal terms refer to previously recognized anatomical enti-
ties, just as we assume that all geographic terms refer to
existing geographic entities and not, for example, some
new town called ?Berlin? or ?London? that is not yet in
the gazetteer. Hence median sulcus is assumed to be a
synonym for one of the five sulci given in the MAN. At
this point, we can invoke the spatial minimality heuris-
tic, looking for the minimal bounding space that includes
tongue and one of the five sulci, here yielding ?sulcus
terminalis?. Thus the spatial minimality heuristic is here
pairwise point-point distances, or symbolically, using a hierar-
chical gazetteer?s relations, such as in-region-of.
used with other assumptions to resolve missing or previ-
ously unseen terms.
4 Visualization of Geo-Spatial Aspects in
Narrative
The usefulness of visual representations to
convey information is widely recognized (cf.
(Larkin and Simon, 1987)). Here, we use the grounding
of named entities in news stories to create a visual
surrogate that represents their ?spatial aboutness?.
Two news stories were selected from online newspa-
pers on the same day (2003-02-21): one story (Appendix
B) reports the tragic death of a baby from London in a
Glasgow hospital despite flying it to a Glasgow special-
ist hospital in the Royal aircraft (BBC News, 2003), and
the other report (Appendix C) describes the search of the
Californian police for a pregnant women from Modesto,
CA, who has disappeared (The Mercury News, 2003).
We use the term ?surrogate? to refer to a partial view
of a text (e.g. (Leidner, 2002)). Figure 5 shows a tex-
tual surrogate in the form of all place names found in a
text: an analyst who wants to get a quick overview about
the locations involved in some item of news reportage, to
decide its local interest or relevance, might find such a
surrogate helpful, although the source would still have to
be skim-read.
Story A
... Scotland ... Tooting ... London ... Glasgow ... London
... Glasgow ... Northolt ... Glasgow ... Britain ... Prestwick
... Tooting ... Glasgow ... UK ... (Glasgow) ...
Story B
Modesto ... (Southern California) ... (Modesto) ... Los
Angeles ... Sacramento ... Berkeley (Marina) ... Fresno
... Oakland ... Modesto ... Los Angeles ... Southern
California ... Modesto ... Southern California ... New York
... Long Island ...
Figure 5: A Textual Geo-Spatial Document Surrogate for
the Stories in Appendices B and C.
We now compare this ?baseline? textual surrogate to a
graphical map representation that draws on the algorithm
introduced before. Our simple visualisation method com-
prises the following components (Figure 6): an (open-
domain) news item is fed into locotagger, our sim-
ple named entity tagger for place names based on UN-
LOCODE.9 It recognises location names, resolves mul-
tireferential place names and looks up the coordinates:
9 For the experiment reported here, we also used data from
http://www.astro.com/cgi/aq.cgi?lang=e.
Named Entity
Tagging
Generator
Map
Newswire Text
Graphical Map
Longitute/
LookupLatitude
Placename
Resolution
Figure 6: System Architecture.
Scott, more than a dozen news crews
from <ENAMEX type="LOCATION" longitude=
"-118.25" latitude="34.05">Los
Angeles</ENAMEX> to <ENAMEX type=
"LOCATION" longitude="121.5"
latitude="38.583333">Sacramento
</ENAMEX> camped out front.
From the text we obtain a vector of types of all spatial
named entities with their frequency of occurrence in the
text:









UK : 1
Scotland : 1
Tooting : 2
London : 2
Glasgow : 5
Northolt : 2
Prestwick : 1
Britain : 1








Classification from Full Text: A Comparison of Canonical Sections of
Scientific Papers
Gail Sinclair Bonnie Webber
School of Informatics,
University of Edinburgh
 	
Exploiting Context for Biomedical Entity Recognition:
From Syntax to the Web
Jenny Finkel,* Shipra Dingare,? Huy Nguyen,*
Malvina Nissim,? Christopher Manning,* and Gail Sinclair?
*Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 93405-9040
United States
{jrfinkel|htnguyen|manning}
@cs.stanford.edu
?Institute for Communicating and
Collaborative Systems
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh EH8 9LW
United Kingdom
{sdingar1|mnissim|csincla1}
@inf.ed.ac.uk
Abstract
We describe a machine learning system for the
recognition of names in biomedical texts. The sys-
tem makes extensive use of local and syntactic fea-
tures within the text, as well as external resources
including the web and gazetteers. It achieves an F-
score of 70% on the Coling 2004 NLPBA/BioNLP
shared task of identifying five biomedical named en-
tities in the GENIA corpus.
1 Introduction
The explosion of information in the fields of molec-
ular biology and genetics has provided a unique
opportunity for natural language processing tech-
niques to aid researchers and curators of databases
in the biomedical field by providing text mining
services. Yet typical natural language processing
tasks such as named entity recognition, informa-
tion extraction, and word sense disambiguation are
particularly challenging in the biomedical domain
with its highly complex and idiosyncratic language.
With the increasing use of shared tasks and shared
evaluation procedures (e.g., the recent BioCreative,
TREC, and KDD Cup), it is rapidly becoming clear
that performance in this domain is markedly lower
than the field has come to expect from the standard
domain of newswire. The Coling 2004 shared task
focuses on the problem of Named Entity Recogni-
tion, requiring participating systems to identify the
five named entities of protein, RNA, DNA, cell line,
and cell type in the GENIA corpus of MEDLINE
abstracts (Ohta et al, 2002). In this paper we de-
scribe a machine learning system incorporating a di-
verse set of features and various external resources
to accomplish this task. We describe our system in
detail and also discuss some sources of error.
2 System Description
Our system is a Maximum Entropy Markov Model,
which further develops a system earlier used for the
CoNLL 2003 shared task (Klein et al, 2003) and the
2004 BioCreative critical assessment of information
extraction systems, a task that involved identifying
gene and protein name mentions but not distinguish-
ing between them (Dingare et al, 2004). Unlike
the above two tasks, many of the entities in the cur-
rent task do not have good internal cues for distin-
guishing the class of entity: various systematic pol-
ysemies and the widespread use of acronyms mean
that internal cues are lacking. The challenge was
thus to make better use of contextual features, in-
cluding local and syntactic features, and external re-
sources in order to succeed at this task.
2.1 Local Features
We used a variety of features describing the imme-
diate content and context of each word, including
the word itself, the previous and next words, word
prefixes and suffix of up to a length of 6 characters,
word shapes, and features describing the named en-
tity tags assigned to the previous words. Word
shapes refer to a mapping of each word onto equiva-
lence classes that encodes attributes such as length,
capitalization, numerals, greek letters, and so on.
For instance, ?Varicella-zoster? would become Xx-
xxx, ?mRNA? would become xXXX, and ?CPA1?
would become XXXd. We also incorporated part-of-
speech tagging, using the TnT tagger(Brants, 2000)
retrained on the GENIA corpus gold standard part-
of-speech tagging. We also used various interaction
terms (conjunctions) of these base-level features in
various ways. The full set of local features is out-
lined in Table 1.
2.2 External Resources
We made use of a number of external resources, in-
cluding gazetteers, web-querying, use of the sur-
rounding abstract, and frequency counts from the
British National Corpus.
88
Word Features wi, wi?1, wi+1
Disjunction of 5 prev words
Disjunction of 5 next words
TnT POS POSi, POSi?1, POSi+1
Prefix/suffix Up to a length of 6
Abbreviations abbri
abbri?1 + abbri
abbri + abbri+1
abbri?1 + abbri + abbri+1
Word Shape shapei, shapei?1, shapei+1
shapei?1 + shapei
shapei + shapei+1
shapei?1 + shapei + shapei+1
Prev NE NEi?1, NEi?2 + NEi?1
NEi?3 + NEi?2 + NEi?1
Prev NE + Word NEi?1 + wi
Prev NE + POS NEi?1 + POSi?1 + POSi
NEi?2 + NEi?1 + POSi?2 +
POSi?1 + POSi
Prev NE + Shape NEi?1 + shapei
NEi?1 + shapei+1
NEi?1 + shapei?1 + shapei
NEi?2 + NEi?1 + shapei?2 +
shapei?1 + shapei
Paren-Matching Signals when one parenthesis
in a pair has been assigned a
different tag than the other in a
window of 4 words
Table 1: Local Features (+ indicates conjunction)
2.2.1 Frequency
Many entries in gazetteers are ambiguous words,
occasionally used in the sense that the gazetteer
seeks to represent, but at least as frequently not.
So while the information that a token was seen in
a gazetteer is an unreliable indicator of whether it
is an entity, less frequent words are less likely to be
ambiguous than more frequent ones. Additionally,
more frequent words are likely to have been seen
often in the training data and the system should be
better at classifying them, while less frequent words
are a common source of error and their classifica-
tion is more likely to benefit from the use of external
resources. We assigned each word in the training
and testing data a frequency category correspond-
ing to its frequency in the British National Corpus,
a 100 million word balanced corpus, and used con-
junctions of this category and certain other features.
2.2.2 Gazetteers
Our gazetteer contained only gene names and was
compiled from lists from biomedical websites (such
as LocusLink) as well as from the Gene Ontol-
ogy and the data provided for the BioCreative 2004
tasks. The final gazetteer contained 1,731,496 en-
tries. Because it contained only gene names, and for
the reasons discussed earlier, we suspect that it was
not terribly useful for identifying the presences of
entities, but rather that it mainly helped to establish
the exact beginning and ending point of multi-word
entities recognized mainly through other features.
2.2.3 Web
For each of the named entity classes, we built in-
dicative contexts, such as ?X mRNA? for RNA, or
?X ligation? for protein. For each entity X which
had a frequency lower than 10 in the British Na-
tional Corpus, we submitted instantiations of each
pattern to the web, using the Google API, and ob-
tained the number of hits. The pattern that returned
the highest number of hits determined the feature
value (e.g., ?web-protein?, or ?web-RNA?). If no
hits were returned by any pattern, a value ?O-web?
was assigned. This value was also assigned to all
words whose frequency was higher than 10 (using
yet another value for words with higher frequency
did not improve the tagger?s performance).
2.2.4 Abstracts
A number of NER systems have made effective use
of how the same token was tagged in different parts
of the same document (see (Curran and Clark, 2003)
and (Mikheev et al, 1999)). A token which appears
in an unindicative context in one sentence may ap-
pear in a very obvious context in another sentence
in the same abstract. To leverage this we tagged
each abstract twice, providing for each token a fea-
ture indicating whether it was tagged as an entity
elsewhere in the abstract. This information was
only useful when combined with information on fre-
quency.
2.3 Deeper Syntactic Features
While the local features discussed earlier are all
fairly surface level, our system also makes use of
deeper syntactic features. We fully parsed the train-
ing and testing data using the Stanford Parser of
(Klein and Manning, 2003) operating on the TnT
part-of-speech tagging ? we believe that the un-
lexicalized nature of this parser makes it a partic-
ularly suitable statistical parser to use when there
is a large domain mismatch between the training
material (Wall Street Journal text) and the target
domain, but have not yet carefully evaluated this.
Then, for each word in the sentence which is in-
side a noun phrase, the head and governor of the
noun phrase are extracted. These features are not
very useful when identifying only two classes (such
as GENE and OTHER in the BioCreative task), but
they were quite useful for this task because of the
large number of classes which the system needed to
distinguish between. Because the classifier is now
89
choosing between classes where members can look
very similar, longer distance information can pro-
vide a better representation of the context in which
the word appears. For instance, the word phospho-
rylation occurs in the training corpus 492 times, 482
of which it is was classified as other. However,
it is the governor of 738 words, of which 443 are
protein, 292 are other and only 3 are cell
line.
We also made use of abbreviation matching to
help ensure consistency of labels. Abbreviations
and long forms were extracted from the data using
the method of (Schwartz and Hearst, 2003). This
data was combined with a list of other abbreviations
and long forms extracted from the BioCreative 2004
task. Then all occurrences of either the long or short
forms in the data was labeled. These labels were in-
cluded in the system as features and helped to im-
prove boundary detection.
2.4 Adjacent Entities
When training our classifier, we merged the B- and
I- labels for each class, so it did not learn how to
differentiate between the first word of a class and
internal word. There were several motivations for
doing this. Foremost was memory concerns; our fi-
nal system trained on just the six classes had 1.5
million features ? we just did not have the resources
to train it over more classes without giving up many
of our features. Our second motivation was that by
merging the beginning and internal labels for a par-
ticular class, the classifier would see more examples
of that class and learn better how to identify it. The
drawback of this move is that when two entities be-
longing to the same class are adjacent, our classifier
will automatically merge them into one entity. We
did attempt to split them back up using NP chunks,
but this severely reduced performance.
3 Results and Discussion
Our results on the evaluation data and a confusion
matrix are shown in Tables 2 and 4. Table 4 sug-
gests areas for further work. Collapsing the B- and
I- tags does cost us quite a bit. Otherwise confusions
between some named entity and being nothing are
most of the errors, although protein/DNA and cell-
line/cell-type confusions are also noticeable.
Analysis of performance in biomedical Named
Entity Recognition tends to be dominated by the
perceived poorness of the results, stemming from
the twin beliefs that performance of roughly ninety
percent is the state-of-the-art and that performance
of 100% (or close to that) is possible and the goal
to be aimed for. Both of these beliefs are ques-
tionable, as the top MUC 7 performance of 93.39%
Entity Precision Recall F-Score
Fully Correct
protein 77.40% 68.48% 72.67%
DNA 66.19% 69.62% 67.86%
RNA 72.03% 65.89% 68.83%
cell line 59.00% 47.12% 52.40%
cell type 62.62% 76.97% 69.06%
Overall 71.62% 68.56% 70.06%
Left Boundary Correct
protein 82.89% 73.34% 77.82%
DNA 68.47% 72.01% 70.19%
RNA 75.42% 68.99% 72.06%
cell line 63.80% 50.96% 56.66%
cell type 63.93% 78.57% 70.49%
Overall 75.72% 72.48% 74.07%
Right Boundary Correct
protein 84.70% 74.96% 79.53%
DNA 74.43% 78.29% 76.31%
RNA 78.81% 72.09% 75.30%
cell line 70.2% 56.07% 62.34%
cell type 71.68% 88.10% 79.05%
Overall 79.65% 76.24% 77.91%
Table 2: Results on the evaluation data
(Mikheev et al, 1998) in the domain of newswire
text used an easier performance metric where incor-
rect boundaries were given partial credit, while both
the biomedical NER shared tasks to date have used
an exact match criterion where one is doubly penal-
ized (both as a FP and as a FN) for incorrect bound-
aries. However, the difference in metric clearly can-
not account entirely for the performance discrep-
ancy between newswire NER and biomedical NER.
Biomedical NER appears to be a harder task due
to the widespread ambiguity of terms out of con-
text, the complexity of medical language, and the
apparent need for expert domain knowledge. These
are problems that more sophisticated machine learn-
ing systems using resources such as ontologies and
deep processing might be able to overcome. How-
ever, one should also consider the inherent ?fuzzi-
ness? of the classification task. The few existing
studies of inter-annotator agreement for biomedi-
cal named entities have measured agreement be-
tween 87%(Hirschman, 2003) and 89%(Demetrious
and Gaizauskas, 2003). As far as we know there
are no inter-annotator agreement results for the GE-
NIA corpus, and it is necessary to have such results
before properly evaluating the performance of sys-
tems. In particular, the fact that BioNLP sought to
distinguish between gene and protein names, when
these are known to be systematically ambiguous,
and when in fact in the GENIA corpus many enti-
ties were doubly classified as ?protein molecule or
90
DNA RNA cell line cell type protein
gold\ans B- I- B- I- B- I- B- I- B- I- O
B-DNA 723 39 0 0 1 0 0 0 154 1 138
I-DNA 52 1390 0 0 0 0 0 0 19 71 257
B-RNA 1 0 89 3 0 0 0 0 14 0 11
I-RNA 0 1 5 164 0 0 0 0 2 0 15
B-cell line 3 0 0 0 319 41 37 5 12 1 82
I-cell line 0 6 0 0 24 713 5 104 0 14 123
B-cell type 1 0 0 0 164 22 1228 90 31 5 380
I-cell type 0 0 0 0 13 383 88 2101 8 27 371
B-protein 48 5 10 3 20 1 19 3 4200 192 566
I-protein 6 66 0 11 0 10 2 25 245 3630 779
O 170 240 25 26 85 142 184 132 1042 656 78945
Table 3: Our confusion matrix over the evaluation data
human B-cell type
monocytes I-cell type
human O
monocytes B-cell type
macrophages B-cell type
primary B-cell type JJ
T I-cell type NN
lymphocytes I-cell type NNS
primary O JJ
peripheral B-cell type JJ
blood I-cell type NN
lymphocytes I-cell type NNS
Table 4: Examples of annotation inconsistencies
region? and ?DNA molecule or region?, suggests
that inter-annotator agreement could be low, and
that many entities in fact have more than one classi-
fication.
One area where GENIA appears inconsistent is
in the labeling of preceding adjectives. The data
was selected by querying for the term human, yet
the term is labeled inconsistently, as is shown in Ta-
ble 4. Of the 1790 times the term human occurred
before or at the beginning of an entity in the train-
ing data, it was not classified as part of the entity
110 times. In the test data, there is only on instance
(out of 130) where the term is excluded. Adjectives
are excluded approximately 25% of the time in both
the training and evaluation data. There are also in-
consistencies when two entities are separated by the
word and.
4 Acknowledgements
This paper is based on work supported in part by a
Scottish Enterprise Edinburgh-Stanford Link Grant
(R36759), as part of the SEER project, and in part
the National Science Foundation under the Knowl-
edge Discovery and Dissemination program.
References
Thorsten Brants. 2000. TnT ? a statistical part-of-speech
tagger. In ANLP 6, pages 224?231.
James R. Curran and Stephen Clark. 2003. Language
independent NER using a maximum entropy tagger.
In Proceedings of the Seventh Conference on Natural
Language Learning (CoNLL-03), pages 164?167.
George Demetrious and Rob Gaizauskas. 2003. Corpus
resources for development and evaluation of a biolog-
ical text mining system. In Proceedings of the Third
Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Text Mining,
Brisbane, Australia, July.
Shipra Dingare, Jenny Rose Finkel, Christopher Man-
ning, Malvina Nissim, and Beatrice Alex. 2004. Ex-
ploring the boundaries: Gene and protein identifica-
tion in biomedical text. In Proceedings of the BioCre-
ative Workshop.
Lynette Hirschman. 2003. Using biological resources to
bootstrap text mining.
Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Accurate
unlexicalized parsing. In ACL 41, pages 423?430.
Dan Klein, Joseph Smarr, Huy Nguyen, and Christo-
pher D. Manning. 2003. Named entity recognition
with character-level models. In CoNLL 7, pages 180?
183.
Andrei Mikheev, Claire Grover, and Mark Moens. 1998.
Description of the LTG system used for MUC-7. In
Proceedings of MUC-7.
Andrei Mikheev, Marc Moens, and Claire Grover. 1999.
Named entity recognition without gazetteers. In Pro-
ceedings of the ninth conference on European chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 1?8. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Tomoko Ohta, Yuka Tateisi, Hideki Mima, and Jun?ichi
Tsujii. 2002. GENIA corpus: an annotated research
abstract corpus in molecular biology domain. In Pro-
ceedings of he Human Language Technology Confer-
ence, pages 73?77.
Ariel Schwartz and Marti Hearst. 2003. A simple al-
gorithm for identifying abbreviation definitions in
biomedical text. In Pacific Symposium on Biocomput-
ing, Kauai, Jan.
91
Proceedings of the Workshop on Annotating and Reasoning about Time and Events, pages 46?53,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Marking Time in Developmental Biology: Annotating Developmental
Events and their Links with Molecular Events
Gail Sinclair
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh EH8 9LW
c.g.sinclair@ed.ac.uk
Bonnie Webber
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh EH8 9LW
bonnie@inf.ed.ac.uk
Duncan Davidson
MRC Human Genetics Unit
Western General Hospital
Edinburgh EH4 2XU
Duncan.Davidson@hgu.mrc.ac.uk
Abstract
Current research in developmental biology
aims to link developmental genetic path-
ways with the processes going on at cel-
lular and tissue level. Normal processes
will only take place under specific sequen-
tial conditions at the level of the pathways.
Disrupting or altering pathways may mean
disrupted or altered development.
This paper is part of a larger work explor-
ing methods of detecting and extracting in-
formation on developmental events from
free text and on their relations in space and
time.
1 Introduction
Most relation extraction work to date on biomedi-
cal articles has focused on genetic and protein in-
teractions, e.g. the extraction of the fact that ex-
pression of Gene A has an effect on the expression
of Gene B. However where genetic interactions are
tissue- or stage-specific, the conditions that govern
the types of interactions often depend on where in
the body the interaction is happening (space) and
at what stage of life/development (time).
For genetic pathways involved in development,
it is critical to link what is happening at the molec-
ular level to changes in the developing tissues,
usually described in terms of processes such as
tubulogenesis and epithelialization (both involved
in the development of the kidney) and where they
are happening.
The processes themselves are usually linked
to stages rather than precise time points and
spans like ?6.15pm EST?, ?March 3?, ?last year?.
Within the developmental mouse community,
there are at least two different ways of specifying
the developmental stage of an embryo - Theiler
stages (TS), and days post coitum/embryonic
day (d.p.c./E). However, these cannot be simply
mapped to one another as can days, weeks and
years. Embryonic days are real time stages in-
dependent of the state of the embryo and dated
from an assumption about when (approximately)
the relevant coitus must have taken place, while
Theiler stages are relative stages dependent on the
processes an embryo is undergoing.
Developmental stages can be also be referred to
implicitly, by the state of the embryo or the pro-
cesses currently taking place within it. This is be-
cause during development, tissues form, change,
merge or even disappear. So if the embryo is un-
dergoing tubulogenesis, one can assume that its
developmental stage is (loosely) somewhere be-
tween TS20 and birth. If the text refers to induced
mesenchyme during a description of tubulogene-
sis, one can assume that this change in the mes-
enchyme is the (normal) consequence of the Wolf-
fian duct invading the metanephric mesenchyme.
The invasion is known to occur around 10.5 d.p.c
so the induced mesenchyme must come into exis-
tence soon after this time.
Temporal links between developmental events
may be indicated explicitly (e.g. first, a tubule de-
velops into a comma-shaped body, which then de-
velops into an S-shaped body), but they are more
likely to be indicated implicitly by their order-
ing in the text and by associative (or ?bridging?)
anaphora where the anaphor refers to the result of
a previously mentioned process, e.g. the induction
of metanephric mesenchyme as one event, and a
subsequent mention of induced mesenchyme (an
?associative? or ?bridging? reference) within an-
other event, suggesting the former event occurred
before the latter.
46
Figure 1: Partial genetic pathway for early kid-
ney morphogenesis. The arrows show directed in-
teractions between genes that are required for the
specified processes. E.g Pax2 interacts with (acti-
vates) Six2 which, together with Sall1 and Wt1,
is required for differentiation of the mesenchy-
mal cells in the metanephric mesenchyme. Image
taken from (Ribes et al, 2003).
This work on linking molecular and develop-
mental events mentioned in text on development
is also meant to deal with the problem that no
one article ever fully describes a topic. The par-
tial genetic interaction network in Figure 1 has
been built from several different studies and not
determined from just a single experiment. So
not only does the information within one article
need to be mined for useful information - the in-
formation across articles needs to be associated
with each other with respect to temporal, spatial
and experimental grounding. Eccles et al (2002)
states that Pax2 is required for differentiation of
mesenchymal cells during kidney morphogenesis,
while Sajithlal et al (2005) states that Eya1 is re-
quired. However these two results by themselves
do not help us determine whether these require-
ments are independent of one another or whether
they are required at different stages or in different
parts of metanephric mesenchyme or whether the
two genes interact. The conditions involved in the
experiments, most importantly the temporal con-
ditions, can help to link the two events.
This work aims to develop methods for extract-
ing information from text that will ground ge-
netic pathways (molecular events) with regard to
tissue location, developmental process and stage
of embryonic development - that is, their spatio-
temporal context. The task at hand is to recognise
how biologists write about developmental events
and then adapt existing or formulate new natu-
ral language processing techniques to extract these
events and temporally relate them to each other.
The resultant information can then be used both
for database curation purposes and for visualisa-
tion, i.e. to enrich pathway diagrams such as Fig-
ure 1, with information such as when and where
the interactions take place, what type of inter-
actions are involved (physical, activation, inhibi-
tion), the origin of this information and other as-
sociated information.
2 Notions of Time
As previously mentioned, there are different ways
of calibrating for developmental stages, and they
cannot simply be mapped to one another. The two
most common stage notations for mouse develop-
ment are Theiler stages, TS, and Embryonic days,
E (equivalent to days post coitum, d.p.c.). The lat-
ter are self explanatory in that they denote the 24
hour day and can be considered real-time staging.
47
The convention was originally that E11 would rep-
resent the 24 hour period of the 11th day. It is,
however, now common to find E11.5 representing
the same time period, but this is merely a change
in convention due to standard practices of experi-
mentation.
A Theiler stage on the other hand represents
a non-fixed relative time period defined by the
progress of development rather than directly in
terms of the passage of time. Theiler Stages
(Theiler, 1989) divide mouse development into 26
prenatal and 2 postnatal stages. In general, Theiler
used external features that can be directly assessed
by visual inspection of the live embryo as devel-
opmental landmarks to define stages. The Edin-
burgh Mouse Atlas Project (EMAP)1 uses Theiler
stages to organise anatomical terms in their Mouse
Atlas Nomenclature (MAN). EMAP gives a brief
description of each Theiler stage with TS25 as an
example as follows:
Skin wrinkled
The skin has thickened and formed wrinkles and
the subcutaneous veins are less visible. The fin-
gers and toes have become parallel and the um-
bilical hernia has disappeared. The eyelids have
fused. Whiskers are just visible.
Absent: ear extending over auditory meatus, long
whiskers.
An embryo is in TS25 at approximately 17 d.p.c.
As can be seen in Figure 2, an embryo at E11
could be considered in Theiler stage 17, 18 or 19,
i.e. Theiler stages can overlap one another with
respect to Embryonic day. Indeed, here, TS17 can
fully encompass TS18 in the dpc timeline.
The development of internal structures is ap-
proximately correlated with external develop-
ments, so except for fine temporal differences,
the Theiler stages can be assumed to apply to the
whole embryo. Theiler stages provide only gross
temporal resolution of developmental events, and
the development of internal structures often take
place within the boundaries of one of these stages
or overlapping stage boundaries. Thus, internal
developmental processes can also have their own
finer relative timeline or staging.
There is no ontology or reference book that
comprehensively specifies this finer staging and
the knowledge of the biologist as the reader of ar-
1Edinburgh Mouse Atlas Project -
http://genex.hgu.mrc.ac.uk/
Figure 2: Graphic of kidney morphogenesis an-
notated with the two standard staging notations
for mouse development. At E10.5 the Wolffian
duct invades the metanephric mesenchyme form-
ing the ureteric bud around E11. The bud then
branches around E11.5 and continues to do so un-
til birth, forming the ultimate functional units of
the kidney - the nephrons. TS = Theiler Stage, E
= Embryonic day/dpc. This image is adapted from
http://www.sciencemuseum.org.uk/
ticles is relied upon. This work will contribute to
making this deeper staging criteria explicit.
3 Annotation
3.1 Event Classification
As a first step, a Gold Standard corpus of 988 sen-
tences was developed with each sentence being
classified as containing the description of a devel-
opmental and/or molecular event or not. 385 sen-
tences were classified as positive, with 603 neg-
ative. Named entities within all these sentences
were also annotated. Among these element types
were stage, process and tissue. A Naive Bayes
automatic classifier for sentence classification was
developed using this Gold Standard resulting in
a balanced F-score of 72.3% for event classifica-
tion. (A manual rule-based approach resulted in
an F-score of 86.6%, but this has yet to be fully
investigated for automation. Guessing positive for
all sentences would give a balanced F-score of
58.4%)
3.2 Event Specifications
Two event types are of interest in this work -
molecular and tissue events. The former involve
the action (and possible effect) of molecules dur-
48
ing development and the latter involves the devel-
opment of the tissues themselves. A description of
an event can be expected to contain the following
elements:
  molecular or tissue event type (e.g. expres-
sion, inhibition)
  stage or temporal expression (e.g. after X,
subsequent to X, E11)
  at least one of
? molecule name, anatomical term, bio-
logical process term
The informational elements included within an
event description can then be used to relate events
to each other. Specifically, processes involve
known tissues and are known to happen during
certain stages, just as the relative order of pro-
cesses, tissue formations and stages are known.
While an initial specification of an event may
be associated with a single sentence, clause or
phrase, not all the elements of relevance to this
work may be specified there. In particular, an in-
formational element of the event may be explic-
itly and fully stated in this initial event specifica-
tion, or it may be underspecified or it may be miss-
ing. For those that are underspecified or missing,
background knowledge about other elements and
events may need to be taken into consideration in
order for them to be fully resolved (see Section
4.2).
The following is a straightforward example
where the given sentence specifies all the main el-
ements required for a molecular event.
1. At E11, the integrin ?8 subunit was expressed
throughout the mesenchyme of the nephro-
genic cord.
  Molecular Event : expression
  molecule name: integrin ?8
  anatomical term: mesenchyme of the
nephrogenic cord
  stage: E11
Example 2 shows that a single sentence may
specify more than one event.
2. Prior to formation of the ureteric bud,
no ?8 expression was evident within the
mesenchyme that separates the urogenital
ridge from the metanephric mesenchyme and
within the metanephric mesenchyme itself.
  EVENT-0
? Tissue Event : formation of anatom-
ical term
? anatomical term: ureteric bud
? stage/temporal expression = missing
  EVENT-1
? Molecular Event: absence of expres-
sion
? molecule name: ?8
? anatomical term: mesenchyme that
separates the urogenital ridge from
the metanephric mesenchyme
? temporal expression:Prior to
EVENT-0
  EVENT-2
? Molecular Event: absence of expres-
sion
? molecule name: ?8
? anatomical term: metanephric mes-
enchyme
? temporal expression: Prior to
EVENT-0
EVENT-0 is not the focus of this sentence, but
rather a reference event. Its attributes need to be
recorded so that the stage of the other events can
be determined.
TimeML (Pustejovsky et al, 2004) is a spec-
ification language designed for the annotation
of temporal and event information. Although
TimeML is not currently being used as a method
of representation for this work, Example 1 above
could be represented as follows:
 SIGNAL sid=?s1? type=?temporal? 
At
 /SIGNAL 
 TIMEX tid=?t1? type=?STAGE?
value=?E11? 
E11
 /TIMEX 
the integrin ?8
 EVENT eid=?e1? class=?molecular? 
was expressed
 /EVENT 
throughout the mesenchyme of the
 SIGNAL sid=?s2? type=?tissue? 
nephrogenic cord
 /SIGNAL 
nephrogenic cord can be considered a signal of
type ?tissue? as it does not exist throughout the
49
whole of development and so can indicate or rule
out time periods for this event description.
3.3 Event Time-Stamping
The relative timing of any biological processes
mentioned in the event descriptions first needs to
be determined before we can work out when the
actual events described are taking place.
Schilder and Habel (2001) looked beyond the
core temporal expressions and into prepositional
phrases that contained temporal relations, i.e. be-
fore, during, etc and introduced the notion of noun
phrases as event-denoting expressions. An event
that is described as occurring ?after the election?
does not have an explicit time-stamp attached to it,
but the knowledge about the timing of the election
mentioned gives the reader a notion of when in ab-
solute time the event occurred. This is similar to
Example 2 above where Event-0 is the reference
event, thus biological processes can be considered
event-denoting expressions.
While Schilder and Habel rely on prepositional
phrases to designate their event-denoting noun
phrases, for this work propositional phrases are
not necessarily required. The mention of a noun
phrase by itelf may be enough. In developmen-
tal biology, tissues may only be extant for a lim-
ited period before they form into some other tissue
and these can also be used as event-denoting ex-
pressions - for example, comma-shaped bodies are
structures within the developing kidney that are
only in existence for a relatively short time period -
before the existence of the S-shaped bodies and af-
ter epithelialization. Therefore the mention of tis-
sues as well as processes can help to pinpoint the
timing of the event being described. While they
may not ultimately bring us to the exact stage the
event is occurring in, it can at least rule out some
spans of time. We discuss this further in Section
4.2.
In order for events to be linked to one another,
it is necessary to uniquely index each event and its
elements. Mapping across indices will be utilised
so that known relationships between elements can
be represented. For example, E10 comes before
E12, tubulogenesis occurs during kidney morpho-
genesis, and the proximal tubule is part of the
nephron.
Of the elements types listed in Section 3.2, only
the molecule element cannot be used to resolve
developmental stage while tissue, process, stage
and, of course, temporal expression can. Other el-
ements are also of interest to the biologist and inte-
gral to development and molecular function, how-
ever they are not of use in the grounding of events
in time.
4 Initial Investigations
This section demonstrates that one must look be-
yond the sentence in order to resolve the temporal
aspects of events.
4.1 Evidence for Developmental Stage
Evidence sufficient to resolve developmental stage
can come from many places. 314 positive sen-
tences from the Gold Standard corpus and their
context were examined, and the evidence required
to resolve developmental stage for each of the
events mentioned there was determined as shown
in Table 1.
As can be seen from the table, only 48 out of
the 314 event sentences (i.e. 15%) have the de-
velopmental stage in which the event is occurring
explicitly stated in the given sentence, (e.g. Ex-
ample 1 in Section 3). So other means need to be
explored in order to ground events with respect to
developmental stage. An event sentence may be a
continuation of a topic, and so the specific devel-
opmental stage involved may well be stated in the
immediately surrounding or related text.
Information in the immediately surrounding
text (rows labelled Following Sentence, Previous
Sentence and Current Paragraph) resolves the de-
velopmental stage of the event in 64 cases (i.e.
21%). This most commonly occurs by looking for
the immediately previously mentioned stage, and
in one case the next encountered stage.
Event sentences also often refer to figures, and
so the stage being described in the caption (i.e.
legend) of the referenced figure will often be the
same as the one relevant to the sentence. (This was
true of all sentences looked at that referenced a fig-
ure.) Figures, however, are generally only found in
the Results sections and so this type of evidence is
not often going to be of use for sentences found in
other sections of an article.
Similarly, events can be described within the
figure legends themselves. The concise and simple
way in which legends are generally written mean
that the explicit stage is commonly referred to, and
so stage can be resolved using this referenced in-
formation(43 out of 47 cases, i.e. 91%).
50
Source of Evidence Abstract Introduction Results Discussion Methods Totals
Time Irrelevant 7 12 22 23 1 65
Prior Knowledge 17 33 31 45 0 126
Following Sentence 0 0 1 0 0 1
Previous Sentence 0 0 7 0 0 7
Current Paragraph 0 0 18 1 0 19
Reference to Figure 0 0 38 0 0 38
Within Fig Legend 0 0 43 0 0 43
(time not resolved) 0 3 1 0 0 4
Explicitly Stated 0 1 41 5 1 48
(not relevant) 0 0 1 0 0 1
Totals 24 49 165 74 2 314
Table 1: Location and type of evidence sufficient to resolve developmental stage in sentences. Time
Irrelevant indicates that the event being described is not time critical, i.e. event is a constant over devel-
opmental timeline, or end result. Prior knowledge means temporal information other than that found in
the current paragraph but associated with current event such as tissue and process is required for temporal
resolution. This may be found in the current article or from previously curated information (assuming
accurate terminology mapping.) Text from outside the current paragraph cannot be relied upon to be rel-
evant to the current sentence without additional information. time not resolved means the stage could not
be pinpointed using the figure legend. not relevant indicates that although an explicit stage was referred
to within the sentence, this was not relevant to the event being described, e.g. event and stage in different
clauses of the sentence.
Table 2 shows a similar table to Table 1, but
deals only with those sentences found within fig-
ure legends. It shows where within the figure leg-
end the required evidence for developmental stage
can be found. As can be seen, in 80% of these
cases the relevant developmental stage can be as-
certained directly from the legend. It should be
noted that figure legends in biological articles tend
to be much lengthier than those from NLP articles.
In 21% of the event sentences, a specific devel-
opmental stage is not relevant to the fact being de-
scribed (first row of Table 1), e.g. the kidneys of
the double mutants were located more caudal and
medial than normal. This sentence is describing
an end result, i.e. an affected or normal kidney
at birth (although this could, of course, be con-
sidered a developmental stage.) Alternatively, the
time-irrelevant event being described could be a
non-event, e.g. the fact that a gene is never ex-
pressed in a particular tissue. Similarly, this could
be considered as the developmental stage range
from conception to birth.
The significantly small proportion of event sen-
tences located in Abstracts (24 of 314 total event
sentences, less than 8%) demonstrates the need to
use full text. Even where an event is described
within an Abstract, it is rarely accompanied by
associated processes or tissues specific enough to
suggest the stage of development never mind an
explicit timestamp, as it is, by necessity, only gen-
erally describing the whole article. The majority
of BioNLP work is being done with the use of Ab-
stracts only. This is because of their relative ease
of access compared with full text, but methods de-
veloped using Abstracts only will not necessarily
be as effective when applied to full text.
As can be seen, the majority of temporally-
underspecified event sentences are situated in the
Results section of the articles. Indeed, this is
the section where most event sentences are to be
found. This work is initially focussing on event
descriptions found in Results sections of articles as
these will focus on the work done by the authors
and their findings and will not generally include
modality in the event descriptions as Introduction
and Discussion sections might. As shown above,
the Methods section rarely contains event descrip-
tions and when they do they are usually about what
the experiment aims to show and so this should be
repeated in the Results section.
4.2 Prior Knowledge
As mentioned earlier, if none of the above sources
reveal the relevant stage of an event, then other el-
ements within the sentence, such as tissue or pro-
cess, need to be looked at so that prior knowledge
51
Source of Evidence Figure Legends
Time Irrelevant 4
Prior Knowledge 4
Following Sentence 0
Previous Sentence 14
Current Paragraph 13
Explicitly Stated 11
Total 47
Table 2: Location and type of evidence sufficient to resolve developmental stage in sentences within
figure legends. Rows as in Table 1, with Current Paragraph being equal to the whole of the legend.
about those elements can be exploited for devel-
opmental stage to be resolved. For example, given
the sentence
Prior to formation of the ureteric bud,
no ?8 expression was evident within the
mesenchyme that separates the urogen-
ital ridge from the metanephric mes-
enchyme and within the metanephric
mesenchyme itself.
the developmental stage can be resolved if we
know when the ureteric bud forms (TS17/E10.5).
It could also be the case that the other tissues
or processes mentioned have a specific lifetime
within development and these could help to fur-
ther pinpoint the timeline involved for the lack of
?8 expression. For example,
Pax2 was initiating in the metanephric
mesenchyme undergoing induction.
It is not so straightforward to assign a stage here,
since the mesenchyme is constantly being induced
from E11 (TS18) until birth (TS26), but we have
at least discounted E1-E10 (TS1-TS17) as relevant
stages.
Resources such as the Mouse Atlas Nomencla-
ture (MAN) (Ringwald et al, 1994) will provide
the initial prior knowledge in order to resolve de-
velopmental stage of events. This describes the
different stages of development and the tissues in
evidence at each stage, giving what is known as the
abstract mouse. From this abstract mouse, we can
ascertain the normal stage ranges where tissues ex-
ist and use this knowledge for temporal resolution,
taking care not to assume that tissues do not neces-
sarily exist within the same stage range in mutant
mice than in wild-type. The prior knowledge data-
bank can be recursively added to with facts from
events already extracted from papers for use in fur-
ther event extraction and their anchoring in time.
5 Future Work
5.1 Term Normalisation
There is no point extracting events descriptions if
we cannot relate the events and their elements to
each other. The event-denoting expressions iden-
tified need to be normalised so that it can be recog-
nised when two terms are referring to the same el-
ement.
Inconsistent terminology in the biomedical field
is a known problem (Sinclair et al, 2002). One
gene can have several names (synonymy) just as
the same name can be used for more than one gene
(homonymy). Very often the synonyms bear no re-
lation to one another since they were perhaps con-
currently discovered in different laboratories and
named. For example, the gene insomnia can also
be known as cheap date, since experiments found
that organisms without this gene have a tendency
to fall asleep and are particularly susceptible to
alcohol. The same anatomical part can also be
referred to by different terms, e.g. the Wolffian
duct is also known as the nephric duct, and the
metanephros is another name for the kidney. There
is also a lineage issue, where a tissue with one
name (or perhaps more) develops into something
with another name (e.g. the intermediate meso-
derm gives rise to both the Wolffian duct and the
metanephric mesenchyme which in turn both de-
velop into the metanephros. The MAN includes
this type of information.
Term normalisation is particularly important for
the process and tissue elements. If these terms
are not normalised, temporal knowledge about the
terms may not be exploited and it may not be de-
termined that events involving them are linked.
52
5.2 Event Elements
If the elements required to fully describe an event
are explicitly stated within a simple sentence, then
temporal grounding will be straightforward. How-
ever, this is unlikely to often be the case. More
complex sentences will dictate the need for de-
pendency relations to be determined so that each
event?s elements can be identified. Methods for
dealing with missing or underspecified elements
that are not resolved within the event description
itself will be investigated.
A naive approach will first be investigated to
fill these gaps: find the closest appropriate ele-
ment in the previous context (varying the size of
the window for how far back to look, such as cur-
rent paragraph or last 3 sentences). An error anal-
ysis on this simple method will help to guide the
amount of further work necessary to achieve equal
success across all elements. For those elements
that this method is ineffective, other methods will
be developed incorporating features such as sen-
sitivity to syntax, event type and location within
article. Similarly, it will be established whether
different techniques are required for missing infor-
mation than for underspecified information. They
will first be treated in the same manner with anal-
ysis determining whether they should be treated
differently.
6 Conclusion
This ongoing work has shown the importance of
relative time lines in order to link events to one
another. The identification of event elements and
their normalisation will then form a basis for rea-
soning over these elements with regards to first
time-stamping of events and then temporally relat-
ing the events. The aim of many BioNLP studies
is ultimately to reason over extracted events and,
as such, the relative timing of these events is cru-
cial. For example, if we know
1. tissue X is transformed into tissue Y at stage S
and
2. molecule M is expressed in X at stage S-1,
then it can be reasoned that event 2 has an im-
pact on event 1. This reasoning can be made more
successful if we know as much about the events
as possible, not just that tissue Y is formed and
molecule M is expressed.
It has also been demonstrated that we not only
need to look beyond the sentence level for tempo-
ral resolution but also beyond the article in order to
replicate the reader?s assumed level of background
knowledge.
References
J. F. Allen, Towards a general theory of action andtime, Artificial Intelligence, vol 23, pp 123-154,
1984.
M. R. Eccles, S. He, M. Legge, R. Kumar, J. Fox, C.Zhou, M. French and R. W. Tsai, .PAX genes indevelopment and disease: the role of PAX2 in uro-
genital tract development. Int J Dev Biol, vol 46, no4, pp 535-44, 2002.
J. Pustejovsky, I. Mani, L. Belanger, B. Bogurev, B.Knippen, J. Littman, A. Rumshisky, A. See, S.
Symonen, J. Van Guilder, L. Van Guilder and M.Verhagen, The Specification Langeuage TimeML.in The Language of Time: A Reader, Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2004.
D. Ribes, E. Fischer, A. Calmont and J. Rossert, Tran-scriptional Control of Epithelial Differentiation dur-ing Kidney Development. J Am Soc Nephrol, vol
14, pp S9-S15, 2003.
M. Ringwald, R. A. Baldock, J. Bard, M. H. Kaufman,J. T. Eppig, J. E. Richardson, J. H. Nadeau and D.Davidson, A database for mouse development. Sci-ence, vol 265, pp 2033-2034, 1994.
G. Sajithlal, D. Zou, D. Silvius and P. X. Xu, Eya 1 actsas a critical regulator for specifying the metanephricmesenchyme. Dev Biol, vol 284, no 2, pp 323-36,
2005.
F. Schilder and C. Habel, From Temporal Expres-sions to Temporal Information: Semantic Taggingof News Message., in Proceedings of the ACL 2001Workshop on Temporal and Spatial Information Pro-cessing, Toulouse, France, pp 88-95.
G. Sinclair, B. Webber and D. Davidson, EnhancedNatural Language Access to Anatomically Indexed
Data. in Proceedings of the ACL 2002 Workshopon Natural Language Processing in the BiomedicalDomain, Philadelphia, pp 45-52.
K. Theiler, The House Mouse. Atlas of Embryonic De-velopment. Springer Verlag New York, 1989.
53
BioNLP 2007: Biological, translational, and clinical language processing, pages 197?198,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Marking Time in Developmental Biology
Gail Sinclair and Bonnie Webber
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh EH8 9LW
c.g.sinclair@ed.ac.uk, bonnie@inf.ed.ac.uk
1 Introduction
In developmental biology, to support reasoning
about cause and effect, it is critical to link genetic
pathways with processes at the cellular and tissue
level that take place beforehand, simultaneously or
subsequently. While researchers have worked on re-
solving with respect to absolute time, events men-
tioned in medical texts such as clinical narratives
(e.g. Zhou et al 2006), events in developmental bi-
ology are primarily resolved relative to other events.
In this regard, I am developing a system to extract
and time-stamp event sentences in articles on devel-
opmental biology, looking beyond the sentence that
describes the event and considering ranges of times
rather than just single timestamps.
I started by creating four gold standard corpora
for documents, event sentences, entities and times-
tamped events (for future public release). These
datasets are being used to develop an automated
pipeline to (1) retrieve relevant documents; (2) iden-
tify sentences within the documents that describe de-
velopmental events; and (3) associate these events
with the developmental stage(s) that the article links
them with or they are known to be linked with
through prior knowledge.
Different types of evidence are used in each step.
For determining the relevant developmental stage(s),
the text surrounding an event-containing sentence is
an efficient source of temporal grounding due of its
immediate accessibility. However, this does not al-
ways yield the correct stage and other sources need
to be used. Information within the sentence, such
as the entities under discussion, can also be used
to help with temporal grounding using mined back-
ground knowledge about the period of existence of
an entity.
2 Creation of Datasets
In creating the four new data sets mentioned above,
I annotated 1200 documents according to relevance
to murine kidney development. From 5 relevant
documents, 1200 sentences were annotated as to
whether they contained an event description. (Two
annotators - one biologist, one computer scientist -
achieved an inter-annotator agreement kappa score
of 95%.) A sentence is considered a positive one if
it contains a description of the following event types:
? molecular expression within tissue/during pro-
cess/at stage X (molecular event)
? tissue process, i.e. what forms from what (tis-
sue event)
? requirement of a molecule for a process
(molecular or tissue event)
? abnormality in a process/tissue/stage (molecu-
lar or tissue event)
? negation of the above e.g. was not expressed,
did not form, formed normally (molecular or
tissue event).
A negative sentence is one that does not fall under at
least one of the above categories.
In addition, 6 entities (tissue, process, species,
stage, molecule and event verb) were annotated in
1800 sentences (1200 described above + 600 from
197
relevant documents not yet annotated at sentence
level) and 347 entity-annotated positive event sen-
tences were marked with their associated develop-
mental stage.
Example: At E11, the integrin ?8 subunit was ex-
pressed throughout the mesenchyme of the nephro-
genic cord. Entities annotated: E11(stage), integrin
?8 (molecule), expressed (event verb), mesenchyme
of the nephrogenic cord (tissue).
3 Evidence for Temporal Resolution
Developmental biology is not as concerned with the
absolute time of events in a specific embryo as it
is with events that generally happen under the same
circumstances in developmental time. These are re-
ferred to with respect to stages from conception to
birth. The evidence sufficient to resolve the devel-
opmental stage of an event sentence can come from
many places. The two significant areas of evidence
are local context (i.e. surrounding text) and prior
(i.e. background) knowledge.
Local context can further be classified as:
? explicit: evidence of stage is mentioned within
current (event) sentence,
? previous sentence: evidence is found in sen-
tence immediately previous to current sentence,
? following sentence: evidence is found in sen-
tence immediately following current sentence,
? current paragraph: evidence is found in para-
graph containing current sentence but not in ad-
jacent sentences,
? referenced to figure: evidence is found in fig-
ure legend referenced in current sentence.
Evidence Source # Event Sentences
Explicitly Stated 48
Immed Prev Sentence 7
Following Sentence 1
Current Paragraph 19
Referenced Figure Legend 38
Within Figure Legend 43
Time Irrelevant 65
Prior Knowledge 126
Total 347
When local context does not provide evidence, prior
knowledge can be used about when entities men-
tioned within the sentence normally appear within
development. Event sentences can also be irrel-
evant of individual time ranges and apply to the
whole of development. The table above shows the
frequency with which each evidence type is used to
resolve developmental stage.
4 Experiments
Event sentence retrieval experiments (using separate
training and test data) resulted in a F-score of 72.3%
and 86.6% for Naive Bayes and rule-based classifi-
cation approaches respectively (relying upon perfect
entity recognition). A baseline method (classifying
all sentences as positive) achieves 58.4% F-score.
Experiments were also carried out to assign devel-
opmental stage to sentences already known to con-
tain events. The baseline approach is to use the last
mentioned stage in the text and any methods devel-
oped should score higher than this baseline. Rules
were developed to assign developmental stage based
on the knowledge gained from two fifths of the in-
vestigations into temporal evidence described above.
The other three fifths were annotated after the rules
had been defined. Precision scores for all 347 sen-
tences can be seen in the following table with the
Naive method representing the baseline and Local
representing the use of rules.
Paper Naive Prec. Local Prec.
1 75.7 97.3
2 89.6 90.9
3 89.1 100
4 95.6 92.3
5 95.5 91.3
Average 89.1 94.5
Experiments are currently ongoing into exploiting
the use of background knowledge of the develop-
mental processes and tissues mentioned within event
descriptions in order to assign developmental stage
to events sentences not already assigned by the lo-
cal context rules and to increase confidence in those
stages already assigned.
References
L. Zhou, G. B. Melton, S. Parsons and G Hripcsak, A tempo-
ral constraint structure for extracting temporal information from
clinical narrative, J Biomed Inf 39(4), Aug 2006, 424-439
198
