Answer  Ext rac t ion  
Steven Abney  Michae l  Co l l ins  Ami t  S ingha l  
AT&T Shannon Laboratory  
180 Park  Ave. 
F lo rharn  Park ,  N J  07932 
{abney,  mco l l ins , s ingha l}@research .a t t . corn  
Abst ract  
Information retrieval systems have typically concen- 
trated on retrieving a set of documents which are rel- 
evant to a user's query. This paper describes a sys- 
tem that attempts to retrieve a much smaller section 
of text, namely, a direct answer to a user's question. 
The SMART IR system is used to extract a ranked 
set of passages that are relevant o the query. En- 
tities are extracted from these passages as potential 
answers to the question, and ranked for plausibility 
according to how well their type matches the query, 
and according to their frequency and position in the 
passages. The system was evaluated at the TREC-8 
question answering track: we give results and error 
analysis on these queries. 
1 Introduction 
In this paper, we describe and evaluate a question- 
answering system based on passage retrieval and 
entity-extraction technology. 
There has long been a concensus in the Informa- 
tion Retrieval (IR) community that natural anguage 
processing has little to offer for retrieval systems. 
Plausibly, this is creditable to the preeminence of ad 
hoc document retrieval as the task of interest in IR. 
However, there is a growing recognition of the lim- 
itations of ad hoc retrieval, both in the sense that 
current systems have reached the limit of achievable 
performance, and in the sense that users' informa- 
tion needs are often not well characterized by docu- 
ment retrieval. 
In many cases, a user has a question with a spe- 
cific answer, such as What city is it where the Euro- 
pean Parliament meets? or Who discovered Pluto? 
In such cases, ranked answers with links to support- 
ing documentation are much more useful than the 
ranked list of documents that standard retrieval en- 
gines produce. 
The ability to answer specific questions also pro- 
vides a foundation for addressing quantitative in- 
quiries such as How many times has the Fed raised 
interest rates this year? which can be interpreted 
as the cardinality of the set of answers to a specific 
question that happens to have multiple correct an- 
swers, like On what date did the Fed raise interest 
rates this year? 
We describe a system that extracts specific an- 
swers from a document collection. The system's per- 
formance was evaluated in the question-answering 
track that has been introduced this year at the 
TREC information-retrieval conference. The major 
points of interest are the following. 
? Comparison of the system's performance to a 
system that uses the same passage retrieval 
component, but no natural language process- 
ing, shows that NLP provides ignificant perfor- 
mance improvements on the question-answering 
task. 
? The system is designed to build on the strengths 
of both IR and NLP technologies. This makes 
for much more robustness than a pure NLP sys- 
tem would have, while affording much greater 
precision than a pure IR system would have. 
? The task is broken into subtasks that admit of 
independent development and evaluation. Pas- 
sage retrieval and entity extraction are both re- 
cognized independent tasks. Other subtasks are 
entity classification and query classification-- 
both being classification tasks that use features 
obtained by parsing--and entity ranking. 
In the following section, we describe the question- 
answering system, and in section 3, we quantify its 
performance and give an error analysis. 
2 The  Quest ion -Answer ing  System 
The system takes a natural-language query as input 
and produces a list of answers ranked in order of 
confidence. The top five answers were submitted to 
the TREC evaluation. 
Queries are processed in two stages. In the infor- 
mation retrieval stage, the most promising passages 
of the most promising documents are retrieved. In 
the linguistic processing stage, potential answers are 
extracted from these passages and ranked. 
The system can be divided into five main compo- 
nents. The information retrieval stage consists of a 
296 
single component, passage retrieval, and the linguis- 
tic processing stage circumscribes four components: 
entity extraction, entity classification, query classi- 
fication, and entity ranking. 
Passage Ret r ieva l  Identify relevant documents, 
and within relevant documents, identify the 
passages most likely to contain the answer to 
the question. 
Ent i ty  Ext ract ion  Extract a candidate set of pos- 
sible answers from the passages. 
Ent i ty  Classification The candidate set is a list of 
entities falling into a number of categories, in- 
cluding people, locations, organizations, quan- 
tities, dates, and linear measures. In some cases 
(dates, quantities, linear measures), entity clas- 
sification is a side effect of entity extraction, 
but in other cases (proper nouns, which may 
be people, locations, or organizations), there is 
a separate classification step after extraction. 
Query  Classi f icat ion Determine what category of 
entity the question is asking for. For example, 
if the query is 
Who is the author of the book, The 
Iron Lady: A Biography of Margaret 
Thatcher? 
the answer should be an entity of type Person. 
Ent i ty  Ranking Assign scores to entities, repre- 
senting roughly belief that the entity is the cor- 
rect answer. There are two components of the 
score. The most-significant bit is whether or 
not the category of the entity (as determined 
by entity classification) matches the category 
that the question is seeking (as determined by 
query classification). A finer-grained ranking is 
imposed on entities with the correct category, 
through the use of frequency and other infor- 
mation. 
The following sections describe these five compo- 
nents in detail. 
2.1 Passage Retrieval 
The first step is to find passages likely to contain the 
answer to the query. We use a modified version of 
the SMART information retrieval system (Buckley 
and Lewit, 1985; Salton, 1971) to recover a set of 
documents which are relevant o the question. We 
define passages as overlapping sets consisting of a 
sentence and its two immediate neighbors. (Pas- 
sages are in one-one correspondence with with sen- 
tences, and adjacent passages have two sentences in 
common.) The score for passage i was calculated as 
1 ?Si-z + ?Si + ~'S,+1 (1) 
where Sj, the score for sentence j, is the sum of IDF 
weights of non-stop terms that it shares with the 
query, plus an additional bonus for pairs of words 
(bigrams) that the sentence and query have in com- 
mon. 
The top 50 passages are passed on as input to 
linguistic processing. 
2.2 Ent i ty  Ext ract ion  
Entity extraction is done using the Cass partial pars- 
er (Abney, 1996). From the Cass output, we take 
dates, durations, linear measures, and quantities. 
In addition, we constructed specialized code for 
extracting proper names. The proper-name extrac- 
tor essentially classifies capitalized words as intrinsi- 
cally capitalized or not, where the alternatives to in- 
trinsic capitalization are sentence-initial capitaliza- 
tion or capitalization in titles and headings. The 
extractor uses various heuristics, including whether 
the words under consideration appear unambiguous- 
ly capitalized elsewhere in the document. 
2.3 Ent i ty  Classif ication 
The following types of entities were extracted as po- 
tential answers to queries. 
Person, Locat ion,  Organization, Other 
Proper names were classified into these cate- 
gories using a classifier built using the method 
described in (Collins and Singer, 1999). 1 This 
is the only place where entity classification was 
actually done as a separate step from entity 
extraction. 
Dates Four-digit numbers starting with 1 . . .  or 
20. .  were taken to be years. Cass was used to 
extract more complex date expressions ( uch as 
Saturday, January 1st, 2000). 
Quant i t ies  Quantities include bare numbers and 
numeric expressions' like The Three Stooges, 4 
1//2 quarts, 27~o. The head word of complex nu- 
meric expressions was identified (stooges, quarts 
or percent); these entities could then be later 
identified as good answers to How many ques- 
tions such as How many stooges were there ?
Durat ions,  Linear Measures  Durations and lin- 
ear measures are essentially special cases of 
quantities, in which the head word is a time 
unit or a unit of linear measure. Examples of 
durations are three years, 6 1/2 hours. Exam- 
ples of linear measures are 140 million miles, 
about 12 feet. 
We should note that this list does not exhaust he 
space of useful categories. Monetary amounts (e.g., 
~The classifier makes a three way distinction between 
Person, Location and Organization; names where the classi- 
fier makes no decision were classified as Other Named E~tity. 
297 
$25 million) were added to the system shortly after 
the Trec run, but other gaps in coverage remain. We 
discuss this further in section 3. 
2.4 Query  Classif ication 
This step involves processing the query to identify 
the category of answer the user is seeking. We parse 
the query, then use the following rules to determine 
the category of the desired answer: 
? Who, Whom -+ Person. 
? Where, Whence, Whither--+ Locat ion.  
? When -+ Date. 
? How few, great, little, many, much -+ 
Quemtity. We also extract the head word of 
the How expression (e.g., stooges in how many 
stooges) for later comparison to the head word 
of candidate answers. 
? How long --+ Duration or Linear Measure. 
How tall, wide, high, big, far --+ Linear 
Measure. 
? The wh-words Which or What typically appear 
with a head noun that describes the category 
of entity involved. These questions fall into two 
formats: What  X where X is the noun involved, 
and What  is the ... X. Here are a couple of 
examples: 
What  company is the largest Japanese 
ship builder? 
What  is the largest city in Germany? 
For these queries the head noun (e.g., compa- 
ny or city) is extracted, and a lexicon map- 
ping nouns to categories is used to identify the 
category of the query. The lexicon was partly 
hand-built (including some common cases such 
as number --+ Quant i ty  or year --~ Date). A 
large list of nouns indicating Person, Locat ion  
or Organ izat ion  categories was automatical- 
ly taken from the contextual (appositive) cues 
learned in the named entity classifier described 
in (Collins and Singer, 1999). 
? In queries containing no wh-word (e.g., Name 
the largest city in Germany), the first noun 
phrase that is an immediate constituent of the 
matrix sentence is extracted, and its head is 
used to determine query category, as for What 
X questions. 
? Otherwise, the category is the wildcard Any. 
2.5 Ent i ty  Rank ing  
Entity scores have two components. The first, most- 
significant, component is whether or not the entity's 
category matches the query's category. (If the query 
category is Any, all entities match it.) 
In most cases, the matching is boolean: either an 
entity has the correct category or not. However, 
there are a couple of special cases where finer distinc- 
tions are made. If a question is of the Date type, and 
the query contains one of the words day or month, 
then "full" dates are ranked above years. Converse- 
ly, if the query contains the word year, then years are 
ranked above full dates. In How many X questions 
(where X is a noun), quantified phrases whose head 
noun is also X are ranked above bare numbers or 
other quantified phrases: for example, in the query 
How many lives were lost in the Lockerbie air crash, 
entities such as 270 lives or almost 300 lives would 
be ranked above entities such as 200 pumpkins or 
150. 2 
The second component of the entity score is based 
on the frequency and position of occurrences of a 
given entity within the retrieved passages. Each oc- 
currence of an entity in a top-ranked passage counts 
10 points, and each occurrence of an entity in any 
other passage counts 1 point. ("Top-ranked pas- 
sage" means the passage or passages that received 
the maximal score from the passage retrieval compo- 
nent.) This score component is used as a secondary 
sort key, to impose a ranking on entities that are not 
distinguished by the first score component. 
In counting occurrences of entities, it is necessary 
to decide whether or not two occurrences are to- 
kens of the same entity or different entities. To this 
end, we do some normalization of entities. Dates 
are mapped to the format year-month-day: that is, 
last Tuesday, November 9, 1999 and 11/9/99 are 
both mapped to the normal form 1999 Nov 9 before 
frequencies are counted. Person names axe aliased 
based on the final word they contain. For example, 
Jackson and Michael Jackson are both mapped to 
the normal form Jackson. a 
3 Eva luat ion  
3.1 Resul ts  on the TREC-8  Evaluat ion 
The system was evaluated in the TREC-8 question- 
answering track. TREC provided 198 questions as a 
blind test set: systems were required to provide five 
potential answers for each question, ranked in or- 
der of plausibility. The output from each system 
was then scored by hand by evaluators at NIST, 
each answer being marked as either correct or in- 
correct. The system's core on a particular question 
is a function of whether it got a correct answer in the 
five ranked answers, with higher scores for the an- 
swer appearing higher in the ranking. The system 
receives a score of 1, 1/2, 1/3, 1/4, 1/5, or 0, re- 
2perhaps less desirably, people would not be recognized 
as a synonym of lives in this example: 200 people would be 
indistinguishable from 200 pumpkins. 
3This does introduce occasional errors, when two people 
with the same last name appear in retrieved passages. 
298 
System Mean Answer Mean 
Ans Len in Top 5 Score 
Entity 10.5 B 46% 0.356 
Passage 50 50 B 38.9% 0.261 
Passage 250 250 B 68% 0.545 
Figure 1: Results on the TREC-8 Evaluation 
spectively, according as the correct answer is ranked 
1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, or lower in the system out- 
put. The final score for a system is calculated as its 
mean score on the 198 questions. 
The TREC evaluation considered two question- 
answering scenarios: one where answers were lim- 
ited to be less than 250 bytes in length, the other 
where the limit was 50 bytes. The output from the 
passage retrieval component (section 2.1), with some 
trimming of passages to ensure they were less than 
250 bytes, was submitted to the 250 byte scenario. 
The output of the full entity-based system was sub- 
mitted to the 50 byte track. For comparison, we also 
submitted the output of a 50-byte system based on 
IR techniques alone. In this system single-sentence 
passages were retrieved as potential answers, their 
score being calculated using conventional IR meth- 
ods. Some trimming of sentences so that they were 
less than 50 bytes in length was performed. 
Figure 1 shows results on the TREC-8 evaluation. 
The 250-byte passage-based system found a correct 
answer somewhere in the top five answers on 68% of 
the questions, with a final score of 0.545. The 50- 
byte passage-based system found a correct answer 
on 38.9% of all questions, with an average score of 
0.261. The reduction in accuracy when moving from 
the 250-byte limit to the 50-byte limit is expected, 
because much higher precision is required; the 50- 
byte limit allows much less extraneous material to 
be included with the answer. The benefit of the 
including less extraneous material is that the user 
can interpret the output with much less effort. 
Our entity-based system found a correct answer in 
the top five answers on 46% of the questions, with 
a final score of 0.356. The performance is not as 
good as that of the 250-byte passage-based system. 
But when less extraneous material is permitted, the 
entity-based system outperforms the passage-based 
approach. The accuracy of the entity-based sys- 
tem is significantly better than that of the 50-byte 
passage-based system, and it returns virtually no ex- 
traneous material, as reflected in the average answer 
length of only 10.5 bytes. The implication is that 
NLP techniques become increasingly useful when 
short answers are required. 
3.2 Error Analysis of the Ent i ty-Based 
System 
3.2.1 Ranking of Answers 
As a first point, we looked at the performance ofthe 
entity-based system, considering the queries where 
the correct answer was found somewhere in the top 
5 answers (46% of the 198 questions). We found that 
on these questions, the percentage ofanswers ranked 
1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 was 66%, 14%, 11%, 4%, and 4% 
respectively. This distribution is by no means uni- 
form; it is clear that when the answer is somewhere 
in the top five, it is very likely to be ranked 1st or 
2nd. The system's performance is quite bimodah 
it either completely fails to get the answer, or else 
recovers it with a high ranking. 
3.2.2 Accuracy on Different Categories 
Figure 2 shows the distribution of question types 
in the TREC-8 test set ("Percentage of Q's"), and 
the performance ofthe entity-based system by ques- 
tion type ("System Accuracy"). We categorized the 
questions by hand, using the eight categories de- 
scribed in section 2.3, plus two categories that es- 
sentially represent types that were not handled by 
the system at the time of the TREC competition: 
Monetary Amount and Miscellaneous. 
"System Accuracy" means the percentage ofques- 
tions for which the correct answer was in the top five 
returned by the system. There is a sharp division in 
the performance on different question types. The 
categories Person, Location, Date and Quantity 
are handled fairly well, with the correct answer ap- 
pearing in the top five 60% of the time. These four 
categories make up 67% of all questions. In contrast, 
the other question types, accounting for 33% of the 
questions, are handled with only 15% accuracy. 
Unsurprisingly, the Miscellaneous and Other 
Named Ent i ty  categories are problematic; unfortu- 
nately, they are also rather frequent. Figure 3 shows 
some examples of these queries. They include a large 
tail of questions eeking other entity types (moun- 
tain ranges, growth rates, films, etc.) and questions 
whose answer is not even an entity (e.g., "Why did 
David Koresh ask the FBI for a word processor?") 
For reference, figure 4 gives an impression of the 
sorts of questions that the system does well on (cor- 
rect answer in top five). 
3.2.3 Errors by Component 
Finally, we performed an analysis to gauge which 
components represent performance bottlenecks in 
the current system. We examined system logs for 
a 50-question sample, and made a judgment of what 
caused the error, when there was an error. Figure 5 
gives the breakdown. Each question was assigned to 
exactly one line of the table. 
The largest body of errors, accounting for 18% of 
the questions, are those that are due to unhandled 
299 
Question I Rank I Output from System 
Who is the author of the book, The Iron Lady: A Biography of 2 
Margaret Thatcher? 
What is the name of the managing director of Apricot Computer? i 
What country is the biggest producer of tungsten? 
Who was the first Taiwanese President? 
When did Nixon visit China? 
How many calories are there in a Big Mac? 4 
What is the acronym for the rating system for air conditioner effi- 1 
ciency? 
Hugo Young 
Dr Peter Horne 
China 
Taiwanese President Li 
Teng hui 
1972 
562 calories 
EER 
Figure 4: A few TREC questions answered correctly by the system. 
Type Percent 
of Q's 
System 
Accuracy 
Person 28 62.5 
Location 18.5 67.6 
Date 11 45.5 
Quantity 9.5 52.7 
TOTAL 67 60 
Other Named Ent 
Miscellaneous 
Linear Measure 
Monetary Amt 
Organization 
Duration 
14.5 
8.5 
3.5 
3 
2 
1.5 
33 TOTAL 
31 
5.9 
0 
0 
0 
0 
15 
Errors 
Passage retrieval failed 
Answer is not an entity 
Answer of unhandled type: money 
Answer of unhandled type: misc 
Entity extraction failed 
Entity classification failed 
Query classification failed 
Entity ranking failed 
16% 
4% 
10% 
8% 
2% 
4% 
4% 
4% 
Successes 
Answer at Rank 2-5 I 16% 
Answer at Rank 1 I 32% 
TOTAL 
Figure 2: Performance ofthe entity-based system on 
different question types. "System Accuracy" means 
percent of questions for which the correct answer 
was in the top five returned by the system. "Good" 
types are in the upper block, "Bad" types are in the 
lower block. 
What does the Peugeot company manufacture? 
Why did David Koresh ask the FBI for a word 
processor? 
What are the Valdez Principles? 
What was the target rate for M3 growth in 1992? 
What does El Nino mean in spanish? 
Figure 5: Breakdown of questions by error type, in 
particular, by component responsible. Numbers are 
percent of questions in a 50-question sample. 
five, but not at rank one, are almost all due to fail- 
ures of entity ranking) Various factors contributing 
to misrankings are the heavy weighting assigned to 
answers in the top-ranked passage, the failure to ad- 
just frequencies by "complexity" (e.g., it is signifi- 
cant if 22.5 million occurs everal times, but not if 3 
occurs several times), and the failure of the system 
to consider the linguistic context in which entities 
appear. 
Figure 3: Examples of "Other Named Entity" and 
Miscellaneous questions. 
types, of which half are monetary amounts. (Ques- 
tions with non-entity answers account for another 
4%.) Another large block (16%) is due to the pas- 
sage retrieval component: the correct answer was 
not present in the retrieved passages. The linguistic 
components ogether account for the remaining 14% 
of error, spread evenly among them. 
The cases in which the correct answer is in the top 
4 Conc lus ions  and  Future  Work  
We have described a system that handles arbi- 
trary questions, producing a candidate list of an- 
swers ranked by their plausibility. Evaluation on 
the TREC question-answering track showed that the 
correct answer to queries appeared in the top five an- 
swers 46% of the time, with a mean score of 0.356. 
The average length of answers produced by the sys- 
tem was 10.5 bytes. 
4The sole exception was a query misclassification caused 
by a parse failure---miraculously, the correct answer made it 
to rank five despite being of the "wrong" type. 
300 
There are several possible areas for future work. 
There may be potential for improved performance 
through more sophisticated use of NLP techniques. 
In particular, the syntactic ontext in which a par- 
ticular entity appears may provide important infor- 
mation, but it is not currently used by the system. 
Another area of future work is to extend the 
entity-extraction component of the system to han- 
dle arbitrary types (mountain ranges, films etc.). 
The error analysis in section 3.2.2 showed that these 
question types cause particular difficulties for the 
system. 
The system is largely hand-built. It is likely that 
as more features are added a trainable statistical or 
machine learning approach to the problem will be- 
come increasingly desirable. This entails developing 
a training set of question-answer pairs, raising the 
question of how a relatively large corpus of questions 
can be gathered and annotated. 
Re ferences  
Steven Abney. 1996. Partial parsing via finite- 
state cascades. J Natural Language Engineering, 
2(4):337-344, December. 
C. Buckley and A.F. Lewit. 1985. Optimization of 
inverted vector searches. In Proe. Eighth Interna- 
tional ACM SIGIR Conference, pages 97-110. 
Michael Collins and Yoram Singer. 1999. Unsuper- 
vised models for named entity classification. In 
EMNLP. 
G. Salton, editor. 1971. The Smart Retrieval Sys- 
tem - Experiments in Automatic Document Pro- 
cessing. Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ. 
301 
