Creating a Universal Networking Language Module 
within an Advanced NLP System 
Igor BOGUSLAVSKY, Nadezhda FRII), l,eonid IOM1)IN, Leonid KREII)LIN, hina SAGALOVA, 
Victor SIZOV 
Coml)utational l~inguistics Laboratory 
Institute for Information Transnlissioll Problems of lho P, ussian Academy of Sciences 
19 Bol'shcti Karetnyj, 101447 Moscow, Russia 
J )~nadya  ion ld in , leny{~lova~)~) . ru  
Abstract 
A multifunctional NIA 9 environment, 
\[!'I'AI~-3, is presented. The environment has 
several NI,I ~ applications, inchtding a machine 
translation system, a natural language interface 
to SQI, type databases, synonymous 
l~araphrasing of sentences, syntactic error 
correction module, and a computer-assisted 
language learning tool. Ihnphasis is laid on a 
new naodtile of tile processor responsible for tlio 
intorl\]lcc with the Universal Networking 
l A.lllgtlagC, il roCOlll plodtlcl by the UN 
Universily inlended for the facilitation of 
nnlltihlnguage, multiethnic access 1o 
communication etworks such as WWW. The 
UNL module of ETAP-3 naturally combines the 
two major al)proaches accepted in machine 
translation: the lransfer-based approach and the 
interlingua pl)roach. 
1. In t roductory  Renmrks  
ETAP-3 is a multilmrposc NIA ~ environmmlt 
that was conceived in the 1980s and has been 
worked out in the Institute for lnl~mnation 
Transmission Problems, Russian Academy of 
Sciences (Apresian et al 1992, l?,oguslavsky 
1995). The theoretical foundation of ETAP-3 is 
tile Meaning ?=> Text linguistic theory by Igor' 
Mel'6uk and the Integral Theory of Language by 
Jurij Apresian. 
Eq'AP-3 is a non-comlnercial environment 
primarily oriented at linguistic research rather 
than creating a marketable software product. The 
main focus of the research carried ()tit with 
I';TAP-3 is COlnputational modelling of natural 
languages. This attitude explains our effort to 
develop the models in a way as linguistically 
sound as possible. We strive to incorporate into the 
system much linguistic knowledge irrespective of 
whether this knowledge is essential for better text 
processing (e.g. machine translation) or not. In 
particular, we want our parser to produce what wc 
consider a correct syntactic representation of tim 
sentence - first of all because we believe that this 
interpretation is a true fact about tile natural 
language. We have had inany occasions to set that 
in the long run the iheorctical soundness and 
completeness of linguistic knowledge incorporated 
in an NIA ) application will pay. 
All NLP applications in F, TAP-3 are largely 
based on an original system of three-wdue logic 
and use an original formal language of linguistic 
descriptions, I~'Oi>&;T. 
2. ETAP-3 :  Modules,  Features,  Des ign ,  
hnplementat io l l  
2.11 ETAP-3  Modules  
The m~tjor NI,P modules of ETAP-3 are as 
lollows: 
? High Quality Machine Translation System 
? Natural Language Interface to SQL Type 
Databases 
? System of Synonymous Paraphrasing of 
Sentences 
? Syntactic Error Correction Tool 
? Computer-Aided Language LeamingTool 
? Tree \]?,ank Workbencll 
Another module, a new UNL converter 
responsible lot the interface with the Universal 
Networking Language, a recent product designed 
' Tile research reported here was in part supl)oricd by a grant (No 99-06-80277) fronl tile Russian Foundation 12)1" 
Fundamental Research, whose assistance isgratefully acknowledged. 
83 
by the UN University, is discussed in detail in 
Section 3. 
2.1.1. ETAP-3 MT System 
The most important module of ETAP-3 is 
the MT system that serves five language pairs: 
(1) English-Russian, (2) Russian - English, (3) 
Russian - Korean. (4) Russian - French, and (5) 
Russian - German. 
By far the most advanced are the first two 
of these pairs. The system disposes of 50,000- 
strong so-called combinatorial dictionaries of 
Russian and English that contain syntactic, 
derivational, semantic, subcategorization, and 
collocational information. The system relies on 
comprehensive grammars of the two languages. 
For the other language pairs smaller scale 
prototypes are available. 
ETAP-3 is able to present multiple 
translations when it encounters an ambiguity it 
cannot resolve. By default, the system produces 
one parse and one translation that it considers 
the most probable. If the user opts for multiple 
translation, the system remembers the 
unresolved ambiguities and provides all 
mutuany compatible parses and lexical choices. 
To give one example from the real output: the 
sentence They made a general remark that . . . .  
when submitted to the multiple translation 
option, yielded two Russian translations that 
correspond to radically different syntactic 
structures and lexical interpretations: (a) Oni 
sdelali obshchee zameehanie, chto... (= They 
made some comn-lon renlark that ...) and (b) Oni 
vynudili generala otmetit; chto... (= They forced 
some general to remark that ...). 
2.1.2. Natural Language Interface to SQL Type 
Databases 
This ETAP-3 module translates freely 
worded human queries to a database from 
Russian or English into SQL expressions. It can 
also produce the reverse generation of a NL 
query from an SQL expression. 
2.1.3. System of Synonymous Paraphrasing 
The module is designed for linguistic 
experiments in obtaining nmltiple meaning- 
retaining paraphrases of Russian and English 
sentences. The paraphrasing is based on the 
concept of lexical functions, one of the 
important innovations of the Meaning ?=> Text 
theory. The following example shows the kind 
of paraphrases that can be produced by the 
module: 
(1) The director ordered John to write a report - 
The director gave John an order to write a report 
- John was ordered by the director to write a 
report - John received an orcler fonn the director 
to write a report. 
It is a very promising direction of linguistic 
research and developlnent that can be applied in a 
wide range of activities, including language 
learning and acquisition, authoring, and text 
planning. Besides that, lexical functions are used 
for ensuring adequate lexical choice in machine 
translation and in the UNL module. 
2.1.4. Syntactic Error Correction Tool 
The module operates with Russian texts in 
which it finds a wide range of errors in 
grammatical agreement as well as case 
subcategorization a d offers the user the correct 
version. 
2.1.5. Computer-Aided Language Learning Tool 
The module is a standalone software 
application constructed as a dialogue type 
computer galne intended for advanced students of 
Russian, English, and German as foreign 
languages who wish to enrich their vocabulary, 
especially to master the collocations of these 
natural languages and their periphrastic abilities. 
The tool relies on the apparatus of lexical 
limctions. It can also be used native speakers of the 
three languages interested in increasing their 
command of the vocabulary (such as journalists, 
school teachers, or politicians). 
2.1.6. Tree Bank Workbench 
This is the module that utilizes the ETAP-3 
dictionaries, its morphological analyzer and the 
parser to produce a first-ever syntactically tagged 
corpus of Russian texts. It is a mixed type 
application that combines automatic parsing with 
human post-editing of tree structure. 
2.2. Major Features 
The following ate the most important features of 
the whole ETAP-3 environment and its modules: 
* Rule-Based Approach 
? Stratificational Approach 
? Transfer Approach 
? Syntactic Dependencies 
? Lexicalistic Approach 
? Multiple Translation 
? Maximum Reusabilty of Linguistic Resources 
84 
Ill tile current version of ETAP-3, its 
modules that process NL senteuces are strictly 
rule-based. However, ill a series of recent 
experiments, tile MT module was supplenlenled 
by all example-based component of a translation 
menlory type and a statistical component hat 
provides semiautonmtic extraction of translatiou 
equivalents t?om bilingual text corpora (see 
lomdin & Streiter 1999). 
ETAP-3 shares its stratificational feature 
with many other NLP systems. It is at tile level 
of tile normalized, or deep syntactic, structure 
that tile transfer flom tile source to tile target 
language takes place in MT. 
ETAP-3 makes use of syntactic dependency 
trees for sentence structure representation 
instead of constituent, or phrase, structure. 
Tile ETAP-3 system takes a lexicalistic 
stand ill tile sense that lexical data are 
considmed as important as gl'ammar 
infornlation. A dictionary entry contains, in 
addition to tile lemma name, information on 
syntactic and semantic features of tile word, its 
subcategorization flame, a default translation, 
and rules of various types, and wdues of lexical 
functions for which tile lemma is tile keyword. 
The word's syntactic t'eatures characterize its 
ability/nou-ability to participate ill specific 
syntactic onstructions. A word can have several 
syntactic features elected from a total of more 
than 200 items. Semantic features arc needed to 
check tile semantic agreement between the 
words ill a sentence. Tile subeategorization 
frame shows the surface marking of tile word's 
arguments (in terms of case, prepositions, 
conjtmctions, etc.). Rules are an essential part of 
the dictionary entry. All the rules operating in 
ETAP-3 are distributed betwecn tile granmmr 
and tile dictionary. Grammar rules me more 
general and apply lo large classes of words, 
whereas tile rules listed or simply referred to in 
the dictionary are restricted ill their scope and 
only apply to small classes of words or even 
individual words. This organization of tile rules 
ensures the self-tuning of tile system to tile 
processing of each particular senteuce. In 
processing a sentence, only those dictionary 
rules are actiwlted that are explicitly referred to 
ill the dictionary entries of tile words making up 
tile sentence. A sample dictionary enlry 
fl'agment for tile English noun chance illustrates 
what was said above: 
\[1\] CHANCE1 
\[21 POR:S 
\[3\] SYNT:COUNT,PREDTO,PREDTHAT 
\[4\] DES:'FACT','ABSTRACT' 
\[5\] D1.1 :OF,'PERSON' 
\[6\] D2.1 :OF,'FACT' 
\[7\] D2.2:TO2 
\[8\] D2.3:THAT1 
\[9\] SYN 1 :OPPORTUNITY 
\[10\] MAG N: GOOD 1~FAIR 1~EXCELLENT 
\[11\] ANTIMAGN: SLIGHT/SLIM/POOR/LITTLE1/ 
SMALL 
\[12\] OPER1 :HA VE/STAND1 
\[13\] REAL1-M: TAKE 
\[14\] ANTIREAL1 -M:MISSl 
\[15\] INCEPOPER1 :GET 
\[16\] FINOPER1 :LOSE 
\[17\] CAUSFUNC1 :GIVE<TOI>/GIVE 
\[18\] ZONE:R 
\[19\] TRANS:SHANS/SLUCHAJ 
\[20\] REG:TRADUCT2.00 
\[21\] TAKE:X 
\[22\] LOC:R 
\[23\] R:COMPOS/MODIF/POSSES 
\[24\] CHECK 
\[25\] 1.1 DEP-LEXA(X,Z,PREPOS,BY1) 
\[26\] N:01 
\[27\] CHECK 
\[2811.1 DOM(X,*,R) 
\[29\] DO 
\[30\] 1 ZAMRUZ:Z(PO1) 
\[31\] 2 ZAMRUZ:X(SLUCFtAJNOST') 
\[32\] N:02 
\[33\] CHECK 
\[34\] 2.1 DOM(X,*,*) 
\[351 DO 
\[36\] I ZAMRUZ:Z(SLUCHAJNO) 
\[37\] 2 STERUZ:X 
\[38\] TRAF:RA-EXPANS.16 
\[39\] LA:THAT1 
\[40\] TRAF:RA-EXPANS.22 
lane \[12\] - part of speech: a noun. 
Line 113\] - tile list of syntactic features. 
Lille \[4\] - tile list of senmntic features. 
Lines \[5\] - \[8\] - tile subcategorization fiame. 
Lines \[9\] - \[17\] - the list of lexical functions used 
to describe restricted lexical co-occurrence. 
Lille \[18\] - marks the end of the application- 
independent infomlation and beginning of the 
information used in tile English-Russian 
translation. 
Lille \[ 19\] - default ranslation into Russian. 
lanes \[20\] - \[37\] - a rule for translating tile phrase 
t) 3 , chance in different contexts. 
Lines \[38\] - \[39\] - a reference to the rule which 
introduces a semantically empty conjunction (that: 
a chance that we obtain a grant) .  
Line \[40\] - a reference to the rule which 
introduces particle to (a chance to win). 
85 
2.3. General  Architecture of the ETAP-3 
environment. 
To give a general idea of how the ETAP-3 NLP 
operates, we show here the layout of the MT 
module (Fig. I). In a way, all the other modules 
can be viewed as this module's deriwttives. 
OBJECTS STAGES 
Source son\[ollCO 
MorphS source 
SyntS source 
NormS source 
NorlnS target 
SyntS target 
MorphS target 
Target sentence 1 
Morphological nalysis 
Pal'sing 
Norlnalization 
Transfer 
Expansioll 
Syntactic synthesis 
Morphological synthesis 
Fig.1 
DICTIONARIES 
SOUI'CO 
morplaological 
dicl:ionarv 
SOllI'CO 
Combinatorial 
Dictionary 
.~ t~ Target 
Colnbinatorial 
~ I DictionarYTarget 
-~ lnorphological 
dictionary 
2.4. hnplementation 
The ETAP-3 environment has been implemented 
on a PC under Windows NT 4.0 environment. 
The environment has a number of auxiliary 
tools, including a sophisticated lexicographer's 
toolkit that allows the developers and the users 
to effectively maintain and update the ETAP-3 
dictionaries. 
3. The UNL Interface 
3.1 Aims and scenario 
The UNL project has a very ambitious goal: 
to break down or at least to drastically lower the 
language barrier for the Internet users. With time 
and space limitations already overcome, the 
Internet community is still separated by 
language boundaries. Theoretically, this seems 
to be the only major obstacle standing in the way 
of international and interpersonal 
communication i  the information society. This 
is why the problem of the language barrier on 
the Interact is perceived as one of the global 
problems of mankind, and a project aiming to 
solve this problem has been initiated under the 
UN auspices - by the Institute of Advanced 
Studies of the United Nations University. 
Started in 1996, the project curremly 
embraces 15 universities and research 
institutions fiom Brazil, China, Egypt, France, 
Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Jordan, 
Latvia, Mongolia, Russia, Spain, and Thailand. 
In the following years more groups are expected 
to join, so that in the long run all languages of 
the UN member states will be covered. 
The idea of the project is as follows. An 
interlingua has been developed which has 
sufficient expressive power to represent 
relevant information conveyed by natural 
languages. This interlingua entitled Universal 
Networking Language (UNL) has been 
proposed by H. Uchida (UNU/IAS). For each 
natural language, two systems should be 
developed: a "deconverter" capable of 
translating texts from UNL to this NL, and an 
"enconverter" which has to convert NL texts 
86 
into UNL. it sholtld be emphasized that the 
procedure of producing a UNL text ix not 
supposed to be fully autolnatic. It will be an 
interactive process with the labor divided 
between the COlnputer and a human expert 
("writer") in UNI+. 
This paradigm makes UNL radically 
different from conventional machine lranslation. 
Duo to the interactive oncoilversion, the UNL 
expression, which serves as inpul for generation, 
can be nlado as good as Clio wishes. The UNL 
writer will edit the rough result proposed by the 
OllConvorlor, corfect its errors, eliminate the 
renlaining ambiguities. He/she can run a 
deconvorior of his own language to lest the 
wtlidity of the UNL expression obtained alld 
then refine it again tin one is fully satisfied with 
the l'inal result. 
Anolhor ilnl)oriant distinction l'roill MT 
systonis is thai lhe inlorlirigua roprosenhilion of 
texts will be created and stored irrespectively of 
ils goiloration into particular languages. UNL 
Call be soon as all independent i-ileal-iS of iYloanillg 
ropreselllation. UNL doctlmonts Call 13e 
processed by indexing, retrieval and knowledge 
extraction tools without being converted to 
llattll'al lallguages. Gellcration \viii only be 
needed when the document has roached the 
htllll;_lll HSOl +. 
A doconvoftor and an enconvoi'tor for each 
lliligtlagC form ii IAlnguago Server residing in the 
hilernot. All language scrvolS will be cotlnoclod 
in the IJNL network. They \viii allow ally 
IlliOiTiOt user to doconvorl a UNI, docunleili 
found on the web into his/her native language, as 
well as to produce UNI, represelltatiOllS of the 
texts he/she wishes to nlako available to 
inultiethnic public. 
3.2 UNL language 
We cannot describe the UNL language here 
in all details: this topic deserves a special paper 
which will hopefully be written by the author of 
the language design - l)r. Hiroshi Uchida. We 
will only characterize it to the extent necessary 
for the description of our deconversion module. 
Full specification of UNL can be found at 
/lllp://WWW. tml. tax. ttnu. edu/. 
UNL is a comlmter language intended to 
represent infolmation in a way that allows to 
generate a text expressing this information in a 
very large number of nahtral anguages. A UNL 
expression is an oriented hyper-graph that 
corresponds to a NL sentence in the amount of 
information conveyed. The arcs of t11o graph are 
interpreted as senmntic relations of the type 
agent, ob.ject, lime, place, inslrttment, manlier, 
etc. The nodes of the graph are special units, the 
so-called Universal Words (UW) interpreted as 
concepts, or groups of UWs. The nodes can be 
supplied with attributes which provide 
additional information on their use in lhc given 
sentence, e.g. @imperative, @generic, @future, 
@obligation. 
Each UW is represented as an t~,nglish 
word that can be optionally supplied with 
semantic specifications to restrict its meaning. 
In most cases, these specifications locate the 
concept in the knowledge base. It is done in the 
following way: UW A(icl>B) ix interpreted as 
'A is subsumed under the category B'. For 
example, the UW coach used without any 
restrictions denotes anything the English coach 
can denote, ll' eric wants to be more precise, one 
can use restrictions: coach(icl>transl)ort ) 
denotes a bus, coaclz (icl>lmman) denotes a 
trainer and coach (icl>do) denotes the action of 
training, in a sense, the apparatus of restrictions 
allows to represent UWs as disambiguated 
l';nglish words. On ltle other hand, restrictions 
allow to denote concepts which are absent in 
I~;nglish. For cxmnple, in Russian there is a large 
group of motion words, whose meaning 
incorporates the idea of the mode of locomotion 
or tral/sportation: priletel' 'come by flying', 
prO@,/' 'come by ship', l)ril)olzti 'come by 
crawling', l)ril)eJlal ' 'come running', elc. 
l!nglish has no neutral words to denote these 
concepts. Still, on the basis of English one can 
constrttct lJWs that approximate required 
concepts, e.g. conw(met>shil) ) is interpreted as 
'come and the method o1' coming ix a ship'. 
IIere is an example of a UNL expression 
for the sentence 
(2) Howevel, hmgua,q,e dll/ferences are a barrier 
to the smoot/L/low of in.fomnation in our society. 
l';ach line is an expression of the kind 
rehttion(UWl, UW2). For simplicity, UWs are 
not supplied with restrictions. 
aoj (barrier. @entry. @present. @indef. @however, 
difference. @pl) 
rood(barrier. @entry. @present. @indef. @ however, 
Ilow. @dcl) 
mod(differencc.@pl, language) 
aoj(smoofli, flow. @del) 
meal(flow. @def, in fol'nmtion) 
scn(fk+w. @dcl, society) 
pos(society, we) 
P, ehttions used: ao i a relation that holds 
between a thing and its state, nmd - a relation 
87 
between a thing and its modifier, scn-  a relation 
between an event or a state and its abstract 
location, pos - a relation between a thing and its 
possessor. Attributes: @entry - denotes the top 
node of the structure, @present - present ense, 
@def - definite NP, @pl - plural, @however - a 
modal meaning corresponding to English 
however. 
3.3. UNL  - Russ ian  deeonvers ion  by  
means  o f  ETAP-3  
As was shown in Section 1, ETAP-3 is a 
transfer-based system where the transfer is 
carried out at the level of the Normalized 
Syntactic Structure (NormSS). This level is best 
suited for establishing correspondence with 
UNL, as UNL expressions and NormSS show 
striking similarities. The most important of theln 
are as follows: 
1. Both UNL expressions and NormSSs 
occupy an intermediate position between the 
surface and the semantic levels of 
representation. They roughly correspond to 
the so-called deep-syntactic level. At this 
level the meaning of the lexical items is not 
decomposed into the primitives, and the 
relations between the lexical items are 
language independent; 
2. The nodes of both UNL expressions and 
NormSSs are terminal elements (lexical 
items) and not syntactic ategories; 
3. The nodes carry additional characteristics 
(attributes); 
4. The arcs of both structures are non- 
symmetrical dependencies. 
At the same time, UNL expressions and 
NormSSs differ in several important respects: 
1. All the nodes of NormSSs are lexical items, 
while a node of a UNL expression can be a sub- 
graph; 
2. Nodes of a NormSS always correspond to one 
word sense, while UWs may either be broader or 
narrower than the corresponding English words: 
2.1. they can cover a meaning area that 
corresponds to several different word senses at a 
time (see above); 
2.2. they can correspond to a fi'ee word 
combination (e.g. computer-based or high- 
quality); 
2.3. they can correspond to a word form 
(e.g. best which a form of good or well); 
2.4. they can denote a concept that has no 
direct correspondence in English (see above). 
3. A NormSS is the simplest of all connected 
graphs - a tree, while a UNL expression is a 
hyper-graph. Its arcs may form a loop and 
connect sub-graphs; 
4. The relations between the nodes in a NormSS 
are purely syntactic and are not supposed to 
convey a meaning of their own, while the UNL 
relations denote semantic roles; 
5. Attributes of a NormSS mostly correspond to 
grammatical elements, while UNL attributes 
often convey a meaning that is expressed both 
in English and in Russian by means of lexical 
items (e.g. modals); 
6. A NormSS contains information on the word 
order, while a UNL expression does not say 
anything to this effect. 
The NormSS of tile sentence (2) looks as 
follows: 
be ,  present 
I~' prcdic "",ik 
however difference, pl barrier, i,l~t~l 
compos ~ l-compt 
f low,  def 
lanvuave / I \attrib ll\]~-Colnp\]~ 
smooth information in 
prepos~ 
society 
Fig. 2 modif~ 
our  
As UNL makes use of English lexical labels, it 
is expedient to bridge the gap between UNL and 
Russian via English NormSS which actually 
serves as an Intermediate Representation (IR). 
in this case tile UNL - Russian interface will be 
the simplest. After the English NormSS has 
been reached, conventional ETAP English-to- 
Russian machine translation mode of operation 
can be used. 
The UNL-to-Russian module carries out the 
following three steps: 
1. Transfer from UNL to the intermediate 
representation (IR). 
88 
2. Transfer fronl tile IR to tile Russian 
ilOllnalized syntactic structure (NorlriSS-1)@ 
3. (\]eneration of a P, ussian sentence from the 
NornlSS-R.  
Tile archilecture of tile UNL-Russian 
deconverter is shown in Fig. 3. 
It follows fi'om tile previous discussion that the 
UNL - NormSS interface should solve the 
following five tasks: 
1. An appropriate English lexeme for every 
UW should be selected where it is possible; 
a Russian lexeme will be provided by tile 
ETAP English - Russian transfer dictionary. 
If no appropriate English word can be found 
for a UW, other means of expression should 
be found. 
2. UNL syntactic relations should be 
tl-anslated, either by means of I~q'AP 
relations or widl tile help of lexical items. 
3. UNL attributes hould be translated, either 
by lneaus of granunatical features or with 
the help of lexical items (e.g. @however -
however). 
4. UNL graph should be converted in a tree. 
5. Word order should be established. 
The first aild (parlly) the second tasks are 
soh, ed by uleaus Of the infornlatiou stored in the 
UW English and English conlbinalorial 
dictionaries. All lhe rest (tasks 2 io 5) is done by 
the rules written in the logical-based I~'OP, tZT 
formalism. 
Let us give one example lo ilhlstrate the 
transformation f UNL relations into NL words. 
UNL has a tim relation that holds between an 
event and its linle. As is known, lhe choice of 
approl)riaie words to express lhis relation is to a 
largo oxleni doterilliried by lexical properties of 
tile word denoting tilne; cf. oz._It Moll(lay, at 
midnight, idAl summe#; rhtri, e~ the it,at; etc. In 
ETAP-3 all these cases are treated as tile lexical 
function LOC denoting (tenlporal) locality (on 
lexical functions see 2.1.3). Tile values of all 
lexical fimctions are given in the lexicon in the 
entries of their arguments ( ee an example in 2.2 
above). While processing tile UNL expression, 
the tim relation is linked to the lexical ftluclioll 
LOC which allows to l'iud a correct preposition, 
both in English and in Russian. 
3.4. Current state and prospects for the 
future 
Tile module of Russian deconversiou is 
operational and can be tested at 
ccc ctrcctcre 
II 
Intermediate Representation 
cccnccisc cormaciced 
ccntactic ctrcctcrec 
cnccisc cc :rcace ccntactic i 
I ctrcctcre i 
Fig.3 
I Rcssian cormaciced \[ 
ccntactic ctrcctcre 
ll 
i i  
II 
Rcssian ccrcace 2 ccntactic 
~' ~ct rcc tc re  
F-----G cnccisccorpcocoeicac I Rcssian corpcococicac ctrcctcre I ctrcctcre - - - - - -T  
centence centence 
hitp://proling.iitp.ru/Ooco. We plan to put it to 
geUela\] rise by aulunlu 2000. Tile interactive 
enconvorsion n\]odulo will be our next concorll. 
As sllo,vn ill Fig. 3, the interface botweou 
UNL and Russian is established at tile level of 
the English NorlllS. At this point ETAP 
English-to-Russian nlachine Iranslation facility 
can be switched which carries through tile 
phases of transfer and Russian generation. This 
architecture allows to obtain English generalion 
for relatively cheap, as ETAP has a Russiau-to- 
English mode of operation as well. First 
experiments in this direction have been carried 
Otll which proved quite promising. 
References 
Aprcsian Ju.D., I.M.B%uslavsky, L.L.Iomdin et al 
(1992). ETAP-2: The Linguistics of a Machine 
Translation System.//META, Vol. 37, No 1, pp. 
97-112. 
Boguslavsky 1.(1995). A bi-dircclional Russian-lo- 
English nlachino Iranslaiion system (ETAP-3). H 
Proceedings el' die Machine Trallslalion Sumnlii 
V. guxonlbourg. 
lomdin L.& O. Slroiter. (1999). Learning 1"1"o111 
Pa,'allel Corpora: Experiments in Machine 
Translation. // l)ialogue'99: Compulational 
IJnguislics and ils Applications International 
Workshop. Tarusa, Russia, June 1999. Vol.2, pp. 
79-88. 
89 
Multilinguality in ETAP-3: Reuse of Lexical Resources 
Igor BOGUSLAVSKY 
Universidad Politecnica de Madrid 
28660 Boadilla del Monte, Madrid, Spain 
igor@opera.dia.fi.upm.es  
 
Leonid IOMDIN 
Institute for Information Transmission 
Problems, Russian Academy of Sciences 
19, B. Karetnyj 
Moscow, GSP-4, Russia  
iomdin@cl.iitp.ru 
 
Victor SIZOV 
Institute for Information Transmission Problems, Russian Academy of Sciences 
19, B. Karetnyj 
Moscow, GSP-4, Russia  
sizov@cl.iitp.ru 
 
Abstract 
The paper presents the work done at the Institute 
for Information Transmission Problems (Russian 
Academy of Sciences, Moscow) on the 
multifunctional linguistic processor ETAP-3. Its 
two multilingual options are discussed ? machine 
translation in a variety of language pairs and 
translation to and from UNL, a meaning 
representation language.  
For each working language, ETAP has one 
integral dictionary, which is used in all 
applications both for the analysis and synthesis 
(generation) of the given language. In difficult 
cases, interactive dialogue with the user is used for 
disambiguation. Emphasis is laid on multiple use 
of lexical resources in the multilingual 
environment.  
1 General Information on ETAP  
The multifunctional ETAP-3 linguistic 
processor, developed by the Computational 
Linguistics Laboratory (CLL) in Moscow (see e.g. 
Apresjan et al 1992a,b, 1993, 2003), is the product 
of more than two decades of laboratory research 
and development in the field of language 
modeling. The most important features of the 
processor are as follows. 
(1) ETAP-3 is based on the general linguistic 
framework of the Meaning ? Text theory, 
proposed by Igor Mel?cuk (e.g. Mel?cuk, 1974) 
and complemented by the theory of systematic 
lexicography and integrated description of 
language proposed by Jurij Apresjan [Apresjan 
1995, 2000].  
(2) ETAP-3 has a declarative organization of 
linguistic knowledge.  
(3) One of the major components of ETAP-3 is 
the innovative combinatorial dictionary. Apart 
from syntactic and semantic features and 
subcategorization frames, the dictionary entry may 
have rules of 8 types. Many dictionary entries 
contain lexical functions (LF).  
(3) ETAP-3 makes use of a formalism based on 
three-value predicate logic, in which all linguistic 
data are presented.  
(4) The ETAP-3 processor has a modular 
architecture. All stages of processing and all types 
of linguistic data are organized into modules, 
which warrants their reusability in many NLP 
applications both within and beyond ETAP-3 
environment.  
At the moment, the ETAP-3 environment 
comprises the following main options: 1) a rule -
based machine translation system; 2) a Universal 
Networking Language (UNL) translation engine; 
3) a system of synonymous paraphrasing of 
sentences; 4) a workbench for syntactic annotation 
of text corpora; and 5) a grammar checker. All the 
applications make use of the same dictionaries, but 
only the first and the second are multilingual. In 
Section 2 we will discuss multilingual lexical 
resources used in machine translation, and in 
Section 3 ? in the UNL module.  
2 Multilinguality in ETAP 
2.1 Structure of the Dictionary Entry 
To support multilinguality, the dictionary entry 
of the ETAP dictionary has several sub-zones. 
There is one general zone and several zones 
oriented towards various languages. The general 
zone stores all types of monolingual information: 
part of speech, syntactic features, semantic 
features, subcategorization frames, lexical 
functions, syntactic and pre-syntactic rules, 
generation rules, and some other data. Each bi-
lingual sub-zone serves for establishing 
correspondence between the given language and 
another one (see Fig. 1).  
For example, the Russian zone of an English 
dictionary entry contains all the information 
needed to translate English words into Russian, the 
Arabic zone provides translation into Arabic, etc. 
Conversely, the information needed to translate 
Russian words into English is stored in the English 
zone of the Russian dictionary entries. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 
 
2.2 Default and Specific Translation 
The information stored in a bi-lingual zone 
consists of two parts: a default translation and 
lexical translation rules. Default translation is a 
single word that translates the given word in non-
specific contexts (it is introduced by a special 
label: TRANS). Any other type of translation is 
carried out by means of rules. If the word is 
translated by a phrase consisting of several words, 
the rule shows how the words in the phrase are 
connected to each other and how this phrase is 
incorporated into the sentence. For example, in the 
entry bachelorship we find a reference to one of 
the standard translation rules (TRADUCT2.42). 
The slots of the rule are filled with specific lexical 
items, grammatical features or syntactic relations.  
TRAF:TRADUCT2.42 
LR1:STEPEN?,LR2:BAKALAVR,T2:SG, 
T3:QUASIAGENT 
The rule says that bachelorship  should be 
translated into Russian with a phrase consisting of 
two words ? stepen? (?degree?) and bakalavr 
(?bachelor?). These words should be connected by 
the quasiagent(ive) syntactic relation, and the 
number feature of bakalavr should be singular.  
If the word is translated in a specific way in a 
specific context or in specific phrases, the rule 
describes this context and the resulting structure. 
When a word is translated, normally first the 
translation rules in its dictionary entry are tried. If 
no rule applies in the given sentence, then the 
default translation is used.  
2.3 Multiple Translation 
The default option of ETAP produces a single 
translation of the sentence ? the one that 
corresponds to the first lexico-syntactic structure 
obtained by the parser. The option of multiple 
translation produces much more. First, it generates 
all lexico-syntactic structures that are compatible 
with the grammar and the dictionary. Since these 
structures are disambiguated both syntactically, 
and lexically, this set of structures contains all 
lexical variants for the source sentence. Then, for 
each structure all possible translation variants are 
tried. As is known, even disambiguated words can 
be translated into another language in different 
ways and it is not always possible to formulate a 
rule that could select an appropriate variant. For 
example, English adjuration can be translated into 
Russian as mol?ba and as zaklinanie, adventurer ? 
as avantjurist and as iskatel? prikljuchenij 
(literally, ?adventure seeker?), alarm ? as trevoga 
and as avarijnyj signal (?alarm signal?). In all these 
cases, we are most probably dealing with a single 
meaning of the English word and yet translation 
variants are not fully synonymous. Since we 
cannot choose among these variants by means of 
rules and at the same time do not want to lose any 
of them, we have to treat them as alternative 
translations to be activated in the ?Multiple 
translation? option. As mentioned in the previous 
section, there are two types of translation devices 
in the bilingual zones of the dictionary: a default 
translation (a single word) and rules. In both cases, 
it is possible to provide alternative translations. For 
example, in the entry for adjuration alternative 
translations are listed in the default part since both 
of them are single words: 
 
ADJURATION 
? 
TRANS: MOL?BA / ZAKLINANIE 
 
If the user selects the ?Single translation? option, 
only the first of these variants will be used. If 
ENGLISH WORD 
General information: 
- part of speech 
- syntactic features 
- semantic features 
- subcategorization frame 
- ?  
Russian zone 
Arabic zone 
? 
UNL zone  
he/she wishes to get al possible translations and 
activates the ?Multiple translation? option, both 
alternatives will be produced.  
In the adventurer entry, the alternative translation 
iskatel? prikljuchenij should be introduced by a 
rule, since it is not a single word but a phrase. Such 
rules are supplied by a special marker, OPT(ional), 
which shows that the translation is alternative.  
 
ADVENTURER 
? 
TRANS: AVANTJURIST 
TRAF:TRADUCT2.42 
OPT:1 
LR1:ISKATEL?2,LR2:PRIKLJUCHENIE,T2:PL, 
T3: ATTRIB 
 
This is another instance of the same rule that we 
saw above in the bachelorship example: the only 
difference is that it introduces different words, 
connects them with a different syntactic relation 
(attributive) and generates a different number 
feature. The marker OPT:1 shows that the 
translation introduced by this rule is less common 
than the default translation avantjurist and should 
be presented to the user after it. Should it be 
otherwise, the rule would have the marker OPT:0 
and have a priority over the default translation.  
2.4 Interactive selection of the translation 
equivalent  
It is well known that ambiguity of linguistic 
units is one of the most difficult problems in NLP. 
In ETAP there is no single stage of processing that 
expressly deals with disambiguation. The sentence 
is gradually disambiguated at different stages of 
processing on the basis of restrictions imposed by 
the linguistic knowledge of the system. However, 
in many cases this knowledge is not sufficient for 
complete disambiguation, since the understanding 
of a text by humans is not based on their linguistic 
knowledge alone. To cope with this problem, we 
are developing an interactive option that at certain 
pivotal points of text processing is expected to ask 
for human intervention and use human assistance 
to resolve those ambiguities that are beyond the 
scope of linguistic knowledge of the system 
(Boguslavsky et al2003). It should be stressed that 
the interactive tool is only resorted to if an 
ambiguity cannot be resolved automatically and 
therefore requires human intervention. This work 
is in line with the approach proposed in a series of 
publications by the GETA group (Blanchon, 1995, 
1996, 1997, Boitet & Blanchon, 1995).  
As mentioned above, the dialogue with the user 
is activated at different stages of the processing 
depending on the tasks solved at each stage. 
During the parsing, which results in the 
construction of the lexico-syntactic structure of the 
sentence, all lexical and syntactic ambiguity should 
be resolved. However, this is done entirely within 
the processing of the source language text and 
represents monolingua l ambiguity. It is not directly 
relevant for our topic of multilinguality. Of 
relevance here are cases of the so-called 
translational (or transfer) ambiguity (Hutchins, 
Somers, 1992: 87). The source language words can 
be unambiguous for the native speakers of this 
language but can be translated by a number of 
different target language expressions. In this sense, 
they are ambiguous from the viewpoint of the 
target language and have to be dealt with at the 
translation stage. An example is the English verb 
wash with respect to Russian. It translates 
differently depending on the type of object that is 
being washed: if it is something made of cloth, for 
example clothes, a special verb has to be chosen. If 
the dictionary provides semantic information on 
what objects are made of, the correct choice of the 
verb can in principle be made automatically. Cf., 
however, cases like We must wash it where such 
information is definitely missing.  
This must be viewed as a relatively inoffensive 
case, though, because most sentences will be 
translated correctly with the help of a simple rule 
(and if not, the mistake is not too important). There 
are many words for which it is much more difficult 
to write a disambiguation rule. A notorious 
example is English blue that corresponds to two 
Russian adjectives, one meaning ?light blue? and 
the other ? roughly ? ?dark blue?. The only way to 
translate this word correctly in most of the contexts 
is to get assistance from the user. The dialog with 
the user is based on the information stored in the 
dictionary and activated at the appropriate 
moment.  
This is how the interactive disambiguation 
currently works. The sentence to be translated is 
entered in the upper window of the ETAP 
environment (Fig. 2) 
 
 
 
Fig. 2 
When it comes to translating the word blue, the 
system finds that there are two options and no way 
to choose among them and activates the dialogue 
(Fig. 3). 
 
 
Fig. 3 
 
In the dialogue box each option is provided with 
a short comment and/or example that helps the user 
choose among them. The user has to click the 
appropriate option (in Fig. 3 ?light blue? is 
selected) and the system moves on. The result of 
the translation of this sentence is shown in Fig. 4.  
 
 
Fig. 4 
 
Should we have selected the other option in the 
dialogue in Fig. 3, the result would have been 
different (Fig. 5).  
 
 
Fig. 5 
 
It is important to note that the interactive 
disambiguation mode fully corresponds to the 
multiple translation possibilities discussed in the 
previous section. In particular, the dialogue takes 
into account all types of alternative translations 
irrespective of the way they are presented in the 
dictionary. It can be lexical or syntactic ambiguity 
that manifests itself in different lexico-syntactic 
structures of the source sentence, one-word 
translation variants within the same lexical 
meaning (of the adjuration type discussed above) 
or more complex phrases that translate a source 
word (of the adventurer type above).  
 
3 UNL module in ETAP 
One of ETAP-3 options is translation between 
Russian and the Universal Networking Language 
(UNL), put forward by H. Uchida of the United 
Nations University. Full specification of UNL and 
references to publications can be found at 
http://www.undl.org. 
UNL is a formal language intended to represent 
information in a way that allows the generation of 
a text expressing this information in a large 
number of natural languages. A UNL expression is 
an oriented hyper-graph that corresponds to a NL 
sentence in the amount of information conveyed. 
The arcs are interpreted as semantic relations like 
agent, object, time, place, manner, etc. The nodes 
are special units, the so-called Universal Words 
(UW), interpreted as concepts, or groups of UWs. 
The concepts are built on the basis of English. 
When needed, English concepts can be modified 
by means of semantic restrictions in order to match 
better with the concepts of other languages. The 
nodes can be supplied with attributes which 
provide additional information on their use in the 
given sentence, e.g. @imperative, @generic, 
@future, @obligation. 
3.1 Architecture  
Since ETAP-3 is an NLP system based on rich 
linguistic knowledge, it is natural to maximally re-
use its knowledge base and the whole architecture 
of the system in all applications. Our approach to 
UNL (described in Boguslavsky et al 2000) is to 
build a bridge between UNL and one of the 
internal representations of ETAP, namely 
Normalized Syntactic Structure (NormSS), and in 
this way link UNL with all other levels of text 
representation, including the conventional 
orthographic form of the text.  
The level of NormSS is best suited for 
establishing correspondence with UNL, as UNL 
expressions and NormSS show strong similarities. 
The most important of them are as follows: 
a) Both UNL expressions and NormSSs occupy 
an intermediate position between the surface and 
the semantic levels of representation. They roughly 
correspond to the so-called deep-syntactic level. At 
this level the meaning of lexical items is not 
decomposed into semantic primitives, and the 
relations between lexical items are language 
independent. 
b) The nodes of both UNL expressions and 
NormSSs are terminal elements (UWs in UNL vs. 
lexical items in NormSS) and not syntactic 
categories. 
c) The nodes carry additional characteristics 
used in particular to convey grammatical 
information (attributes). 
d) The arcs of both structures are non-
symmetrical dependencies. 
At the same time, UNL expressions and 
NormSSs differ in several important respects:  
a) All nodes of NormSSs are lexical items, while 
a node of a UNL expression can be a sub-graph. 
b) Nodes of a NormSS always correspond to one 
word sense, while UWs may either be broader or 
narrower than the corresponding English words. 
c) A NormSS is a tree, while a UNL expression 
is a hyper-graph, which is a much more 
complicated object. Its arcs may form loops and 
connect sub-graphs.  
d) The relations between the nodes in a NormSS 
are purely syntactic and are not supposed to 
convey a meaning of their own, while UNL 
relations denote semantic roles.  
e) Attributes of a NormSS mostly correspond to 
grammatical elements, while UNL attributes often 
convey a meaning that is expressed in English or 
other natural languages by means of lexical items 
(e.g. modals).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6 
 
UNL Structure  
English Normalized 
Syntactic Structure 
Russian Normalized 
Syntactic Structure 
Russian Surface 
Syntactic Structure  
Russian Morphological 
Structure 
Russian Sentence 
English Surface 
Syntactic Structure  
English Morphological 
Structure 
 
English Sentence  
 
f) A NormSS contains information on the word 
order, while a UNL expression does not say 
anything to this effect. 
These differences and similarities make the task 
of establishing a bridge between UNL and 
NormSS far from trivial but feasible. Between the 
two types of NormSS readily available in ETAP ? 
the Russian and the English one ? we have chosen 
the latter, since it is the English concepts that 
serve for UNL as building blocks.  
The architecture of the UNL module of ETAP-3 
is given in Fig. 6. 
3.2 UNL vs. English vs. Russian 
As shown in Fig. 6, the interface between UNL 
and Russian is established at the level of the 
English NormSS. It ensures the maximum reuse 
of ETAP?s English-to-Russian machine 
translation facility.  
In the simple case, this scenario suggests that 
the UNL ? Natural Language link can be localized 
within the English dictionary. This dictionary will 
only provide an English correspondence to UNL, 
which in most cases is not very difficult, and all 
the rest will be taken care of by the translation 
engine of ETAP. In this case, direct link between 
Russian and UNL is not needed at all, as long as 
ETAP covers the English-to-Russian 
correspondence.  
However, the situation is not that simple. If we 
try to look at one language (Russian) through the 
perspective of another one (English), we 
encounter well-known problems. Let us illustrate 
the issue with an example. In Russian, there is no 
neutral equivalent of the English non-causative 
verb to marry as represented in sentences like 
John married Ann in June. The expression that 
exactly corresponds to this English verb ? vstupat? 
v brak (?to contract a marriage?) ? is an official 
term and is not used in everyday life. Instead, 
Russian speakers make use of two different 
expressions: zhenit?sja, if the agent of the action is 
a male, and vyxodit? zamuzh, if it is a female. 
Since the English and the Russian words differ in 
their meaning, they correspond to different UWs. 
The UW for English to marry looks like (1), while 
Russian expressions have UNL equivalents with a 
more narrow meaning ? (2) and (3), respectively 
(for simplicity?s sake, only the relevant fragments 
of the UWs are given):  
(1) marry(agt>human) 
(2) marry(agt>male) 
(3) marry(agt>female)  
(Here agt stands for ?agent?).  
Suppose the UNL expression that we receive at 
the input of our generator contains UW (2). Since 
we have to pass through English, we must first 
translate this concept into English and then 
translate the English word into Russian. But 
English has no direct equivalent of (2). It only has 
a word with a more general meaning ? to marry. 
If our objective were to get the English text, this 
word would be perfectly in place. But since our 
target language is Russian, we cannot stop here 
and have to make a difficult choice between two 
different Russian equivalents.  
This is exactly the problem that faces any 
translator from English into Russian, human or 
machine. Sometimes such a problem can be easily 
solved with the help of the context, sometimes it 
is less easy to solve or even unsolvable. For 
example, in the case of blue vs. goluboj ? sinij 
discussed in 2.4 the context would hardly help to 
choose an appropriate Russian translation. 
However, in our example (2) the UNL source 
expression provides unambiguous information 
that allows avoiding this problem altogether, since 
the UW has only one correlate in Russian. If we 
pass from UNL to English and lose sight of the 
UNL source, we will lose the control of the 
semantic information and the quality of the output 
will deteriorate. This should not be permitted. Our 
solution to this problem is presented in 3.3. 
In view of the above, it may seem that a better 
idea would be to sacrifice the benefit of reuse and 
establish a direct link between UNL and Russian.  
However, the architecture shown in Fig. 6 has 
two more advantages that seem crucial.  
First, this architecture allows us to make the 
UNL module of ETAP multilingual, that is to link 
UNL not only with Russian but also with English. 
In view of this perspective, it is reasonable to 
produce a full-fledged English NormSS that is 
much closer to UNL than the Russian one.  
Second, the stock of the UNL concepts is 
continuously growing through the contributions 
coming from diverse languages. The UNL 
dictionaries of different languages grow at 
different rates and in different directions. Very 
often, the generator of language L1 receives the 
UNL input produced by the UNL group of 
language L2 that contains UWs that are absent 
from the UNL-to-L1 dictionary. This happens 
particularly often with the so called multi-word 
UWs of the type  
(4) International Research and Training 
Institute for the Advancement of Women 
(pof>General Assembly {(pof>United 
Nations)}).  
If our only source of lexical knowledge were 
the UNL ? Russian dictionary, we would not be 
able to interpret such UWs, had they not been 
introduced in this dictionary in advance.  
Our UNL-to-English architecture provides a 
universal solution to all difficulties of this kind. If 
the UW is not listed in the UNL dictionariy of 
ETAP, it is analyzed by means of the ETAP 
English dictionary and, if it is a multi-word 
expression, the English parser, which results in a 
reasonably good representation of the UW.  
Moreover, it is often possible to correctly 
translate a UW that is absent from ETAP?s UNL 
dictionary even if its headword is ambiguous. For 
example, if we receive UW  
(5) open(mod<thing)  
and do not find it in our UNL dictionary, we can 
replace it with the English word that stands in the 
position of the headword, that is open. However, 
this headword is ambiguous. In ETAP?s English 
dictionary there are three entries for open - the 
adjective, the verb and the noun. A simple rule 
allows selecting the correct entry on the basis of 
the UW restriction: (mod<thing) means that the 
headword serves as a modifier of things. Hence, 
its English correlate is an adjective and not a verb 
or a noun.  
3.3 UNL dictionary vs. English dictionary vs. 
Russian dictionary  
The UNL-related information is distributed 
among the three ETAP dictionaries: UNL, English 
and Russian. The general idea is to combine (a) 
the idea of having the English NormSS as an 
intermediate level between UNL and the Russian 
NormSS and as a source of Russian and English 
generation and (b) the requirement of adequately 
treating cases of non-isomorphism between the 
English and the Russian concepts.  
As shown in section 2.1, the ETAP dictionary 
entry contains several bilingual sub-zones, 
according to the number of working languages. In 
particular, the Russian dictionary has sub-zones 
for English and UNL, the English dictionary ? for 
Russian and UNL and the UNL dictionary ? for 
English and Russian.  
Let us consider two cases: (1) the Russian and 
the English words are synonymous (as, for 
example, to divorce and razvodit?sja) and (2) they 
are not synonymous (as, for example, to marry 
and zhenit?sja).  
The relevant fragments of the dictionary entries 
(with some simplifications) are as follows. 
 
UNL dictionary: 
NAME: divorce(agt>human) 
ZONE:EN 
TRANS: divorce 
ZONE:RU 
<none> 
NAME: marry(agt>human) 
ZONE:EN 
TRANS: marry 
ZONE:RU 
<none> 
NAME: marry(agt>male) 
ZONE:EN 
<none> 
ZONE:RU 
TRANS: zhenit?sja  
 
English dictionary 
NAME: divorce 
ZONE: RU 
 TRANS: razvodit?sja  
ZONE:UNL 
 TRANS: divorce(agt>human) 
NAME: marry 
ZONE: RU 
 TRANS: zhenit?sja / vyxodit? zamuzh 
ZONE:UNL 
 TRANS: marry(agt>human) 
 
Russian dictionary 
NAME: razvodit?sja  
ZONE: EN 
 TRANS: divorce 
ZONE:UNL 
 TRANS: divorce(agt>human) 
NAME: zhenit?sja  
ZONE: EN 
 TRANS: marry 
ZONE:UNL 
 TRANS: marry(agt>human) 
 
Suppose we have to process a UNL expression 
that contains UW ?divorce(agt>human)?. Since 
this concept corresponds to both English and 
Russian words, we can do safely without any 
information on the Russian word in the UNL 
dictionary and obtain the NormSS with English to 
divorce taken from the English zone of the UNL 
entry. This NormSS allows generating both 
English and Russian texts by means of the 
standard ETAP transfer and generation facilities.  
Let us consider the source UNL expression that 
contains UW ?marry(agt>human)?. It may have 
come from the language that, like English, 
German or Spanish, but unlike Russian or Polish, 
does not distinguish between the male -marriage 
and the female-marriage. The UNL dictionary 
entry for this UW will have the English translation 
but no Russian one, since Russian has no direct 
correlate for this concept. The problem of finding 
an appropriate Russian term is shifted to the level 
of the NormSS. At this level, we will have to find 
an equivalent of English to marry, just as if we 
translated from English and not from UNL. In this 
case, the UNL source does not help us make a 
choice between two types of marriage. What does 
help is the mechanism of the interactive resolution 
of translational ambiguity described above, in 2.4.  
Finally, let us examine the most interesting case 
- a UNL expression with UW ?marry(agt>male)?. 
The dictionary entry of this UW is symmetric to 
the entry of ?marry(agt>human)?: it contains a 
Russian correlate but no English one. In this 
situation, both English and Russian generations 
are not quite straightforward. As there is no direct 
English equivalent of this UW, the translation 
should be found by means of the UNL Knowledge 
Base (Uchida, 2003). In the absence of the 
operational version of KB, the general solution for 
processing an unknown UW is to extract the 
headword of the UW (marry) and treat it as an 
English word (cf. above, 3.2). This solves the 
problem of the generation of the English text. As 
for Russian, zhenit?sja indicated in the Russian 
zone of the UW entry is attached as a feature to 
the English node marry. At the stage of transfer 
from NormSS-English to NormSS-Russian, this 
feature will be lexicalized and replace the word 
marry.  
4 Conclusion 
The organization of lexical resources of the 
ETAP system allows reusing the dictionaries in 
diverse applications, such as machine translation 
in various language pairs and translation to and 
from UNL. In all the applications, there are three 
modes of operation supported by the dictionaries: 
automatic production of a single (most probable) 
translation, automatic production of all possible 
translations and the interactive translation with the 
dialogue-based disambiguation.  
References  
Apresjan Ju.D., Boguslavskij I.M., Iomdin L.L., 
Lazurskij A.V., Mitjushin L.G., Sannikov, V.Z., 
Cinman, L.L. (1992) Lingvisticheskij processor 
dlja slozhnyx informacionnyx sistem. [A 
linguistic processor for advanced information 
systems.] Moskva, Nauka. 256 p. 
Apresjan Ju.D., Boguslavskij I.M., Iomdin L.L., 
Lazurskij A.V., Sannikov V.Z. and Tsinman 
L.L. 1992b. The Linguistics of a Machine 
Translation System. Meta , 37 (1): 97-112. 
Apresjan Ju.D., Boguslavskij I.M., Iomdin L.L., 
Lazurskij A.V., Sannikov V.Z. and Tsinman 
L.L. 1993. Systeme de traduction automatique 
{ETAP}. In: La Traductique. P.Bouillon and 
A.Clas (eds). Montreal, Les Presses de 
l'Universite de Montreal. 
Apresjan, Ju.D. 1995. Integral?noe opisanie 
jazyka i sistemnaja leksikografija [An 
Integrated Description of Language and 
Systematic lexicography.] Moscow, Jazyki 
russkoj kul?tury.  
Apresjan, Ju. D. 2000. Systematic Lexicography. 
Oxford University Press, London, 304 p.  
Apresian Ju., I. Boguslavsky, L. Iomdin, A. 
Lazursky, V. Sannikov, V. Sizov, L. Tsinman. 
2003. ETAP-3 Linguistic Processor: a Full-
Fledged NLP Implementation of the MTT. In: 
MTT 2003, First International Conference on 
Meaning ? Text Theory. Paris, Ecole Normale 
Superieure, Paris, 279-288. 
Blanchon, H. Interagir pour traduire: la TAO 
personnelle pour redacteur monolingue. La 
Tribune des Industries de la Langues. Vol. 17-
18-19, 1995, pp. 28-34. 
Blanchon, H. A Customizable Interactive 
Disambiguation Methodology and Two 
Implementations to Disambiguate French and 
English Input. Proc. MIDDIM'96. Le col de 
porte, Isere, France. 12-14 Aout 1996. Vol. 1/1, 
1996, pp. 190-200. 
Blanchon, H. Interactive Disambguation of 
Natural Language Input: a Methodology and 
Two Implementations for French and English. 
Proc. IJCAI-97. Nagoya, Japan. August 23-29, 
1997. Vol. 2/2, 1997, pp. 1042-1047 
Boguslavsky I., N. Frid, L. Iomdin, L. Kreidlin, I. 
Sagalova, V. Sizov. 2000. Creating a Universal 
Networking Language Module within an 
Advanced NLP System. Proceedings of the 18th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING 2000), 2000, 83-89.  
Boguslavsky I., L. Iomdin, V. Sizov. 2003. 
Interactive enconversion by means of the 
ETAP-3 system. In ?Proceedings of the 
International Conference on the Convergence of 
Knowledge, Culture, Language and Information 
Technologies?, Alexandria, 2003. 
Boitet, C. & Blanchon, H. Multilingual Dialogue-
Based MT for monolingual authors: the LIDIA 
project and a first mockup. Machine 
Translation. Vol. 9(2), 1995, pp 99-132. 
Hutchins W. J., H. L. Somers. 1992. An 
Introduction to Machine Translation. Academic 
Press, London. 
Mel?cuk I. 1974. Opyt teorii lingvisticheskix 
modelej ?Smysl ? Tekst?. Moscow, ?Nauka? 
Publishers.  
Uchida H. 2003. The UW Manual. 
http://www.undl.org. 
Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Ontologies and Lexical Resources (Ontolex 2010), pages 67?76,
Beijing, August 2010
Interfacing the Lexicon and the Ontology in a Semantic Analyzer 
 
Igor Boguslavsky 
Universidad Polit?cnica de Madrid 
Institute for Information Transmission 
Problems of the Russian Academy of Sci-
ences 
igor.m.boguslavsky@gmail.com
Leonid Iomdin 
Institute for Information Transmission 
Problems of the Russian Academy of Sci-
ences 
iomdin@iitp.ru 
Victor Sizov 
Institute for Information Transmission 
Problems of the Russian Academy of Sci-
ences 
sizov@iitp.ru 
Svetlana Timoshenko 
Institute for Information Transmission 
Problems of the Russian Academy of Sci-
ences 
nyrestein@gmail.com
 
Abstract 
We discuss the possibility to link the 
lexicon of an NLP system with a for-
mal ontology in an attempt to con-
struct a semantic analyzer of natural 
language texts. The work is carried 
out on the material of sports news 
published in Russian media.  
1 Introduction 
Many Semantic Web applications need a 
much deeper semantic analysis of the text 
than is used today. Not only should the 
ontology elements be extracted from the 
textual data but also it is important to 
interpret the text in terms of the ontology. It 
is essential that IE and QA systems should be 
able to discover semantic similarity between 
the texts if they express the meaning in 
different ways. Cf. synonymous sentences (1) 
? (3):  
(1) Real Madrid and Barcelona will meet in 
the semi-finals on Thursday. 
(2) The semi-final match between Real 
Madrid and Barcelona will take place on 
Thursday. 
(3) The adversary of Real Madrid in the semi-
finals on Thursday will be Barcelona.  
If we wish to extract the meaning from the 
text irrespective of the way it is conveyed, we 
should construct a semantic analyzer capable 
of producing identical semantic structures for 
sentences (1)-(3), or at least semantic 
structures whose equivalence can be easily 
demonstrated. 
The problem becomes much more difficult 
if text understanding includes access to text-
external world knowledge. For example, 
sentences (1)-(3) describe the same situation 
as (4).  
(4) The semi-finals on Thursday will see the 
champion of the UEFA Champions League 
2008-2009 and the team of Manuel Pelle-
grini.  
To account for this synonymy, the system 
should know that it was the football club 
Barcelona who won the UEFA Champions 
League in 2008-2009, and that Manuel Pelle-
grini is the coach of Real Madrid. This im-
plies that linguistic knowledge should be 
linked with ontological resources. The crea-
tion of a semantic analyzer of this type goes 
far beyond the task of assigning ontological 
classes to words occurring in the text. It re-
quires a powerful wide-coverage linguistic 
processor capable of building coherent se-
mantic structures, a knowledge-extensive 
lexicon, which contains different types of 
lexical information, an ontology, which de-
scribes objects in the domain and their prop-
erties, a repository of ground-level facts, and 
an inference engine.  
67
A project NOVOFUT aiming at the devel-
opment of a semantic analyzer of this type for 
Russian texts has started at the Institute for 
Information Transmission Problems of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences. It covers the 
domain of news about football. There are 
several reasons for this choice of domain. 
First, the news texts are written primarily for 
the general public, so that their understanding 
does not require specialized expert knowl-
edge. This is a major advantage since it sig-
nificantly facilitates the acquisition of the 
ontology. Second, the language typical of 
sports journalism is rich enough, which 
makes its interpretation linguistically non-
trivial. Last but not least, sports enjoy enor-
mous public interest. There are many sports 
portals publishing multifarious information 
on the daily (and sometimes hourly) basis and 
visited by a lot of people. Enhanced Ques-
tion-Answering and Information Extraction in 
this domain are likely to attract many users.     
The NOVOFUT semantic analyzer reuses 
many types of resources created or accumu-
lated by the team in previous work. In this 
paper we focus on the static resources used 
by the analyzer ? the lexicon and the ontol-
ogy. The plan of the presentation is as fol-
lows. In Section 2 we discuss related work. In 
Section 3 we will briefly describe the linguis-
tic processor we build on and its lexicon. Sec-
tion 4 outlines a small-scale ontology devel-
oped for the project. The correlation between 
natural language words as presented in the 
lexicon and the ontology is the main concern 
of Section 5. In Section 6 the interface be-
tween the ontology and the lexicon is dis-
cussed. Future work is outlined in Section 7.    
2 Related work 
The link between the ontologies and NL texts 
is investigated in two directions ? ?from the 
ontology towards NL texts? and ?from the 
texts towards the ontology?. In the first case 
written texts are used as a means for ontology 
extension and population. To name but a few 
authors, McDowell and Cafarella (2006) start 
from an ontology and specify web searches 
that identify in the texts possible semantic 
instances, relations, and taxonomic informa-
tion. In (Schutz and Buitelaar 2005) an inter-
esting attempt is made to extract ontological 
relations from texts. (Buitelaar et al 2008, 
Magnini et al 2006, Maynard & al. 2006) are 
further advances in the direction of ontology 
population.  
Finding NL equivalents to ontological 
elements and be monolingual or multilingual. 
A metamodel for linking conceptual knowl-
edge with its lexicalizations in various lan-
guages is proposed in (Montiel-Ponsoda et al 
2007).    
The second direction research starts from 
NL texts and tries to interpret them in terms 
of the ontology. In most cases, this takes the 
form of marking the text with ontological 
classes and instances. A typical example is 
(Sanfilippo et al 2006). One should also 
mention the work based on the Generalized 
Upper Model (GUM), which is meant for in-
terfacing between domain models and NL 
components (Bateman et al 1995) 
Our work belongs to this second direction, 
but our aim is not limited to finding ontologi-
cal correlates to words. In many aspects we 
were inspired by the ontological semantic 
approach developed in the Mikrokosmos 
framework (cf. Nirenburg and Raskin 2004). 
We share many of its postulates and concrete 
solutions. In particular, semantic analysis of 
the text should be based on both linguistic 
and extra-linguistic knowledge. Linguistic 
knowledge is implemented in language 
grammars and dictionaries, while extra-
linguistic knowledge is comprised in an on-
tology, which enumerates concepts, describes 
their properties and states interrelationships 
between them, and a fact repository which 
accumulates ground-level facts, such as, in 
our case, the data about concrete players, 
teams and matches. To a large extent, the on-
tology serves as the semantic language for 
meaning representation.  
At the same time, there exist some differ-
ences between our approaches determined by 
the linguistic model adopted.  Our work is 
based on the Meaning ? Text theory 
(Mel??uk 1974, 1996). In particular, we make 
extensive use of lexical functions, which con-
stitute one of the prominent features of this 
theory. Thanks to lexical functions it turns 
out possible to reduce a wider range of syn-
onymous sentences to the same semantic 
68
structure, and in many cases, improve the per-
formance of search engines (see e.g. Apresjan 
et al 2009). Another difference between the 
Mikrokosmos approach and ours concerns the 
fact that the Mikrokosmos ontology is written 
in a specific in-house formalism. Our empha-
sis is on using as far as possible standard on-
tology languages (OWL, SWRL), in order to 
obtain interoperability with a wide and ever 
growing range of semantic web resources and 
inference engines. 
3 The ETAP-3 Linguistic 
Processor and its Lexicon. 
The multifunctional ETAP-3 linguistic proc-
essor, developed by the Computational Lin-
guistics Laboratory of the Institute for Infor-
mation Transmission Problems, Russian 
Academy of Sciences, Moscow, (see e.g. 
Apresjan et al 2003), is the product of dec-
ades of research and development in the field 
of language modelling.  
At the moment, ETAP-3 consists of a 
number of options, including  
1) a rule-based machine translation system 
working both ways between Russian and 
English (plus several prototypes for other 
languages ? French, German, Spanish, Ko-
rean and Arabic);  
2) a system of synonymous and quasi-
synonymous paraphrasing of sentences;  
3) an environment for deep annotation of 
text corpora, in which SynTagRus, the only 
corpus of Russian texts tagged morphologi-
cally, syntactically (in the dependency tree 
formalism), and lexically was created, and  
4) a Universal Networking Language 
(UNL) module, responsible for automatic 
translation of natural language text into a  
semantic interlingua, UNL, and the other way 
around.  
The ETAP-3 processor is largely based on 
the general linguistic framework of the Mean-
ing ? Text theory by Mel??uk. An important 
complement to this theory was furnished by 
the theory of systematic lexicography and 
integrated description of language proposed 
by Jurij Apresjan (2000).  
One of the major resources used in ETAP-
3 is the combinatorial dictionary. It offers 
ample and diverse data for each lexical entry. 
In particular, the entry may list the word?s 
syntactic and semantic features, its subcate-
gorization frames, as well as rules (or refer-
ence to rules) of a dozen types, which make it 
possible to describe peculiar behavior of in-
dividual words and exceptions to general 
rules in a complete and consistent way. Many 
dictionary entries contain information on 
lexical functions, to be discussed below in 
some detail.  
The entry of the combinatorial dictionary 
has a number of zones, one of which provides 
the properties of the word that are manifested 
in the given language, while all the other 
zones contain information on the match be-
tween this word and its equivalent in a par-
ticular language. For example, the EN zone in 
the Russian combinatorial dictionary entry 
contains information on the translational 
equivalents of the respective Russian word 
into English. One field (TRANS) gives the 
default single-word translation (or several 
such translations) of this word in English. 
Other fields contain less trivial translation 
rules, or references to such rules. 
A newly introduced ONTO zone offers in-
formation underlying the match between the 
Russian word and its counterparts in the on-
tology. 
4 Ontology of football. 
The ontology we are working with focuses in 
the first place on football. It contains infor-
mation on teams, players, football field, sport 
events, and their properties. However, we 
want it to be extendable to other sports as 
well. That is why some classes are more gen-
eral than would be needed for football alone. 
For example, instead of having one class 
FootballPlayer, the ontology has a 
more general class Sportsman, of which 
FootballPlayer is a subclass. An 
equivalence restriction states that Foot-
ballPlayer is a Sportsman whose 
SportType is football. In this way, 
sportsmen doing different types of sports can 
be treated by the ontology in a uniform way.  
The football ontology is written in SWRL, 
which is OWL augmented with rules (Hor-
rocks et al 2004). In compiling it, we used 
some existing ontologies dealing with foot-
69
ball 
(http://www.lgi2p.ema.fr/~ranwezs/ontologie
s/soccerV2.0.daml). As usual, properties of 
classes are inherited by the subclasses. For 
example, the Match class is a subclass of 
SportEvent, which in its turn is a subclass 
of Event. Match inherits from Event the 
properties of having definite Time and 
Place. From SportEvent it inherits the 
fact that its participants should be Sport-
Agents. Its own properties are: the number 
of participants is 2 (as opposed to champion-
ships, which have more) and it has a definite 
sport type (as opposed to Olympics, which 
involve many sport types).  A subclass of 
Match is Derby, in which both participants 
should be from the same city or region. This 
property is implemented by means of a 
SWRL rule (cf. below). Another rule as-
signed to Match states that if its sport type is 
football (or any other team sport), then its 
participants should be teams and not individ-
ual sportsmen, as is the case in tennis or 
chess.  Sportsman is a subclass of two 
classes: Person, from which it inherits the 
property of having a name and a birth date, 
and SportAgent, which includes also 
Team and from which it inherits the property 
of having a definite sport type and a coach.  
 
5 Correlation between the 
words and the elements of the on-
tology.  
As mentioned above, the ontology plays a 
two-fold role. On the one hand, it is a reposi-
tory of domain-specific knowledge, and on 
the other hand, it is a semantic metalanguage 
used for representing the meaning of natural 
language texts. All meaningful natural lan-
guages elements (words, grammatical con-
structions, morphological features) must be 
interpreted in ontological terms. This makes 
the correlation between the lexicon and the 
ontology far from trivial. In this section, we 
will present several typical situations and il-
lustrate them with examples. 
5.1 One-to-one correspondence 
between NL words and ontology 
elements. 
The simplest situation occurs when a word 
directly corresponds to an ontology element ? 
a class, an individual, a relation, an attribute 
or its value.  Example:  
(5) Real Madrid pobedil Arsenal so s?etom 
3:1 ?Real Madrid defeated Arsenal 3 to 1?.  
Here Real Madrid and Arsenal are indi-
viduals ? instances of the Team class, the 
verb to defeat corresponds to the WinEvent 
class, and numbers 3 and 1 are values of at-
tributes scoreWinner and scoreLoser, 
respectively. In the semantic structure (SemS) 
classes are represented by instances supplied 
by a unique numeric identifier. SemS for sen-
tence (5) looks as follows: 
hasWinner(WinEvent01, Real-
Madrid)&hasLoser(WinEvent01, 
Arsenal)& scoreWinner 
(WinEvent01,3)& 
scoreLoser(WinEvent01,1) 
5.2 One ontology element ? 
several words (?multi-word con-
cepts?). 
This is a very typical situation, especially in 
the area of terminology. For example, in or-
dinary language ?eltaja karto?ka ?a yellow 
card? is a free noun phrase that simply de-
notes a card whose colour is yellow. In the 
sports domain, it is a single concept that re-
fers to one of several possible punishments a 
referee can mete out for a rules infraction. 
Therefore, it is represented as one element in 
the ontology. Some other examples of multi-
word sport concepts: uglovoj udar ?corner?, 
svobodnyj udar ?free kick?, pravyj po-
luza??itnik ?right tackle?. 
5.3 One word ? several onto-
logical elements. 
Many words that can be interpreted in terms 
of ontological elements do not correspond to 
any single class, relation or instance. Their 
definition consists in a configuration of these 
elements. Most often, it is a class with some 
of the properties instantiated. In principle, 
often there are two options: one can either 
postulate two different classes (e.g. 
70
Sportsman and FootballPlayer as its 
subclass), or only one class (Sportsman) 
and represent the football player as a 
Sportsman whose SportType property is 
football. There is no general solution to 
this alternative. In general, it is desirable to 
obtain a parsimonious ontology and refrain 
from introducing new classes, if one can de-
fine a concept in terms of existing classes and 
their properties. However, if a concept has 
important properties of its own, it is prefer-
able to present it in the ontology as a separate 
class. In our example, FootballPlayer 
has Specialization which other sports-
men do not have (goalkeeper, for-
ward, back, etc.) For this reason, it is pos-
tulated as a separate class of the ontology, 
with the indication of its equivalence to the 
anonymous class ?Sportsman and 
hasSportType football?.  
An interesting and typical case are adjecti-
val modifiers to nouns of the type ispanskij 
?Spanish?, francuzskij ?French?, moskovskij 
?of Moscow?, and the like. Usually, dictionar-
ies provide a very general definition of such 
words. For example, the COBUILD English 
dictionary gives only one meaning for the 
adjective Spanish: ?belonging or relating to 
Spain, or to its people, language or culture?. 
However, in real life situations this word is 
often interpreted by the speakers in a more 
specific way, according to the context. Onto-
logical description should try, as far as possi-
ble, to take contextual factors into account 
and make explicit the specific interpretation 
of the modifier in each particular case. Some-
times, it can be done by means of rules that 
refer to ontological categories. For example, 
the meaning of the adjective ispanskij ?Span-
ish? mentioned above, when applied to geo-
graphical objects (rivers, cities, mountains, 
roads, etc.), narrows down to (hasLoca-
tion Spain). If this adjective modifies a 
noun denoting an industrial or agricultural 
product (car, wine, olive oil, etc.), it is rather 
interpreted as (producedIn Spain). 
We will hardly understand the phrase Spanish 
wine as denoting the wine located in Spain. 
Textual objects (songs, literature, poetry, 
etc.) move the adjective towards denoting the 
Spanish language: (inLanguage Span-
ish). Of course, these rules are not always 
sufficient for disambiguation. If an object 
falls into more than one category, several in-
terpretations are possible. In particular, a 
book is both a textual and a consumer object. 
Therefore, a Spanish book can be interpreted 
as a book written in Spanish, and as a book 
published in Spain.  
In many cases, adjectives serve as argu-
ments of nouns. The semantic role of this ar-
gument may be different for different nouns 
(cf. (6-8)), and even for the same noun (cf. 
(9-11)):  
(6) presidential decree ? ?the president issued 
a decree?:  
hasAgent(decree,president); 
(7) presidential elections ? ?somebody elects 
the president?: hasOb-
ject(elect,president);  
(8) Babylonian invasion ? ?Babylon invaded 
some city or country?: 
hasAgent(invade,Babylon); but not 
?some city or country invaded Babylon?:  
hasObject(invade,Babylon);  
(9) economic advisor ? ?advises in the area of 
economics?: has-
Topic(advisor,economics);  
(10) American advisor:  hasNational-
ity(advisor,USA);  
(11) presidential advisor ? ?advises to the 
president?: hasAd-
dressee(advisor,president).  
5.4 A word is interpreted in on-
tological terms but does not have any 
fixed ontological equivalent. 
There is a large class of words that denote 
individuals which are in a certain relation to 
other individuals: brother, sister, uncle, wife, 
friend, enemy, classmate, co-author, co-
regent, coeval, adversary, ally, etc. Of 
course, these words can be easily represented 
as ontology properties: has-
Brother(John, Bill), hasSis-
ter(John, Mary). However, such rep-
resentation does not reveal the meaning of the 
concepts. Being a brother of somebody means 
being a male and having common parents 
with this person.  This meaning shares the 
second component (?having common par-
ents?) with the property of being a sister and 
71
differs from it in the first component (?being 
a male?). Such a definition of meanings re-
quires the use of variables. This is the point 
where the OWL expressive capacity is insuf-
ficient and one has to recur to SWRL rules:   
Person(?person1)&Gender (?per-
son1,male)&hasParent(?person1, 
?person3) &hasParent (?per-
son2,?person3)? 
brother(?person1, ?person2)  
Person(?person1)&Gender (?per-
son1,female)&hasParent(?person
1, ?person3)& hasParent (?per-
son2,?person3)?        sis-
ter(?person1,?person2) 
In a similar way one can define the concept 
of adversary (in sports), as used for example 
in sentence (3) above.  Adversary of Z is 
someone different from Z who plays in the 
same match as Z: 
SportAgent(?agent)& 
Match(?match)& hasPartici-
pant(?match,?agent)& hasPar-
ticipant(?match,?z)& differ-
entFrom(?agent,?z) ? adver-
sary(?agent,?z)  
Among the words that require variables for 
their ontological definition are not only rela-
tional nouns. There are many other words that 
cannot be translated into ontological catego-
ries without claiming identity (or difference) 
of the properties of some individuals. Here 
are some examples from the football domain.  
A derby is a match whose participants are 
from the same city or region. Our ontology 
defines the concept of derby as follows:   
hasParticipant(?match, ?par-
ticipant1)& hasParticipant 
(?match, ?partici-
pant2)&differentFrom (?par-
ticipant1,?participant2) 
&hasLocation (?participant1, 
?location) &hasLocation (?par-
ticipant2,?location) ? 
derby(?match) 
Pobednyj gol (?decisive goal?) is a goal 
which was scored when both teams had equal 
score and which was the last goal in the 
match. However, since having no subsequent 
goals cannot be expressed in SWRL we will 
convey this idea by saying that the goal 
brought the victory in the match to one of the 
teams. We will need the following classes 
and properties: 
GoalEvent, with the properties: 
hasAgent, atMinute, e.g. on the tenth 
minute, inMatch, hasResult (inher-
ited from the more general class Event).  
SituationInMatch (the score at a 
given moment), with the properties: in-
Match, atMinute, scorePartici-
pant1, scoreParticipant2. 
WinEvent, with the properties: 
hasWinner, hasLoser.  
Team, with the property hasPart, to be 
filled by instances of Sportsman.  
Besides that, we need the property 
timeImmediatelyBefore, inherited by 
moments of time from Time. 
We will describe the situation by means of 
two rules. Rule (12) says that the goal that 
brought a victory can be called a decisive 
goal. Rule (13) complements this description 
by saying that if a goal brings a victory, the 
winner is the team whose player scored it and 
this goal was scored at the moment when 
both teams had equal score.  
 (12) GoalEvent(?goal)&WinEvent 
(?victory)& hasRe-
sult(?goal,?victory) ?      
decisiveGoal(?goal) 
(13) hasResult(?goal,?victory) 
&hasAgent(?goal,?player)& has-
Part (?team,?player)&atMinute 
(?goal,?min0)&inMatch (?goal, 
?match)& timeImmediatelyBe-
fore(?min1,?min0)& Situation-
InMatch (?situation)&inMatch 
(?situation,?match)& atMinute 
(?situation,?min1) ?  
hasWinner(?victory,?team) 
&scoreParticipant1(?situation,
?n) &scoreParticipant2(?situa-
tion,?n). 
5.5 Ontology and Lexical Func-
tions. 
A lexical function (LF), in the Meaning ? 
Text theory (Mel'?uk 1996), has the basic 
properties of a multi-value mathematical 
72
function. A prototypical LF is a triple of ele-
ments {R, X, Y}, where R is a certain general 
semantic relation obtaining between the ar-
gument lexeme X (the keyword) and some 
other lexeme Y which is the value of R with 
regard to X (by a lexeme in this context we 
mean either a word in one of its lexical mean-
ings or some other lexical unit, such as a set 
expression). Here are some examples for  the 
Oper1 and Oper2 functions: Oper1 (control) = 
exercise (control), Oper1 (research) = do (re-
search), Oper1 (invitation) = issue (an invita-
tion), Oper1 (doubt) = have (doubts), Op-
er1 (defeat) = suffer (a defeat), Oper1 (victory) 
= gain (a victory), Oper1 (campaign) = wage 
(a campaign), Oper2 (control) = be  under 
(control), Oper2 (analysis) = undergo (an 
analysis), Oper2 (invitation) = receive (an 
invitation), Oper2 (resistance) = encounter 
(resistance), Oper2 (respect) = enjoy (re-
spect), Oper2 (obstacle) = face (an obstacle).  
Y is often represented by a set of synony-
mous lexemes Y1, Y2, ?., Yn, all of them 
being the values of the given LF R with re-
gard to X; e. g., Magn (desire) = strong / 
keen / intense / fervent / ardent / overwhelm-
ing. All the LF exponents for each word are 
listed in the lexicon. 
LFs have a strong potential for advanced 
NLP applications. Apresjan et al (2007) 
shows how LFs can be used in parsing, ma-
chine translation, paraphrasing. In parsing, 
LFs are used to resolve or reduce syntactic 
and lexical ambiguity. The MT system resorts 
to LFs to provide idiomatic target language 
equivalents for source sentences in which 
both the argument and the value of the same 
LF are present. The system of paraphrasing 
automatically produces one or several syn-
onymous transforms for a given sentence or 
phrase by means of universal LF-axioms; for 
example: He respects [X] his teachers ? He 
has [Oper1(S0 (X))] respect [S0 (X)] for his 
teachers ? He treats [Labor1-2(S0 (X))] his 
teachers with respect ? His teachers enjoy 
[Oper2(S0(X))] his respect. It can be used in a 
number of advanced NLP applications rang-
ing from machine translation to authoring and 
text planning. 
In ontologically-oriented semantic analysis 
different LFs are reflected in different ways. 
An LF corresponds to an ontological class. 
Many LFs represent bundles of words that are 
semantically identical or very close and there-
fore can serve as representatives of this com-
mon meaning. We illustrate this with two 
closely related LFs (Apresjan et al 2008).  
The meaning covered by LiquFunc0 is ?to 
cause to cease to exist or to be taking place?. 
This concept corresponds, in particular, to the 
following English verbs: to stop (the aggres-
sion), to lift (the blockade), to dispel (the 
clouds), to demolish (the building), to dis-
perse (the crowd), to avert (the danger), to 
cure (the disease), to close (the dispute), to 
break up (the family), to annul (the law), to 
dissolve (the parliament), to denounce (the 
treaty), to bridge (the gap). Another LF of the 
Liqu family ? LiquFact0 ? refers to a different 
kind of elimination. It means ?to cause to 
cease functioning according to its destina-
tion?. When somebody closes the eyes, they 
do not cease to exist, they only stop function-
ing. Some more examples: shut down (the 
factory), stop (the car), land (the airplane), 
depose (the king), switch off (the lamp), neu-
tralize (the poison), empty (the bucket).  
These LFs, along with several dozen oth-
ers, play a significant role not only in text 
understanding and generation. They contrib-
ute in an interesting way to one of the crucial 
functions of ontologies ? inference of implicit 
knowledge. Important inference rules can be 
easily formulated in terms of LFs: if the 
blockade is lifted (=LiquFunc0), it does not 
exist any more. Another example of the LF-
based inference (this time it is LF Real1): He 
fulfilled (= Real1) the promise to buy a bicycle 
? He bought a bicycle. 
It should be emphasized that, given a lexi-
con which contains LF data (which is the case 
of our ETAP dictionary), the acquisition of 
this part of the ontology is straightforward.   
An LF generates an ontological relation.  
This case can be illustrated by support verbs 
of the Oper-Func-Labor family that attach 
one of the arguments to the noun. For exam-
ple, in sentence Father gave me an advice the 
subject of the Oper1-support verb to give (fa-
ther) is the Agent of advice, while in The 
proposal received much attention the subject 
73
of the Oper2-support verb to receive (the pro-
posal) is the Object of attention. Other exam-
ples of Oper1 and Oper2 were given in 5.5 
above. Some examples of other LFs of this 
family:  
Func1: (fear) possesses (somebody), (ru-
mour) reaches (somebody), (the blame) falls 
on (somebody) / (the blame) lies with (some-
body), (control) belongs to (somebody), (re-
sponsibility) rests with (somebody). 
Func2: (proposal) consists in (something), 
(criticism) bears upon (something), (revenge) 
falls upon (somebody). 
Labor1-2: keep (something) under (control), 
submit (something) to (analysis), meet (some-
body) with (applause), put (somebody) under 
(arrest), hold (somebody) in (contempt), 
bring (something) into (comparison with 
something), take (something) into (considera-
tion).  
An LF has no ontological correlate. 
This is the case of Func0. This LF neither de-
notes a concept, nor attaches an argument to a 
concept. It only duplicates the meaning of its 
keyword and has no correlate in the SemS. 
For example, in sentence (2) above the phrase 
the match took place (= Func0) is only repre-
sented by the concept Match. Other exam-
ples of Func0: (the snow) falls, (the wind) 
blows, (the danger) exists, (the war) is on, 
(changes) occur. 
6 Lexicon ? Ontology in-
terface.  
For the purposes of semantic analysis, the 
Russian dictionary and the ontology are 
linked in the same way as dictionaries of dif-
ferent languages are linked in Machine Trans-
lation options of the ETAP-3 system. As 
noted in Section 2, if the system performs 
translations from language L to language L?, 
all dictionary entries of L contain a special 
zone (ZONE: L?) where all translation vari-
ants of the given word into L? are recorded. 
The semantic analysis option uses the ONTO 
zone of the Russian dictionary. In this zone, 
two types of information may be written: 
? Default translation. This is a one-
word equivalent of the given word, which is 
used if no translation rule is applicable.  
For example, Russian komanda ?team? has 
the Team class as its ontological counterpart. 
This is written in the ontological zone of ko-
manda as follows: 
ZONE: ONTO 
TRANS: Team 
Names of ontological individuals are also 
often translated by default.  
? Translation rules. A rule is written 
every time one needs to carry out an action 
which does not boil down to the default trans-
lation.  
Let us give several examples of translation 
rules written in the ONTO zone of the Rus-
sian lexicon. We will not give their formal 
representation and restrict ourselves to ex-
plaining what they are doing in plain words. 
Pobeditel? ?winner? is a SportAgent (i.e. a 
sportsman or a team) that won some contest: 
SportAgent(?x)&WinEvent(?y)& 
hasWinner(?y,?x). 
Phrases of the type komanda NN ?team of 
NN? (where NN is a proper human name in 
the genitive case) are translated in four differ-
ent ways depending on the ontological infor-
mation assigned to NN.  
(a) If NN is the name of a player, the 
phrase is represented as ?the team of which 
NN is a player?: komanda Arshavina ?Ar-
shavin?s team? = Team(?team) 
&hasPart(?team,Arshavin). 
(b) If NN is the name of a coach, the 
phrase is represented as ?the team of which 
NN is the coach?: komanda Pellegrini ?Pelle-
grini?s team? = Team(?team) 
&hasCoach(?team,Pellegrini) 
(c) If NN is the name of a captain, the 
phrase is represented as ?the team of which 
NN is the captain?: komanda Iraneka ?Ira-
nek?s team? = Team(?team)& hasCap-
tain(?team,Iranek) 
(d) If NN is neither a player, nor a coach, 
nor a captain, the phrase is represented as ?the 
team of which NN is a fan?: komanda Ivana 
?Ivan?s team? =  Team(?team)& has-
Fan(?team,Ivan) 
It is well-known that genitive noun phrases 
(or phrases ?N1 of N2? in English) are very 
vague semantically, and their interpretation is 
very much dependent on the context. This 
example shows that even within the 
74
part/whole interpretation such a phrase, para-
doxically, has two opposite varieties: either 
N2 is part of N1, as in the team of Ar-
shavin/Arshavin?s team, or N1 is part of N2, 
as in the leg of the table.  
The following examples involve the prop-
erty hasLocation, which characterizes 
both sport events (The match took place in 
Madrid), and sport agents (the Ukrainian 
sportsman, a London club).   
Frequently, a football match is played in a 
location, such that one of the teams is from 
that location while the other is not. This situa-
tion can be represented by the following 
SemS: 
(14) 
Match(?match)&hasLocation(?mat
ch,?place)&hasParticipant 
(?match, ?team1)&hasParicipant 
(?match,?team2)&differentFrom(
?team1,?team2)&hasLocation(?te
am1,?place)&?hasLocation(?team
2,?place) 
In the natural language this situation can be 
viewed from different angles and denoted by 
different words.  
Xozjaeva ?home team? denotes a team that 
plays a match in a place it is from, the adver-
sary being from a different place. Gosti ?visi-
tors? is a team that plays a match in a location 
different from the place it is from, the adver-
sary being the home team. Prinimat? ?to re-
ceive? means to play a match being a home 
team, to host it. Igrat? v gostjax lit.?to play 
being guests? means to play a match away.  
Although all these words correspond to the 
same situation (14), their translation rules 
cannot be identical. The rules should not only 
introduce SemS (14), but also assure correct 
amalgamation of this SemS with SemSs of 
other words. In particular, the rule for prini-
mat? ?receive? should guarantee that in (15) 
Real Madrid instantiates variable ?team1 of 
(14), and Barcelona ? variable ?team2.     
(15) Real Madrid prinimal Barcelonu ?Real 
Madrid hosted Barcelona? 
The rule for gosti ?visitors? should see to it 
that in (16) hasWinner property of 
WinEvent be filled by variable ?team2 of 
(14): 
(16) Gosti vyigrali 3:1 ?the visitors won 3 to 
1? 
This is assured due to marking ?team2 in 
the gosti ?visitors? rule as the head element of 
SemS (14). Naturally, in the xozjaeva ?home 
team? rule the same role is assigned to 
?team1. 
7 Future work.  
In the continuation, it is planned to enlarge 
both the ontology and ONTO zone of the 
Russian lexicon. We are investigating the 
possibility of merging our small football on-
tology with some existing larger upper level 
ontology. The difficult task will be to unify 
our semantic rules with the axioms of this 
ontology.  
A second direction of our future activity is 
connected with another component of the se-
mantic analyzer, which we did not touch 
upon in this paper. It is the set of semantic 
rules which are not incorporated into the lexi-
con due to their general character. This com-
ponent also requires significant enhancement.  
An important extension of this work con-
sists in introducing an inference component 
based on the SWRL rules. 
Acknowledgement  
This study has received partial funding from 
the Russian Foundation for Humanities (grant No. 
10-04-00040a), which is gratefully acknowledged.  
References 
Apresjan, Ju. D. Systematic Lexicography. 
Oxford University Press, 2000, XVIII p., 304 p.  
Apresjan, Jury, I. Boguslavsky, L. Iomdin, 
A. Lazursky, V.Sannikov, V.Sizov, L.Tsinman. 
ETAP-3 Linguistic Processor: a Full-Fledged 
NLP Implementation of the MTT // MTT 2003, 
First International Conference on Meaning ? 
Text Theory (June 16-18 2003). Paris: Ecole 
Normale Sup?rieure, 2003. P. 279-288. 
Apresjan, Jury, Igor Boguslavsky, Leonid 
Iomdin and Leonid Tsinman. Lexical Functions 
in Actual NLP Applications // Selected Lexical 
and Grammatical Issues in the Meaning?Text 
Theory. In honour of Igor Mel'?uk. (Ed. by Leo 
Wanner). John Benjamins, Studies in Language 
Companion Series 84. 2007. ?. 199-230.  
75
Apresjan, Ju.D., P.V. Djachenko, A.V. 
Lazursky, L.L. Tsinman. O kompjuternom 
uchebnike russkog? jazyka. [On a computer 
textbook of Russian.] Russkij jazyk v nauchnom 
osveshchenii. 2008, No. 2 (14). P. 48-112.  
Apresjan Ju., I. Boguslavsky, L.Iomdin, 
L.Cinman, S.Timoshenko. Semantic Paraphras-
ing for Information Retrieval and Extraction. 
In: T.Andreasen, R.Yager, H.Bulskov, 
H.Christiansen, H.Legind Larsen (eds.) Flexi-
ble Query Answering Systems. Proceedings, 
8th International Conference, 2009. Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science 5822. pp. 512-523 
Bateman J., B. Magnini and G. Fabris. The 
Generalized Upper Model Knowledge Base: 
Organization and Use. In: Towards Very Large 
Knowledge Bases, pp. 60-72, IOS Press. 1995.  
Buitelaar P., Ph. Cimiano, A.Frank, M. Har-
tung, S.Racioppa. (2008). "Ontology-based In-
formation Extraction and Integration from Het-
erogeneous Data Sources." In: International 
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 66(11). 
Horrocks, I., P.F. Patel-Schneider, H. Boley, 
S. Tabet, B. Grosof and M. Dean (2004). 
SWRL: A Semantic Web Rule Language Com-
bining OWL and RuleML. // W3C Member 
Submission 21 May 2004.  
Magnini B., Emanuele Pianta, Octavian 
Popescu, and Manuela Speranza. (2006). 
"Ontology Population from Textual Mentions: 
Task Definition and Benchmark." In: Proceed-
ings of the Ontology Population and Learning 
Workshop at ACL/Coling 2006. 
Maynard D., Wim Peters, and Yaoyong Li. 
(2006). "Metrics for Evaluation of Ontology-
based Information Extraction." In: WWW 2006 
Workshop on Evaluation of Ontologies for the 
Web (EON 2006) 
McDowell Luke K.,  Michael Cafarella.  On-
tology-driven Information Extraction with On-
toSyphon. In: Proceedings of the 5th Interna-
tional Semantic Web Conference (ISWC 2006). 
Volume 4273 of LNCS., Athens, GA, Springer 
(2006) 428 ? 444 
Mel??uk, Igor. Opyt teorii lingvisiticheskix 
modelej ?Smysl ? Text? [The theory of lin-
guistic models of the Meaning ? Text type]. 
Moscow, 1974 (2nd edition 1999).  
Mel??uk, Igor. Lexical Functions: A Tool for 
the Description of Lexical Relations in Lexi-
con. L. Wanner (ed.), Lexical Functions in 
Lexicography and Natural Language Process-
ing. Amsterdam, 1996, 37-102.  
Montiel-Ponsoda, E., Aguado de Cea, G. y 
G?mez-P?rez, A. 2007 "Localizing ontologies 
in OWL. From Text to Knowledge: The Lexi-
con/Ontology Interface. WS 2. The 6th Interna-
tional Semantic Web Conference." 
Nirenburg, Sergei, and Victor Raskin. Onto-
logical Semantics. The MIT Press. Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. London, England, 2004. 
Sanfilippo A., Tratz S., Gregory M., Chap-
pell A.,  Whitney P., Posse Ch., Paulson P., 
Baddeley B.,  Hohimer R., White A. Automat-
ing Ontological Annotation with WordNet. In: 
Sojka P., Key-Sun Choi, Ch. Fellbaum, P. 
Vossen (Eds.): GWC 2006, Proceedings, pp. 
85?93. 
Schutz, A. and P. Buitelaar. RelExt: A Tool 
for Relation Extraction from Text in Ontology 
Extension. In: Y. Gil et al (Eds.), ISWC 2005, 
LNCS 3729, pp. 593?606, 2005. 
76
