Some Aspects of the Morphological Processing of Bulgarian
Milena Slavcheva
Linguistic Modelling Department
Central Laboratory for Parallel Processing
Bulgarian Academy of Sciences
25A, Acad. G. Bonchev St, 1113 Sofia, Bulgaria
milena@lml.bas.bg
Abstract
This paper demonstrates the modelling
of morphological knowledge in Bulgar-
ian and applications of the created data
sets in an integrated framework for pro-
duction and manipulation of language
resources. The production scenario is
exemplified by the Bulgarian verb as the
morphologically richest and most prob-
lematic part-of-speech category. The
definition of the set of morphosyntactic
specifications for verbs in the lexicon is
described. The application of the tagset
in the automatic morphological analy-
sis of text corpora is accounted for. A
Type Model of Bulgarian verbs handling
the attachment of short pronominal ele-
ments to verbs, is presented.
1 Introduction
The morphological processing of languages is in-
dispensable for most applications in Human Lan-
guage Technology. Usually, morphological mod-
els and their implementations are the primary
building blocks in NLP systems.
The development of the computational mor-
phology of a given language has two main stages.
The first stage is the building of the morphologi-
cal database itself. The second stage includes ap-
plications of the morphological database in differ-
ent processing tasks. The interaction and mutual
prediction between the two stages determines the
linguistic and computational decision-making of
each stage.
Bulgarian computational morphology has de-
veloped as the result of local (Paskaleva et al
1993; Popov et al 1998) and international activ-
ities for the compilation of sets of morphosyntac-
tic distinctions and the construction of electronic
lexicons (Dimitrova et al 1998). The need for
synchronization and standardization has lead to
the activities of the application to Bulgarian of
internationally acknowledged guidelines for mor-
phosyntactic annotation (Slavcheva and Paskaleva
1997), and to the comparison of morphosyntactic
tagsets (Slavcheva 1997).
In this paper I demonstrate the production sce-
nario of modelling morphological knowledge in
Bulgarian and applications of the created data sets
in an integrated framework for production and ma-
nipulation of language resources, that is, the Bul-
TreeBank framework (Simov et al 2002). The
production scenario is exemplified by the Bulgar-
ian verb as the morphologically richest and most
problematic part-of-speech category. The defini-
tion of the set of morphosyntactic specifications
for verbs in the lexicon is described. The ap-
plication of the tagset in the automatic morpho-
logical analysis of text corpora is accounted for.
Special attention is drawn to the attachment of
short pronominal elements to verbs. This is a phe-
nomenon difficult to handle in language process-
ing due to its intermediate position between mor-
phology and syntax proper.
The paper is structured as follows. In section
2 the principles of building the latest version of
a Bulgarian tagset are pointed out and the subset
of the tagset for verbs is exhaustively presented.
Section 3 is dedicated to a specially worked out
typology of Bulgarian verbs which is suitable for
handling the problematic verb forms.
2 Morphosyntactic Specifications for
Verbs As a Subset of a Bulgarian
Tagset
2.1 Principles of Tagset Construction
The set of morphosyntactic specifications for
verbs is a subset of the tagset (Simov, Slavcheva,
Osenova 2002) used within the BulTreeBank
framework (Simov et al 2002) for morphologi-
cal analysis of Bulgarian texts. A tagset for anno-
tating real-world texts can be divided into several
subsets according to the types of text units:
1. Tags attached to single word tokens. (These
are the common words in the vocabulary:
nouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, pronouns,
prepositions, etc.)
2. Tags attached to multi-word tokens. (Most
of them are conjunctions having analytical
structure, but also some indefinite pronouns,
etc.)
3. Tags attached to abbreviations.
4. Tags attached to named entities which are of
various types: person names, topological en-
tities, etc.; film titles, company names, etc.;
formulas, single letters, citations of words as
used in scientific texts.
5. Tags for punctuation.
The above groups of tags belong to three big
divisions of tag types. The tags in items 1 and 2
above include annotation of linguistic items that
belong to what is accepted to be a common dic-
tionary. The tags in items 3 and 4 contain annota-
tion of linguistic units that name, generally speak-
ing, different kinds of realities and entities. They
are peculiarities of the unrestricted, real-life texts.
Item 5 refers to the annotation of linguistic items
that serve as text formatters. The subject of discus-
sion in this paper is a tagset of the first type, that
is, morphosyntactic information attached to words
as dictionary units.
As pointed above, the tagset for Bulgarian is
constructed on the basis of the long term experi-
ence acquired in local and international initiatives
for the compilation of core sets of morphosyntac-
tic distinctions and the construction of electronic
lexicons.
The EAGLES principle of levels of the mor-
phosyntactic annotation is used but it is, so to say,
localized. That means that while the EAGLES an-
notation schemes are constructed for the simulta-
neous application to many languages, in the tagset
described here, the principle of levels is consis-
tently applied for structuring the morphosyntactic
information attached to each part of speech (POS)
category in a single language, that is, Bulgarian.
The principle of levels is applied in the EAGLES
multi-lingual environment as follows. The elabo-
ration of the tags starts with the encoding of the
most general information which is applicable to a
big range of languages (e.g., the languages spoken
in the European Union). It continues with structur-
ing the morphosyntactic information that is con-
sidered more or less common to a smaller group
of languages. Finally, the single language-specific
information is added to the tags. In the monolin-
gual tagset for Bulgarian this scheme of informa-
tion levels is used for the POS categories.
The next underlying structuring principle that
is used in the Bulgarian tagset is that of MUL-
TEXT and MULTEXT-East for ordering the infor-
mation by defining numbered slots in the tags for
the value of each grammatical feature and leaving
the slot unoccupied if the feature is not relevant
in a given tag. Again, in a multi-lingual environ-
ment, the MULTEXT ordering of the grammatical
categories is simultaneously applied to a bunch of
languages, while in the Bulgarian tagset it is ap-
plied to one and the same POS category of Bul-
garian. The ordering of the information starts with
the POS category and follows a scale of general-
ity where the more general lexeme features (e.g.
type, aspect of the verb) precede the grammati-
cal features describing the wordform (e.g. person,
number of verb forms).
The tagset is defined so that the necessary and
enough information is attached to the word tokens
according to the following factors:
? The information is attached on the morpho-
logical level (that is, stemming from the lexi-
con).
? The information is attached to running words
in the text (and here is the tricky interplay of
form and function of the lexical items).
? There is potential for interfacing this infor-
mation with the next levels of linguistic rep-
resentation like, for instance, syntax (that is
why we speak about morphosyntactic anno-
tation).
? When defining the specifications in the tags,
the levels of linguistic representation (i.e.,
morphology, syntax, semantics, and prag-
matics) are kept distinct as much as possi-
ble. That means that the underlying princi-
ple is to provide information for the lexical
items thinking about them as dictionary units.
In connection to the latter principle, another
principle is defined, that is, whenever possi-
ble, the formal morphological analyses of the
lexical items are taken into account, rather
than the assignment of functional categories
to them, which is the task of the successive
levels of linguistic interpretation and repre-
sentation.
2.2 Format of the Tagset
The information encoded in the morphosyntactic
annotation is represented as sets of feature-value
pairs. The tags are lists of values of the grammati-
cal features describing the wordforms. The format
of the tags is a string of symbols (letters, digits or
hyphens) where for each value there is one single
symbol that denotes it. The first symbol is a cap-
ital letter denoting the POS category. The rest of
the string is a mixture of small letters, digits or hy-
phens. The letters or digits denote the values of
the features describing a lexical item. The hyphen
means that a given feature is irrelevant for a given
lexical item. The hyphen preserves the ordering of
the values of features in the tag string by denoting
a position. In case the hyphen or hyphens come
last in the tag string, that is, no symbol follows
them, they are omitted.
2.3 Specifications for the Verb
The grammatical features which are encoded in
the verb tagset have ordered positions in the tag
strings as shown bellow.
1:POS, 2:Verb type, 3:Aspect, 4:Transitiv-
ity, 5:Clitic attachment, 6:Verb form/Mood,
7:Voice, 8:Tense, 9:Person, 10:Number, 11:Gen-
der, 12:Definiteness
All the descriptions below are in the form of
triples where the first element is the name of the
grammatical feature, the second element is the
value of the grammatical feature and the third ele-
ment is the abbreviation used in the tag string.
The feature-value pairs describing the verb cat-
egory are distributed in three levels. The first level
of feature-value pairs represents the most general
category, that is, the part of speech.
[POS, verb, V]
The second level of description includes fea-
tures whose values provide the invariant informa-
tion for a given wordform, that is, the information
stemming from the lexeme. This is the informa-
tion used for the generation of the appropriate type
and number of paradigm elements for a given lex-
eme. For the verb the second level features are:
Verb type, Aspect, Transitivity, Clitic attachment.
Combinations of those features denote subclasses
of verbs. The features, their values, and the abbre-
viations are given in the following descriptions.
[Verb type, personal, p]
[Verb type, impersonal, n]
[Verb type, auxiliary, x]
[Verb type, semi-impersonal, s]
[Aspect, imperfective, i]
[Aspect, perfective, p]
[Aspect, dual, d]
[Transitivity, transitive, t]
[Transitivity, intransitive, i]
[Clitic attachment, none, 0]
[Clitic attachment, mandatory ?se?, 1]
[Clitic attachment, mandatory ?si?, 2]
[Clitic attachment, mandatory acc.pron., 3]
[Clitic attachment, mandatory dat.pron., 4]
[Clitic attachment, mandatory dat.pron.+se, 5]
[Clitic attachment, optional ?se?, 6]
[Clitic attachment, optional ?si?, 7]
The values of the third level features define the
variant information for a given word form, that is,
the grammatical information carried by the vari-
ous inflections. This is the level of most specific
information. The third level features for the verb
are: Verb form/Mood, Voice, Tense, Person, Num-
ber, Gender, Definiteness.
[Verb form/Mood, Finite indicative, f]
[Verb form/Mood, Finite imperative, z]
[Verb form/Mood, Finite conditional, u]
[Verb form/Mood, Non-finite participle, c]
[Verb form/Mood, Non-finite gerund, g]
[Voice, active, a]
[Voice, passive, v]
[Tense, present, r]
[Tense, aorist, o]
[Tense, imperfect, m]
[Tense, past, t]
[Person, first, 1]
[Person, second, 2]
[Person, third, 3]
[Number, singular, s]
[Number, plural, p]
[Gender, masculine, m]
[Gender, feminine, f]
[Gender, neuter, n]
[Definiteness, indefinite, i]
[Definiteness, definite, d]
[Definiteness, Short definite form, h]
[Definiteness, Full definite form, f]
3 Type Model of Bulgarian Verbs and its
Application in Lexicon Construction
The type model is the underlying factor in defin-
ing the morphosyntactic schemes for verbs and the
scheme transformations necessary in different ap-
plications. Four initial Verb Types are defined:
personal, impersonal, semi-personal and auxil-
iary. The definition of the types is triggered by
the necessity to determine the relevant and opti-
mal combinations of second level features which
generate the correct paradigms of verbs belong-
ing to the respective verb type. A decisive fac-
tor for the typology is the combination of verbs
with short pronominal elements. It is necessary
to differentiate, from one side, the attachment of
short pronominals as an integral part of the lexeme
for some groups of verbs (and consequently to the
whole paradigm), and, on the other hand, the gen-
eration of combinations between verb forms and
short pronominals when grammatical structures of
various meanings come out.
At this point it should be noted that the
electronic lexicon that is used for automatic
morphosyntactic annotation in the BulTreeBank
framework (Popov et al 1998) follows the tra-
ditional, ?paper-dictionary? subcategorization of
verbs into personal, impersonal and auxiliary.
Also the morphological analyzer identifies only
single word tokens, that is, strings of symbols be-
tween white spaces. Orthographically, the short
pronominal elements in Bulgarian are always sep-
arate word tokens and change their place around
the verb according to language-specific phonolog-
ical rules. In such a way, the full Type Model
which takes into account the pronominal elements
is, so to say, ?switched off?. It can be easily
?switched on?, since the full Type Model cate-
gories are subsets of the categories belonging to
the model applied at present. In the BulTree-
bank tagset the slot for the values of the feature
Clitic attachment is filled by a hyphen, that is, the
subcategorization according to the attachment of
short pronominals is switched off, but it is easily
recoverable when required.
Now let us consider the full Type Model proper
and the templates of morphosyntactic specifica-
tions defined by the possible combinations of sec-
ond level features, that is, features describing
the invariant, lexeme information. The full Type
Model is already applied in practice in the paradig-
matic dimension of lexicon construction: 17909
Bulgarian verbs have been classified according to
the model (Slavcheva 2002a).
3.1 Type Personal Verbs
The greatest number of verbs belong to this type.
The personal verbs have a full paradigm of in-
flected forms. The number of the paradigm
members depends on the features Aspect and
Transitivity. The possible values of the fea-
ture Clitic attachment are: none, mandatory se,
mandatory si. In the working variant of the dictio-
nary there exist the values optional se, optional si
which are used for the generation of verb lexemes
containing a reflexive formant (i.e., se or si).
The combination between a personal verb and
the short accusative reflexive pronominal element
se defines the following classes of verbs:
1. Intransitive verbs with obligatory accusative
reflexive element se (e.g., usmihvam se
?smile?), which have no correlates without se.
2. So called medium verbs (e.g., karam se
?quarrel?) which have correlates without se
(e.g., karam ?drive?) but the meaning of two
correlates is quite different. The short reflex-
ive pronoun is not interchangeable with the
full form of the reflexive pronoun sebe si.
3. Verbs denoting a reciprocal action (e.g., bia
se ?fight?).
4. Verbs that can be defined as reflexive per se,
that is, the subject and the object of the ac-
tion coincide. The subject is prevailingly an-
imate. The interesting linguistic fact about
those verbs is that, theoretically and logi-
cally, the alternation of short and full forms
of the accusative reflexive pronoun is possi-
ble, but in reality the usage of the full form
is communicatively very strongly marked and
is not common at all. This fact supports the
assumption that the combination between a
verb and the short reflexive se is lexicalized
(e.g., aboniram ?subscribe smb.? / aboniram
se ?subscribe self?).
The combination between a personal verb and
the short dative reflexive pronominal element si
defines the following classes of verbs:
1. Transitive and intransitive verbs with oblig-
atory dative reflexive element si (e.g., vao-
braziavam si ?imagine?), which have no cor-
relates without si.
2. Medium verbs (e.g., tragvam si ?go home?)
which have correlates without si (e.g., trag-
vam ?go?) but the meaning of two correlates
is quite different.
3.2 Type Impersonal Verbs
The verbs belonging to this class have the small-
est paradigm: the finite forms are only in the
third person singular, and the participles are only
in the neuter singular. The attribute Transitiv-
ity is irrelevant for the impersonal verbs. The
possible values of the feature Clitic attachment
are: none, mandatory acc pers pron, manda-
tory dat pers pron, mandatory dat pers pron+se,
mandatory se. The combination between an im-
personal verb and the short pronominals results in
the following classes:
1. Impersonal verbs without short pronominals
(e.g., samva ?dawn?).
2. Impersonal verbs with se, which are formal
variants of some verbs belonging to class 1,
that is, there is no difference in the meaning
(e.g., samva se ?dawn?).
3. Impersonal verbs with obligatory short ac-
cusative personal pronoun, short dative per-
sonal pronoun or short dative personal pro-
noun + se (e.g., marzi me ?to be lazy?,
dozsaliava mi ?to feel pitty?, gadi mi se ?to
feel sick?). The verbs in this class have no
correlated forms of personal verbs without
pronominals.
4. Impersonal verbs with short pronominals,
which have correlated forms of personal
verbs without short pronominals, but the at-
tachment of the pronominals changes the
meaning and triggers the differentiation of in-
dependent verb lexemes of impersonal verbs
with pronominals (e.g, trese ?shake? / trese
me ?be in a fever?, struva ?cost? / struva mi
se ?it appears to me?).
3.3 Type Semi-personal Verbs
The definition of this innovative type of verbs is
triggered by the idiosyncracies of the paradigm,
the argument structure and the obligatory attach-
ment of short personal pronouns. The verbs in this
class have features in common both with the per-
sonal and the impersonal verbs and it is most con-
venient to isolate them in a separate class. The
semi-personal verbs resemble the personal verbs
in having a much bigger paradigm compared to the
impersonal ones. In fact, forms in the first and sec-
ond person singular and plural are not used (e.g,
vali ?to rain?, boli me ?it hurts me?). The semi-
personal verbs can form sentences which struc-
turally coincide with sentences of personal verbs,
that is, they have a full-fledged subject, but the set
of nouns that can occupy the subject position is
rather small, hence the argument structure is rather
specific. (E.g., Valiat porojni dazsdove. ?Heavy
rains fall.? Krakata me boliat. ?My legs hurt
me.?) The semi-personal verbs have also features
in common with the impersonal verbs. They have
the same possible combinations with the short
pronominals as the impersonal verbs have. The
feature Transitivity is irrelevant, as it is with the
impersonal verbs. The subcategorization of the
semi-personal verbs is analogous to that of the im-
personal verbs (see items 1-4 for the impersonal
verbs above).
3.4 Type Auxiliary Verbs
The small number of auxiliary verbs have an id-
iosyncratic paradigm. The features Aspect, Tran-
sitivity and Clitic attachment are irrelevant for
them.
4 Conclusion and Further Development
In section 3, the application of the verb Type
Model in a paradigmatic dimension has been con-
sidered. A very important practical issue is how
the morphosyntactic information encoded in the
second level features (i.e., the lexeme informa-
tion) can be used in a syntagmatic dimension, that
is, pattern recognition and annotation in running
texts. The issue of crucial importance is the uti-
lization of the Clitic attachment information.
Within the BulTreebank framework, a cascaded
regular grammar has been built for the segmenta-
tion, pattern recognition and category assignment
of Bulgarian compound verb forms as linguistic
entities in XML documents (Slavcheva 2002b). In
the segmentation model, the short pronominals are
included into the compound verb forms of all types
of verbs which consist of different combinations
among short pronominals, particles and auxiliary
verbs. At present the grammar for parsing com-
pound verb forms does not discriminate between
cliticized verb forms which are lexemes per se and
cliticized verb forms which are purely grammati-
cal. Thus an immediate application of the Type
Model and the data set of approximately 18000
subcategorized verbs would be the construction of
a discriminating parser for the different types of
cliticized verb forms. In its turn, this more de-
tailed morphosyntactic differentiation can be used
as a source for predictions of the valency frame al-
ternations in a machine-aided construction of the
syntactic structure of sentences.
5 Acknowledgment
The work presented in this paper is supported by
the BulTreebank project, funded by the Volkswa-
gen Foundation, Federal Republic of Germany,
under the Programme ?Cooperation with Natural
and Engineering Scientists in Central and Eastern
Europe?, contract I/76887.
References
Dimitrova, L., Erjavec, T., Ide, N., Kaalep, H.J.,
Petkevic?, V., Tufis?, D. (1998) ?Multext-East: Par-
allel and Comparable Corpora and Lexicons for Six
Central and Eastern European Languages.? In Pro-
ceedings of COLING-ACL?98, Montre?al, Que?bec,
Canada, pp.315-319.
Paskaleva, E., Simov, K., Damova, M., Slavcheva, M.
(1993) ?The Long Journey from the Core to the Real
Size of a Large LDB?. In Proceedings of ACL Work-
shop ?Acquisition of Lexical Knowledge from Text?,
Columbus, Ohio, pp.161-169.
Popov, D., Simov, K., Vidinska, S. (1998) Dictionary
of Writing, Pronunciation and Punctuation of Bul-
garian. Atlantis LK, Sofia.
Simov, K., Peev, Z., Kouylekov, M., Simov, A., Dim-
itrov, M., Kiryakov, A. (2001) ?CLaRK - an XML-
based System for Corpora Development.? In Pro-
ceedings of the Corpus Linguistics 2001 Conference,
pp.558-560.
Simov, K., P. Osenova, M. Slavcheva, S. Kolhovska, E.
Balabanova, D. Doikov, K. Ivanova, A. Simov, M.
Kouylekov. (2002) ?Building a Linguistically Inter-
preted Corpus of Bulgarian: the BulTreeBank.? In
Proceedings of LREC 2002, Canary Islands, Spain,
pp.1729-1736.
Simov, K., Slavcheva, M., Osenova, P. (2002) ?Bul-
TreeBank Morphosyntactic Tagset.? BulTreeBank
Report, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Slavcheva, M. (1997) ?A Comparative Representa-
tion of Two Bulgarian Morphosyntactic Tagsets
and the EAGLES Encoding Standard?, TELRI I
COPERNICUS Concerted Action 1202, Working
Group 3 ?Morphosyntactic Annotation?, Report.
http://www.lml.bas.bg/projects/BG-EUstand/
Slavcheva, M. (2002a) ?Language Technology and
Bulgarian Language - Classificational Model of the
Verb?. In Proceedings of the Conference ?Slavistics
in 21 Century. Traditions and Expectations.?, SE-
MASH Publishing House, Sofia, Bulgaria, pp.240-
247 (in Bulgarian).
Slavcheva, M. (2002b) ?Segmentation Layers in the
Group of the Predicate: a Case Study of Bulgarian
within the BulTreeBank Framework?. In Proceed-
ings of the International Workshop ?Treebanks and
Linguistic Theories?, Sozopol, Bulgaria, pp.199-
209.
Slavcheva, M., Paskaleva, E. (1997) ?Application to
Bulgarian. A contribution to the EAGLES Synop-
sis and Comparison of Morphosyntactic Phenom-
ena Encoded in Lexicons and Corpora. A Com-
mon Proposal and Applications to European Lan-
guages.? TELRI I COPERNICUS Concerted Action
1202, Working Group 3 ?Morphosyntactic Anno-
tation?, Report. http://www.lml.bas.bg/projects/BG-
EUstand/eagles/index.html
