Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics, pages 896?903,
Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Sequencing Model for Situation Entity Classification
Alexis Palmer, Elias Ponvert, Jason Baldridge, and Carlota Smith
Department of Linguistics
University of Texas at Austin
{alexispalmer,ponvert,jbaldrid,carlotasmith}@mail.utexas.edu
Abstract
Situation entities (SEs) are the events, states,
generic statements, and embedded facts and
propositions introduced to a discourse by
clauses of text. We report on the first data-
driven models for labeling clauses according
to the type of SE they introduce. SE classifi-
cation is important for discourse mode iden-
tification and for tracking the temporal pro-
gression of a discourse. We show that (a)
linguistically-motivated cooccurrence fea-
tures and grammatical relation information
from deep syntactic analysis improve clas-
sification accuracy and (b) using a sequenc-
ing model provides improvements over as-
signing labels based on the utterance alone.
We report on genre effects which support the
analysis of discourse modes having charac-
teristic distributions and sequences of SEs.
1 Introduction
Understanding discourse requires identifying the
participants in the discourse, the situations they par-
ticipate in, and the various relationships between and
among both participants and situations. Coreference
resolution, for example, is concerned with under-
standing the relationships between references to dis-
course participants. This paper addresses the prob-
lem of identifying and classifying references to situ-
ations expressed in written English texts.
Situation entities (SEs) are the events, states,
generic statements, and embedded facts and propo-
sitions which clauses introduce (Vendler, 1967;
Verkuyl, 1972; Dowty, 1979; Smith, 1991; Asher,
1993; Carlson and Pelletier, 1995). Consider the
text passage below, which introduces an event-type
entity in (1), a report-type entity in (2), and a state-
type entity in (3).
(1) Sony Corp. has heavily promoted the VideoWalkman
since the product?s introduction last summer ,
(2) but Bob Gerson , video editor of This Week in Con-
sumer Electronics , says
(3) Sony conceives of 8mm as a ?family of products ,
camcorders and VCR decks , ?
SE classification is a fundamental component in de-
termining the discourse mode of texts (Smith, 2003)
and, along with aspectual classification, for tempo-
ral interpretation (Moens and Steedman, 1988). It
may be useful for discourse relation projection and
discourse parsing.
Though situation entities are well-studied in lin-
guistics, they have received very little computational
treatment. This paper presents the first data-driven
models for SE classification. Our two main strate-
gies are (a) the use of linguistically-motivated fea-
tures and (b) the implementation of SE classification
as a sequencing task. Our results also provide empir-
ical support for the very notion of discourse modes,
as we see clear genre effects in SE classification.
We begin by discussing SEs in more detail. Sec-
tion 3 describes our two annotated data sets and pro-
vides examples of each SE type. Section 4 discusses
feature sets, and sections 5 and 6 present models,
experiments, and results.
896
2 Discourse modes and situation entities
In this section, we discuss some of the linguistic mo-
tivation for SE classification and the relation of SE
classification to discourse mode identification.
2.1 Situation entities
The categorization of SEs into aspectual classes is
motivated by patterns in their linguistic behavior.
We adopt an expanded version of a paradigm relat-
ing SEs to discourse mode (Smith, 2003) and char-
acterize SEs with four broad categories:
1. Eventualities. Events (E), particular states (S),
and reports (R). R is a sub-type of E for SEs
introduced by verbs of speech (e.g., say).
2. General statives. Generics (G) and generaliz-
ing sentences (GS). The former are utterances
predicated of a general class or kind rather than
of any specific individual. The latter are habit-
ual utterances that refer to ongoing actions or
properties predicated of specific individuals.
3. Abstract entities. Facts (F) and proposi-
tions (P).1
4. Speech-act types. Questions (Q) and impera-
tives (IMP).
Examples of each SE type are given in section 3.2.
There are a number of linguistic tests for iden-
tifying situation entities (Smith, 2003). The term
linguistic test refers to a rule which correlates an
SE type to particular linguistic forms. For exam-
ple, event-type verbs in simple present tense are a
linguistic correlate of GS-type SEs.
These linguistic tests vary in their precision and
different tests may predict different SE types for
the same clause. A rule-based implementation us-
ing them to classify SEs would require careful rule
ordering or mediation of rule conflicts. However,
since these rules are exactly the sort of information
extracted as features in data-driven classifiers, they
1In our system these two SE types are identified largely as
complements of factive and propositional verbs as discussed
in Peterson (1997). Fact and propositional complements have
some linguistic as well as some notional differences. Facts may
have causal effects, and facts are in the world. Neither of these
is true for propositions. In addition, the two have somewhat
different semantic consequences of a presuppositional nature.
can be cleanly integrated by assigning them empiri-
cally determined weights. We use maximum entropy
models (Berger et al, 1996), which are particularly
well-suited for tasks (like ours) with many overlap-
ping features, to harness these linguistic insights by
using features in our models which encode, directly
or indirectly, the linguistic correlates to SE types.
The features are described in detail in section 4.
2.2 Basic and derived situation types
Situation entities each have a basic situation type,
determined by the verb plus its arguments, the verb
constellation. The verb itself plays a key role in de-
termining basic situation type but it is not the only
factor. Changes in the arguments or tense of the verb
sometimes change the basic situation types:
(4) Mickey painted the house. (E)
(5) Mickey paints houses. (GS)
If SE type could be determined solely by the verb
constellation, automatic classification of SEs would
be a relatively straightforward task. However, other
parts of the clause often override the basic situation
type, resulting in aspectual coercion and a derived
situation type. For example, a modal adverb can
trigger aspectual coercion:
(6) Mickey probably paints houses. (P)
Serious challenges for SE classification arise from
the aspectual ambiguity and flexibility of many
predicates as well as from aspectual coercion.
2.3 Discourse modes
Much of the motivation of SE classification is
toward the broader goal of identifying discourse
modes, which provide a linguistic characterization
of textual passages according to the situation enti-
ties introduced. They correspond to intuitions as to
the rhetorical or semantic character of a text. Pas-
sages of written text can be classified into modes
of discourse ? Narrative, Description, Argument, In-
formation, and Report ? by examining concrete lin-
guistic cues in the text (Smith, 2003). These cues
are of two forms: the distribution of situation entity
types and the mode of progression (either temporal
or metaphorical) through the text.
897
For example, the Narration and Report modes
both contain mainly events and temporally bounded
states; they differ in their principles of temporal pro-
gression. Report passages progress with respect to
(deictic) speech time, whereas Narrative passages
progress with respect to (anaphoric) reference time.
Passages in the Description mode are predominantly
stative, and Argument mode passages tend to be
characterized by propositions and Information mode
passages by facts and states.
3 Data
This section describes the data sets used in the ex-
periments, the process for creating annotated train-
ing data, and preprocessing steps. Also, we give ex-
amples of the ten SE types.
There are no established data sets for SE classifi-
cation, so we created annotated training data to test
our models. We have annotated two data sets, one
from the Brown corpus and one based on data from
the Message Understanding Conference 6 (MUC6).
3.1 Segmentation
The Brown texts were segmented according to SE-
containing clausal boundaries, and each clause was
labeled with an SE label. Segmentation is itself a
difficult task, and we made some simplifications.
In general, clausal complements of verbs like say
which have clausal direct objects were treated as
separate clauses and given an SE label. Clausal com-
plements of verbs which have an entity as a direct
object and second clausal complement (such as no-
tify) were not treated as separate clauses. In addi-
tion, some modifying and adjunct clauses were not
assigned separate SE labels.
The MUC texts came to us segmented into ele-
mentary discourse units (EDUs), and each EDU was
labeled by the annotators. The two data sets were
segmented according to slightly different conven-
tions, and we did not normalize the segmentation.
The inconsistencies in segmentation introduce some
error to the otherwise gold-standard segmentations.
3.2 Annotation
Each text was independently annotated by two ex-
perts and reviewed by a third. Each clause was as-
signed precisely one SE label from the set of ten
possible labels. For clauses which introduce more
SE Text
S That compares with roughly paperback-book
dimensions for VHS.
G Accordingly, most VHS camcorders are usually
bulky and weigh around eight pounds or more.
S ?Carl is a tenacious fellow,?
R said a source close to USAir.
GS ?He doesn?t give up easily
GS and one should never underestimate what he can
or will do.?
S For Jenks knew
F that Bari?s defenses were made of paper.
E Mr. Icahn then proposed
P that USAir buy TWA,
IMP ?Fermate?!
R Musmanno bellowed to his Italian crewmen.
Q What?s her name?
S Quite seriously, the names mentioned as possibilities
were three male apparatchiks from the Beltway?s
Democratic political machine
N By Andrew B. Cohen Staff Reporter of The WSJ
Table 1: Example clauses and their SE annota-
tion. Horizontal lines separate extracts from differ-
ent texts.
than one SE, the annotators selected the most salient
one. This situation arose primarily when comple-
ment clauses were not treated as distinct clauses, in
which case the SE selected was the one introduced
by the main verb. The label N was used for clauses
which do not introduce any situation entity.
The Brown data set consists of 20 ?popular lore?
texts from section cf of the Brown corpus. Seg-
mentation of these texts resulted in a total of 4390
clauses. Of these, 3604 were used for training and
development, and 786 were held out as final test-
ing data. The MUC data set consists of 50 Wall
Street Journal newspaper articles segmented to a to-
tal of 1675 clauses. 137 MUC clauses were held
out for testing. The Brown texts are longer than
the MUC texts, with an average of 219.5 clauses
per document as compared to MUC?s average of
33.5 clauses. The average clause in the Brown data
contains 12.6 words, slightly longer than the MUC
texts? average of 10.9 words.
Table 1 provides examples of the ten SE types as
well as showing how clauses were segmented. Each
SE-containing example is a sequence of EDUs from
the data sets used in this study.
898
WWORDS words & punctuation
WT
W (see above)
POSONLY POS tag for each word
WORD/POS word/POS pair for each word
WTL
WT (see above)
FORCEPRED T if clause (or preceding clause)
contains force predicate
PROPPRED T if clause (or preceding clause)
contains propositional verb
FACTPRED T if clause (or preceding clause)
contains factive verb
GENPRED T if clause contains generic predicate
HASFIN T if clause contains finite verb
HASMODAL T if clause contains modal verb
FREQADV T if clause contains frequency adverb
MODALADV T if clause contains modal adverb
VOLADV T if clause contains volitional adverb
FIRSTVB lexical item and POS tag for first verb
WTLG
WTL (see above)
VERBS all verbs in clause
VERBTAGS POS tags for all verbs
MAINVB main verb of clause
SUBJ subject of clause (lexical item)
SUPER CCG supertag
Table 2: Feature sets for SE classification
3.3 Preprocessing
The linguistic tests for SE classification appeal to
multiple levels of linguistic information; there are
lexical, morphological, syntactic, categorial, and
structural tests. In order to access categorial and
structural information, we used the C&C2 toolkit
(Clark and Curran, 2004). It provides part-of-speech
tags and Combinatory Categorial Grammar (CCG)
(Steedman, 2000) categories for words and syntac-
tic dependencies across words.
4 Features
One of our goals in undertaking this study was to
explore the use of linguistically-motivated features
and deep syntactic features in probabilistic models
for SE classification. The nature of the task requires
features characterizing the entire clause. Here, we
describe our four feature sets, summarized in table 2.
The feature sets are additive, extending very basic
feature sets first with linguistically-motivated fea-
tures and then with deep syntactic features.
2svn.ask.it.usyd.edu.ap/trac/candc/wiki
4.1 Basic feature sets: W and WT
The WORDS (W) feature set looks only at the words
and punctuation in the clause. These features are
obtained with no linguistic processing.
WORDS/TAGS (WT) incorporates part-of-speech
(POS) tags for each word, number, and punctuation
mark in the clause and the word/tag pairs for each
element of the clause. POS tags provide valuable in-
formation about syntactic category as well as certain
kinds of shallow semantic information (such as verb
tense). The tags are useful for identifying verbs,
nouns, and adverbs, and the words themselves repre-
sent lexico-semantic information in the feature sets.
4.2 Linguistically-motivated feature set: WTL
The WORDS/TAGS/LINGUISTIC CORRELATES
(WTL) feature set introduces linguistically-
motivated features gleaned from the literature
on SEs; each feature encodes a linguistic cue that
may correlate to one or more SE types. These
features are not directly annotated; instead they are
extracted by comparing words and their tags for
the current and immediately preceding clauses to
lists containing appropriate triggers. The lists are
compiled from the literature on SEs.
For example, clauses embedded under predicates
like force generally introduce E-type SEs:
(7) I forced [John to run the race with me].
(8) * I forced [John to know French].
The feature force-PREV is extracted if a member
of the force-type predicate word list occurs in the
previous clause.
Some of the correlations discussed in the litera-
ture rely on a level of syntactic analysis not available
in the WTL feature set. For example, stativity of the
main verb is one feature used to distinguish between
event and state SEs, and particular verbs and verb
tenses have tendencies with respect to stativity. To
approximate the main verb without syntactic analy-
sis, WTL uses the lexical item of the first verb in the
clause and the POS tags of all verbs in the clause.
These linguistic tests are non-absolute, making
them inappropriate for a rule-based model. Our
models handle the defeasibility of these correlations
probabilistically, as is standard for machine learning
for natural language processing.
899
4.3 Addition of deep features: WTLG
The WORDS/TAGS/LINGUISTIC CORRE-
LATES/GRAMMATICAL RELATIONS (WTLG)
feature set uses a deeper level of syntactic analysis
via features extracted from CCG parse representa-
tions for each clause. This feature set requires an
additional step of linguistic processing but provides
a basis for more accurate classification.
WTL approximated the main verb by sloppily tak-
ing the first verb in the clause; in contrast, WTLG
uses the main verb identified by the parser. The
parser also reliably identifies the subject, which is
used as a feature.
Supertags ?CCG categories assigned to words?
provide an interesting class of features in WTLG.
They succinctly encode richer grammatical informa-
tion than simple POS tags, especially subcategoriza-
tion and argument types. For example, the tag S\NP
denotes an intransitive verb, whereas (S\NP)/NP
denotes a transitive verb. As such, they can be seen
as a way of encoding the verbal constellation and its
effect on aspectual classification.
5 Models
We consider two types of models for the automatic
classification of situation entities. The first, a la-
beling model, utilizes a maximum entropy model
to predict SE labels based on clause-level linguistic
features as discussed above. This model ignores the
discourse patterns that link multiple utterances. Be-
cause these patterns recur, a sequencing model may
be better suited to the SE classification task. Our
second model thus extends the first by incorporating
the previous n (0 ? n ? 6) labels as features.
Sequencing is standardly used for tasks like part-
of-speech tagging, which generally assume smaller
units to be both tagged and considered as context
for tagging. We are tagging at the clause level rather
than at the word level, but the structure of the prob-
lem is essentially the same. We thus adapted the
OpenNLP maximum entropy part-of-speech tagger3
(Hockenmaier et al, 2004) to extract features from
utterances and to tag sequences of utterances instead
of words. This allows the use of features of adjacent
clauses as well as previously-predicted labels when
making classification decisions.
3http://opennlp.sourceforge.net.
6 Experiments
In this section we give results for testing on Brown
data. All results are reported in terms of accu-
racy, defined as the percentage of correctly-labeled
clauses. Standard 10-fold cross-validation on the
training data was used to develop models and fea-
ture sets. The optimized models were then tested on
the held-out Brown and MUC data.
The baseline was determined by assigning S
(state), the most frequent label in both training sets,
to each clause. Baseline accuracy was 38.5% and
36.2% for Brown and MUC, respectively.
In general, accuracy figures for MUC are much
higher than for Brown. This is likely due to the fact
that the MUC texts are more consistent: they are all
newswire texts of a fairly consistent tone and genre.
The Brown texts, in contrast, are from the ?popular
lore? section of the corpus and span a wide range
of topics and text types. Nonetheless, the patterns
between the feature sets and use of sequence predic-
tion hold across both data sets; here, we focus our
discussion on the results for the Brown data.
6.1 Labeling results
The results for the labeling model appear in the two
columns labeled ?n=0? in table 3. On Brown, the
simple W feature set beats the baseline by 6.9% with
an accuracy of 45.4%. Adding POS information
(WT) boosts accuracy 4.5% to 49.9%. We did not
see the expected increase in performance from the
linguistically motivated WTL features, but rather a
slight decrease in accuracy to 48.9%. These features
may require a greater amount of training material to
be effective. Addition of deep linguistic information
with WTLG improved performance to 50.6%, a gain
of 5.2% over words alone.
6.2 Oracle results
To determine the potential effectiveness of sequence
prediction, we performed oracle experiments on
Brown by including previous gold-standard labels as
features. Figure 1 illustrates the results from ora-
cle experiments incorporating from zero to six pre-
vious gold-standard SE labels (the lookback). The
increase in performance illustrates the importance of
context in the identification of SEs and motivates the
use of sequence prediction.
900
42
44
46
48
50
52
54
56
58
60
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Acc
Lookback
WWTWTLWTLG
Figure 1: Oracle results on Brown data.
6.3 Sequencing results
Table 3 gives the results of classification with the se-
quencing model on the Brown data. As with the la-
beling model, accuracy is boosted by WT and WTLG
feature sets. We see an unexpected degradation in
performance in the transition from WT to WTL.
The most interesting results here, though, are the
gains in accuracy from use of previously-predicted
labels as features for classification. When labeling
performance is relatively poor, as with feature set W,
previous labels help very little, but as labeling accu-
racy increases, previous labels begin to effect notice-
able increases in accuracy. For the best two feature
sets, considering the previous two labels raises the
accuracy 2.0% and 2.5%, respectively.
In most cases, though, performance starts to de-
grade as the model incorporates more than two pre-
vious labels. This degradation is illustrated in Fig-
ure 2. The explanation for this is that the model is
still very weak, with an accuracy of less than 54%
for the Brown data. The more previous predicted la-
bels the model conditions on, the greater the likeli-
hood that one or more of the labels is incorrect. With
gold-standard labels, we see a steady increase in ac-
curacy as we look further back, and we would need
a better performing model to fully take advantage of
knowledge of SE patterns in discourse.
The sequencing model plays a crucial role, partic-
ularly with such a small amount of training material,
and our results indicate the importance of local con-
text in discourse analysis.
42
44
46
48
50
52
54
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
WWTWTLWTLG
Figure 2: Sequencing results on Brown data.
BROWN Lookback (n)
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
W 45.4 45.2 46.1 46.6 42.8 43.0 42.4
WT 49.9 52.4 51.9 49.2 47.2 46.2 44.8
WTL 48.9 50.5 50.1 48.9 46.7 44.9 45.0
WTLG 50.6 52.9 53.1 48.1 46.4 45.9 45.7
Baseline 38.5
Table 3: SE classification results with sequencing
on Brown test set. Bold cell indicates accuracy at-
tained by model parameters that performed best on
development data.
6.4 Error analysis
Given that a single one of the ten possible labels
occurs for more than 35% of clauses in both data
sets, it is useful to look at the distribution of er-
rors over the labels. Table 4 is a confusion matrix
for the held-out Brown data using the best feature
set.4 The first column gives the label and number
of occurrences of that label, and the second column
is the accuracy achieved for that label. The next
two columns show the percentage of erroneous la-
bels taken by the labels S and GS. These two labels
are the most common labels in the development set
(38.5% and 32.5%). The final column sums the per-
centages of errors assigned to the remaining seven
labels. As one would expect, the model learns the
predominance of these two labels. There are a few
interesting points to make about this data.
First, 66% of G-type clauses are mistakenly as-
signed the label GS. This is interesting because
these two SE-types constitute the broader SE cat-
4Thanks to the anonymous reviewer who suggested this use-
ful way of looking at the data.
901
% Correct % Incorrect
Label Label S GS Other
S(278) 72.7 n/a 14.0 13.3
E(203) 50.7 37.0 11.8 0.5
GS(203) 44.8 46.3 n/a 8.9
R(26) 38.5 30.8 11.5 19.2
N(47) 23.4 31.9 23.4 21.3
G(12) 0.0 25.0 66.7 8.3
IMP(8) 0.0 75.0 25.0 0.0
P(7) 0.0 71.4 28.6 0.0
F(2) 0.0 100.0 0.0 0.0
Table 4: Confusion matrix for Brown held-out test
data, WTLG feature set, lookback n = 2. Numbers
in parentheses indicate how many clauses have the
associated gold standard label.
egory of generalizing statives. The distribution of
errors for R-type clauses points out another interest-
ing classification difficulty.5 Unlike the other cat-
egories, the percentage of false-other labels for R-
type clauses is higher than that of false-GS labels.
80% of these false-other labels are of type E. The
explanation for this is that R-type clauses are a sub-
type of the event class.
6.5 Genre effects in classification
Different text domains frequently have different
characteristic properties. Discourse modes are one
way of analyzing these differences. It is thus in-
teresting to compare SE classification when training
and testing material come from different domains.
Table 5 shows the performance on Brown when
training on Brown and/or MUC using the WTLG
feature set with simple labeling and with sequence
prediction with a lookback of two. A number of
things are suggested by these figures. First, the la-
beling model (lookback of zero), beats the baseline
even when training on out-of-domain texts (43.1%
vs. 38.5%), but this is unsurprisingly far below
training on in-domain texts (43.1% vs. 50.6%).
Second, while sequence prediction helps with in-
domain training (53.1% vs 50.6%), it makes no
difference with out-of-domain training (42.9% vs
43.1%). This indicates that the patterns of SEs in a
text do indeed correlate with domains and their dis-
course modes, in line with case-studies in the dis-
course modes theory (Smith, 2003). Finally, mix-
5Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for bringing this to our
attention.
lookback Brown test set
WTLG
train:Brown 0 50.6
2 53.1
train:MUC 0 43.1
2 42.9
train:all 0 50.4
2 49.5
Table 5: Cross-domain SE classification
ing out-of-domain training material with in-domain
material does not hurt labelling accuracy (50.4% vs
50.6%), but it does take away the gains from se-
quencing (49.5% vs 53.1%).
These genre effects are suggestive, but inconclu-
sive. A similar setup with much larger training and
testing sets would be necessary to provide a clearer
picture of the effect of mixed domain training.
7 Related work
Though we are aware of no previous work in SE
classification, others have focused on automatic de-
tection of aspectual and temporal data.
Klavans and Chodorow (1992) laid the founda-
tion for probabilistic verb classification with their
interpretation of aspectual properties as gradient and
their use of statistics to model the gradience. They
implement a single linguistic test for stativity, treat-
ing lexical properties of verbs as tendencies rather
than absolute characteristics.
Linguistic indicators for aspectual classification
are also used by Siegel (1999), who evaluates 14 in-
dicators to test verbs for stativity and telicity. Many
of his indicators overlap with our features.
Siegel and McKeown (2001) address classifica-
tion of verbs for stativity (event vs. state) and
for completedness (culminated vs. non-culminated
events). They compare three supervised and one un-
supervised machine learning systems. The systems
obtain relatively high accuracy figures, but they are
domain-specific, require extensive human supervi-
sion, and do not address aspectual coercion.
Merlo and Stevenson (2001) use corpus-based
thematic role information to identify and classify
unergative, unaccusative, and object-drop verbs.
Stevenson and Merlo note that statistical analysis
cannot and should not be separated from deeper lin-
guistic analysis, and our results support that claim.
902
The advantages of our approach are the broadened
conception of the classification task and the use of
sequence prediction to capture a wider context.
8 Conclusions
Situation entity classification is a little-studied but
important classification task for the analysis of dis-
course. We have presented the first data-driven mod-
els for SE classification, motivating the treatment of
SE classification as a sequencing task.
We have shown that linguistic correlations to sit-
uation entity type are useful features for proba-
bilistic models, as are grammatical relations and
CCG supertags derived from syntactic analysis of
clauses. Models for the task perform poorly given
very basic feature sets, but minimal linguistic pro-
cessing in the form of part-of-speech tagging im-
proves performance even on small data sets used for
this study. Performance improves even more when
we move beyond simple feature sets and incorpo-
rate linguistically-motivated features and grammat-
ical relations from deep syntactic analysis. Finally,
using sequence prediction by adapting a POS-tagger
further improves results.
The tagger we adapted uses beam search; this al-
lows tractable use of maximum entropy for each la-
beling decision but forgoes the ability to find the
optimal label sequence using dynamic programming
techniques. In contrast, Conditional Random Fields
(CRFs) (Lafferty et al, 2001) allow the use of max-
imum entropy to set feature weights with efficient
recovery of the optimal sequence. Though CRFs are
more computationally intensive, the small set of SE
labels should make the task tractable for CRFs.
In future, we intend to test the utility of SEs in dis-
course parsing, discourse mode identification, and
discourse relation projection.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Morris Memorial
Trust Grant from the New York Community Trust.
The authors would like to thank Nicholas Asher,
Pascal Denis, Katrin Erk, Garrett Heifrin, Julie
Hunter, Jonas Kuhn, Ray Mooney, Brian Reese, and
the anonymous reviewers.
References
N. Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract objects in Dis-
course. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
A. Berger, S. Della Pietra, and V. Della Pietra. 1996. A
maximum entropy approach to natural language pro-
cessing. Computational Linguistics, 22(1):39?71.
G. Carlson and F. J. Pelletier, editors. 1995. The Generic
Book. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
S. Clark and J. R. Curran. 2004. Parsing the WSJ using
CCG and log?linear models. In Proceedings of ACL?
04, pages 104?111, Barcelona, Spain.
D. Dowty. 1979. Word Meaning and Montague Gram-
mar. Reidel, Dordrecht.
J. Hockenmaier, G. Bierner, and J. Baldridge. 2004. Ex-
tending the coverage of a CCG system. Research on
Language and Computation, 2:165?208.
J. L. Klavans and M. S. Chodorow. 1992. Degrees of
stativity: The lexical representation of verb aspect. In
Proceedings of COLING 14, Nantes, France.
J. Lafferty, A. McCallum, and F. Pereira. 2001. Con-
ditional random fields: Probabilistic models for seg-
menting and labelling sequence data. In Proceedings
of ICML, pages 282?289, Williamstown, USA.
P. Merlo and S. Stevenson. 2001. Automatic verb clas-
sification based on statistical distributions of argument
structure. Computational Linguistics.
M. Moens and M. Steedman. 1988. Temporal ontol-
ogy and temporal reference. Computational Linguis-
tics, 14(2):15?28.
P. Peterson. 1997. Fact Proposition Event. Kluwer.
E. V. Siegel and K. R. McKeown. 2001. Learning meth-
ods to combine linguistic indicators: Improving as-
pectual classification and revealing linguistic insights.
Computational Linguistics, 26(4):595?628.
E. V. Siegel. 1999. Corpus-based linguistic indicators
for aspectual classification. In Proceedings of ACL37,
University of Maryland, College Park.
C. S. Smith. 1991. The Parameter of Aspect. Kluwer.
C. S. Smith. 2003. Modes of Discourse. Cambridge
University Press.
M. Steedman. 2000. The Syntactic Process. MIT
Press/Bradford Books.
Z. Vendler, 1967. Linguistics in Philosophy, chapter
Verbs and Times, pages 97?121. Cornell University
Press, Ithaca, New York.
H. Verkuyl. 1972. On the Compositional Nature of the
Aspects. Reidel, Dordrecht.
903
