Chinese Sketch Engine and 
the Extraction of Grammatical Collocations
Chu-Ren Huang  
Inst. of Linguistics  
Academia Sinica  
churen@sinica.edu.tw
Adam Kilgarriff 
Lexicography MasterClass 
Information Technology  
adam@lexmasterclass.com 
Yiching Wu 
Inst. of Linguistics 
Tsing Hua University 
d898702@oz.nthu.edu.tw 
Chih-Ming Chiu 
Inst. of Information Science 
Academia Sinica 
henning@hp.iis.sinica.edu.tw 
Simon Smith 
Dept. of Applied English 
Ming Chuan University 
ssmith@mcu.edu.tw 
Pavel Rychly 
Faculty of Informatics 
Masaryk University. 
pary@textforge.cz 
Ming-Hong Bai 
Inst. of Information Science 
Academia Sinica 
mhbai@sinica.edu.tw 
Keh-Jiann Chen 
Inst. of Information Science 
Academia Sinica 
kchen@iis.sinica.edu.tw
Abstract. This paper introduces a new 
technology for collocation extraction in Chinese. 
Sketch Engine (Kilgarriff et al, 2004) has 
proven to be a very effective tool for automatic 
description of lexical information, including 
collocation extraction, based on large-scale 
corpus. The original work of Sketch Engine was 
based on BNC. We extend Sketch Engine to 
Chinese based on Gigaword corpus from LDC. 
We discuss the available functions of the 
prototype Chinese Sketch Engine (CSE) as well 
as the robustness of language-independent 
adaptation of Sketch Engine. We conclude by 
discussing how Chinese-specific linguistic 
information can be incorporated to improve the 
CSE prototype.  
1. Introduction 
The accessibility to large scale corpora, at 
one billion words or above, has become both a 
blessing and a challenge for NLP research. How 
to efficiently use a gargantuan corpus is an 
urgent issue concerned by both users and corpora 
designers. Adam Kilgarriff et al (2004) 
developed the Sketch Engine to facilitate 
efficient use of corpora. Their claims are two 
folded: that genuine linguistic generalizations 
can be automatically extracted from a corpus 
with simple collocation information provided 
that the corpus is large enough; and that such a 
methodology is easily adaptable for a new 
language. The first claim was fully substantiated 
with their work on BNC. The current paper deals 
with the second claim by adapting the Sketch 
Engine to Chinese.  
2. Online Chinese Corpora: The State of 
the Arts 
2.1 Chinese Corpora 
The first online tagged Chinese corpus is 
Academia Sinica Balanced Corpus of Modern 
Chinese (Sinica Corpus), which has been 
web-accessible since November, 1996. The 
current version contains 5.2028 million words 
(7.8927 million characters). The corpus data was 
collected between 1990 and 1996 (CKIP, 
1995/1998). Two additional Chinese corpora 
were made available on line in 2003. The first is 
the Sinorama Chinese-English Parallel Text 
Corpus (Sinorama Corpus). The Sinorama 
Corpus is composed of 2,373 parallel texts in 
both Chinese and English that were published 
between 1976 and 2000. There are 103,252 pairs 
of sentences, composed of roughly 3.2 million 
48
English words and 5.3 million Chinese 
characters 1 . The second one is the modern 
Chinese corpus developed by the Center for 
Chinese Linguistics (CCL Corpus) at Peking 
University. It contains eighty-five million 
(85,398,433) simplified Chinese characters 
which were published after 1919 A.D. 
2.2 Extracting Linguistic Information from 
Online Chinese Corpora: Tools and Interfaces 
The Chinese corpora discussed above are 
all equipped with an online interface to allow 
users to extract linguistic generalizations. Both 
Sinica Corpus and CCL Corpus offer 
KWIC-based functions, while Sinorama Corpus 
gives sentence and paragraph aligned output. 
2.2.1 String Matching or Word Matching 
The basic unit of query that a corpus allows 
defines the set of information that can be 
extracted from that corpus. While there is no 
doubt that segmented corpus allows more precise 
linguistic generalizations, string-based 
collocation still afford a corpus of the robustness 
that is not restricted by an arbitrary word-list or 
segmentation algorithm. This robustness is of 
greatest value when extracting neologism or 
sub-lexical collocations. Since CCL Corpus is 
not segmented and tagged, string-based KWIC is 
its main tool for extracting generalizations. This 
comes with the familiar pitfall of word boundary 
ambiguity. For instance, a query of ci.yao ??
?secondary? may yield the intended result (la), as 
well as noise (1b). 
1a. ??????
dan zhe shi ci.yao de 
but this is secondary DE
1http://cio.nist.gov/esd/emaildir/lists/mt_list/msg0003
3.html 
?But this is secondary? 
 b. ????????!
ta ji ci yao.qiu ta da.fu 
he several time ask her answer 
?He had asked her to answer for several times? 
 Sinica Corpus, on the other hand, is fully 
segmented and allows word-based 
generalizations. In addition, Sinica Corpus also 
allows wildcards in its search. Users specify a 
wildcard of arbitrary length (*), or fixed length 
(?). This allows search of a class of words 
sharing some character strings.
2.2.2 Display of Extracted Data 
Formal restriction on the display of 
extracted data also constraints the type of 
information that can be obtained from that 
corpus. Sinica Corpus allows users to change 
window size from about 25 to 57 Chinese 
characters. However, since a Chinese sentence 
may be longer than 57 characters, Sinica Corpus 
cannot guarantee that a full sentence is displayed. 
CCL Corpus, on the other hand, is able to show a 
full output sentence, which may be up to 200 
Chinese characters. However, it does not display 
more than a full sentence. Thus it cannot show 
discourse information. Sinorama Corpus with 
TOTALrecall interface is most versatile in this 
respect. Aligned bilingual full sentences are 
shown with an easy link to the full text. 
In terms of size and completeness of 
extracted data, Sinica Corpus returns all matched 
examples. However, cut and paste must be 
performed for the user to build his/her dataset. 
CCL Corpus, on the other hand, limits data to 
500 lines per page, but allows easy download of 
output data. Lastly, Sinorama/TOTALrecall 
provides choices of 5 to 100 sentences per page. 
49
2.2.3 Refining Extracted Information: Filter 
and Sorter 
Both Sinica Corpus and CCL corpus allows 
users to process extracted information, using 
linguistic and contextual filter or sorter. The CCL 
corpus requires users to remember the rules, 
while Sinica Corpus allows users to fill in blanks 
and/or choose from pull-down menu. In 
particular, Sinica Corpus allows users to refine 
their generalization by quantitatively 
characterizing the left and right contexts. The 
quantitative sorting functions allowed include 
both word and POS frequency, as well as word 
mutual information.  
2.2.4 Extracting Grammatical Information 
Availability of grammatical information 
depends on corpus annotation. CCL and 
Sinorama Corpus do not have POS tags. Sinica 
Corpus is the only Chinese corpus allowing users 
to access an overview of a keyword?s syntactic 
behavior. Users can obtain a list of types and 
distribution of the keyword?s syntactic category. 
In addition, users can find possible collocations 
of the keyword from the output of Mutual 
Information (MI).  
The most salient grammatical information, 
such as grammatical functions (subject, object, 
adjunct etc.) is beyond the scope of the 
traditional corpus interface tools. Traditional 
corpora rely on the human users to arrive at these 
kinds of generalizations.
3. Sketch Engine: A New Corpus-based 
approach to Grammatical Information  
Several existing linguistically annotated 
corpus of Chinese, e.g. Penn Chinese Tree Bank 
(Xia et al, 2000), Sinica Treebank (Chen et al, 
2003), Proposition Bank (Xue and Palmer, 2003, 
2005) and Mandarin VerbNet (Wu and Liu, 
2003), suffer from the same problem. They are 
all extremely labor-intensive to build and 
typically have a narrow coverage. In addition, 
since structural assignment is theory-dependent 
and abstract, inter-annotator consistency is 
difficult to achieve. Since there is also no general 
consensus on the annotation scheme in Chinese 
NLP and linguistics, building an effective 
interface for public use is almost impossible. 
The Sketch Engine offers an answer to the 
above issues.
3.1 Initial Implementation and Design of the 
Sketch Engine 
The Sketch Engine is a corpus processing 
system developed in 2002 (Kilgarriff and 
Tugwell, 2002; Kilgarriff et al, 2004). The main 
components of the Sketch Engine are KWIC 
concordances, word sketches, grammatical 
relations, and a distributional thesaurus. In its 
first implementation, it takes as input basic BNC 
(British National Corpus, (Leech, 1992)) data: 
the annotated corpus, as well as list of lemmas 
with frequencies. In other words, the Sketch 
Engine has a relatively low threshold for the 
complexity of input corpus. 
The Sketch Engine has a versatile query 
system. Users can restrict their query in any 
sub-corpus of BNC. A query string may be a 
word (with or without POS specification), or a 
phrasal segment. A query can also be performed 
using Corpus Query Language (CQL). The 
output display format can be adjusted, and the 
displayed window of a specific item can be 
freely expanded left and right. Most of all, the 
Sketch Engine produces a Word Sketch 
(Kilgarriff and Tugwell, 2002) that is an 
automatically generated grammatical description 
of a lemma in terms of corpus collocations. All 
items in each collocation are linked back to the 
original corpus data. Hence it is similar to a 
50
Linguistic Knowledge Net anchored by a lexicon 
(Huang et al, 2001). 
 A Word Sketch is a one-page list of a 
keyword?s functional distribution and collocation 
in the corpus. The functional distribution 
includes: subject, object, prepositional object, 
and modifier. Its collocations are described by a 
list of linguistically significant patterns in the 
language. Word Sketch uses regular expressions 
over POS-tags to formalize rules of collocation 
patterns, e.g. (2) is used to retrieve the 
verb-object relation in English:
2. 1:?V? ?(DET|NUM|ADJ|ADV|N)?* 2:?N? 
The expression in (2) says: extract the data 
containing a verb followed by a noun regardless 
of how many determiners, numerals, adjectives, 
adverbs and nouns preceding the noun. It can 
extract data containing cook meals and cooking a 
five-course gala dinner, and cooked the/his/two 
surprisingly good meals etc.
The Sketch Engine also produces thesaurus 
lists, for an adjective, a noun or a verb, the other 
words most similar to it in their use in the 
language (Kilgarriff et al 2004). For instance, 
the top five synonym candidates for the verb kill
are shoot (0.249), murder (0.23), injure (0.229), 
attack (0.223), and die (0.212).2 It also provides 
direct links to the Sketch Difference which lists 
the similar and different patterns between a 
keyword and its similar word. For example, both 
kill and murder can occur with objects such as 
people and wife, but murder usually occurs with 
personal proper names and seldom selects animal 
nouns as complement whereas kill can take fox,
whale, dolphin, and guerrilla, etc. as its object. 
 The Sketch Engine adopts Mutual 
2 The similarity is measured and ranked adopting 
Lin?s (1998) mathematics. 
Information (MI) to measure the salience of a 
collocation. Salience data are shown against each 
collocation in Word Sketches and other Sketch 
Engine output. MI provides a measure of the 
degree of association of a given segment with 
others. Pointwise MI, calculated by Equation 3, 
is what is used in lexical processing to return the 
degree of association of two words x and y (a 
collocation).
3. 
)(
)|(log);(
xP
yxPyxI  
3.2 Application to Chinese Corpus 
In order to show the cross-lingual 
robustness of the Sketch Engine as well as to 
propose a powerful tool for collocation 
extraction based on a large scale corpus with 
minimal pre-processing; we constructed Chinese 
Sketch Engine (CSE) by loading the Chinese 
Gigaword to the Sketch Engine (Kilgarriff et al, 
2005). The Chinese Gigaword contains about 
1.12 billion Chinese characters, including 735 
million characters from Taiwan?s Central News 
Agency, and 380 million characters from China?s 
Xinhua News Agency3. Before loading Chinese 
Gigaword into Sketch Engine, all the simplified 
characters were converted into traditional 
characters, and the texts were segmented and 
POS tagged using the Academia Sinica 
segmentation and tagging system (Huang et al, 
1997). An array of machine was used to process 
the 1.12 million characters, which took over 3 
days to perform. All components of the Sketch 
Engine were implemented, including 
Concordance, Word Sketch, Thesaurus and 
Sketch Difference.  
 In our initial in-house testing of this 
prototype of the Chinese Sketch Engine, it does 
3http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Catalog/CatalogEntry.jsp?
catalogId=LDC2003T09 
51
produce the expected results with an easy to use 
interface. For instance, the Chinese Word Sketch 
correctly shows that the most common and 
salient object of dai.bu ??  ?to arrest? is
xian.fan ??  ?suspect?; the most common 
subject jing.fang ??!?police?; and the most 
common modifier dang.chang??.
 The output data of Thesaurus correctly 
verify the following set of synonyms from the 
Chinese VerbNet Project: that ren.wei ???to
think? behaves most like biao.shi ??  ?to 
express, to state? (salience 0.451), while yi.wei?
? ?to take somebody/something as? is more like 
jue.de?? ?to feel, think? (salience 0.488). The 
synonymous relation can be illustrated by (4) and 
(5).
4a. ????????????????????
?????????????????
ta ren.wei dao hai.wai tou.zi you yi ge guan.nian 
hen zhong.yao, jiu shi yao zhi.dao dang.di de 
you.xi gui.ze 
?He believes that for those investing overseas, 
there is a very important principle-one must know 
the local rules of the game, and accept them.? 
 b. ????????????????????
?????!
zhi.zheng.dang ye biao.shi, you.yu gong.shi 
zheng.yi tai da, kong.pa wu.fa quan.li zhi.chi 
?The KMT also commented that due to the many 
controversies surrounding PTV, it could not 
wholeheartedly support it either.? 
5a. ?????????????????????
????????
he.jia.ju jiu ren.wei??dian.shi you ji.ben yu.yan 
he wen.fa, yao jiang.jiu mai.dian he shi.chang??
?Ho Chia-chu says, "Television has its own 
fundamental language and grammar. You must 
consider selling points and the market."? 
b. ?????????????????????
???????????
ta biao.shi??wo xi.wang fuo.jiao.tu neng liao.jie, 
fu.quan she.hui yu jue.wu de she.hui shi bu 
xiang.he de??
?She says "I hope that followers of Buddhism can 
realize that a patriarchal society is incompatible 
with an enlightened society."? 
The above examples show that ren.wei and 
biao.shi can take both direct and indirect 
quotation. Yi.wei and jue.de, on the other hand, 
can only be used in reportage and cannot 
introduce direct quotation. 
Distinction between near synonymous pairs 
can be obtained from Sketch Difference. This 
function is verified with results from Tsai et al?s 
study on gao.xing?? ?glad? and kuai.le??!
?happy? (Tsai et al, 1998). Gao.xing ?glad? 
specific patterns include the negative imperative 
bie? ?don?t?. It also has a dominant collocation 
with the potentiality complement marker de?
(e.g. ta gao.xing de you jiao you tiao ????
???? ?she was so happy that she cried and 
danced?). In contrast, kuai.le ?happy? has the 
specific collocation with holiday nouns such as 
qiu.jie ??  ?Autumn Festival?. The Sketch 
Difference result is consistent with the account 
that gao.xing/kuai.le contrast is that inchoative 
state vs. homogeneous state. 
4. Evaluation and Future Developments 
An important feature of the prototype of the 
Chinese Sketch Engine is that, in order to test the 
robustness of the Sketch Engine design, the 
original regular expression patterns were adopted 
with minimal modification for Chinese. Even 
though both are SVO languages with similar 
surface word order, it is obvious that they differ 
substantially in terms of assignment of 
grammatical functions. In addition, the Sinica 
tagset is different from the BNC tagset and 
52
actually has much richer functional information. 
These are the two main directions that we will 
pursue in modification and improvement of the 
Chinese Sketch Engine. 
4.1 Word Boundary Representation 
Word breaks are not conventionalized in 
Chinese texts. This poses a challenge in Chinese 
language processing. The Chinese Sketch Engine 
inserted space after segmentation, which helps to 
visualize words. In the future, it will be trivial to 
allow the conventional alternative of no word 
boundary markups. However, it will not be trivial 
to implement fuzzy function to allow searches 
for non-canonical lemmas (i.e. lemmas that are 
segmented differently from the standard corpus). 
4.2 Sub-Corpora Comparison  
The Chinese Gigaword corpus is marked 
with two different genres, story and non-story. A 
still more salient sub-corpus demarcation is the 
one between Mainland China corpus and Taiwan 
corpus. Sketch Difference between lemmas form 
two sub-corpora is being planned. This would 
allow future comparative studies and would have 
wide applications in the localization adaptations 
of language related applications.  
4.3 Collating Frequency Information with 
POS
One of the convenient features of Sketch 
Engine that a frequency ranked word list is 
linked to all major components. This allows a 
very easy and informative reference. Since 
cross-categorical derivation with zero 
morphology is dominant in Chinese, it would 
help the processing greatly if POS information is 
added to the word list. Adding such information 
would also open the possibility of accessing the 
POS ranked frequency information. 
4.5 Fine-tuning Collocation Patterns  
The Sketch Engine relies on collocation 
patterns, such as (2) above, to extract 
collocations. The regular expression format 
allows fast processing of large scale corpora with 
good results. However, these patterns can be 
fine-tuned for better results. We give VN 
collocates with object function as example here. 
In (6), verbs are underlined with a single line, 
and the collocated nouns identified by English 
Word Sketch are underlined with double lines. 
Other nominal objects that the Sketch Engine 
misses are marked with a dotted line. 
6.a. In addition to encouraging kids to ask, think and 
do, parents need to be tolerant and appreciative to 
avoid killing a child's creative sense.
b. Children are taught to love their parents,
classmates, animals, nature . . . . in fact they are 
taught to love just about everything except to 
love China, their mother country. 
c. For example, the government deliberately chose 
not to teach Chinese history and culture, nor 
civics, in the schools. 
d. At the game there will be a lottery drawing for a 
motorcycle! And perhaps you'll catch a foul ball
or a home run.
The sentences in (6) show that the current Sketch 
Engine tend to only identify the first object when 
there are multiple objects. The resultant 
distributional information thus obtained will be 
valid given a sufficiently large corpus. However, 
if the collocation patterns are fine-tuned to allow 
treatment of coordination, richer and more 
precise information can be extracted. 
 A regular expression collocation pattern 
also runs the risk of mis-classification. For 
instance, speech act verbs often allow subject to 
occur in post-verbal positions, and intransitive 
53
verbs can often take temporal nouns in 
post-verbal positions too.  
7. a. ?you can say goodbye to your competitive 
career. 
b. `No,' said Scarlet, `but then I don't notice much.'
8. a. Where did you sleep last night?
  b. ?it arrived Thursday morning.
  c. From Arty's room came the sound of an 
accordion.
9. `I'll look forward to that.' `So will I.' 
Such non-canonical word orders are even more 
prevalent in Chinese. Chinese objects often occur 
in pre-verbal positions in various pre-posing 
constructions, such as topicalization. 
10. ???????????
quan.gu mian.bao, chi le hen jian.kang 
whole-grain bread, eat LE very healthy 
?Eating whole-grain bread is very healthy.? 
11a. ??????????????????
you ren chang.shi yao jiang zhe he.hua fen.lei,
que yue fen yue lei 
someone try to JIANG the lotus classify, but more 
classify more tired 
?People have tried to decide what category the 
lotus belongs in, but have found the effort 
taxing.? 
b. ??????????
wo yi.ding yao ba lao.da chu.diao
I must want BA the oldest (son) get rid of
?I really want to get rid of the older son.?
When objects are pre-posed, they tend to stay 
closer to the verb than the subject. Adding object 
marking information, such as ba?, jiang?, lian
?  would help correctly identify collocating 
pre-posed objects. However, for those unmarked 
pre-posed structures, closeness to the verb may 
not provide sufficient information. Several rules 
will need to be implemented jointly.  
 The above example underlines a critical 
issue. That is, whether relative position alone is 
enough to identify positional information. The 
Sketch Engine is in essence a powerful tool 
extracting generalizations from annotated corpus 
data. We have shown that it can extract useful 
grammatical information with POS tag alone. If 
the corpus is tagged with richer annotation, the 
Sketch Engine should be able to extract even 
richer information. 
 The Sinica Corpus tagset adapts to the fact 
that Chinese has a freer word order than English 
by incorporating semantic information with the 
grammatical category. For instance, locational 
and temporal nouns, proper nouns, and common 
nouns each are assigned a different tag. Verbs are 
sub-categorized according to activity and 
transitivity. Such information is not available in 
the BNC tagset and hence not used in the 
original Sketch Engine design. We will enrich the 
collocation patterns with the annotated linguistic 
information from the Sinica Corpus tagset. In 
particular, we are converting ICG lexical 
subcategorization frames (Chen and Huang 1990) 
to Sketch Engine collocation patters. These ICG 
frames, called Basic Patterns and Adjunct 
Patterns, have already been fully annotated 
lexically and tested on the Sinica Corpus. We 
expect their incorporation to improve Chinese 
Sketch Engine results markedly. 
6. Conclusion 
In this paper, we introduce a powerful tool 
for extraction of collocation information from 
large scale corpora. Our adaptation proved the 
cross-lingual robustness of the Sketch Engine. In 
particular, we show the robustness of the Sketch 
Engine by achieving better results through 
fine-tuning of the collocation patterns via 
integrating available grammatical knowledge. 
54
References 
Chen, Keh-Jiann and Huang, Chu-Ren. 1990.  
Information-based Case Grammar.  
Proceedings of the 13th COLING. Helsinki, 
Finland. 2:54-59. 
Chen, Keh-Jiann, Chu-Ren Huang, Feng-Yi Chen, 
Chi-Ching Luo, Ming-Chung Chang, and 
Chao-Jan Chen. 2003. Sinica Treebank: 
Design Criteria, Representational Issues and 
Implementation. In Anne Abeill?e, (ed.): 
Building and Using Parsed Corpora. Text, 
Speech and Language Technology,
20:231-248. Dordrecht: Kluwer.  
CKIP (Chinese Knowledge Information Processing 
Group). 1995/1998. The Content and 
Illustration of Academica Sinica Corpus.
(Technical Report no 95-02/98-04). Taipei: 
Academia Sinica  
Huang, Chu-Ren, Feng-Ju Lo, Hui-Jun Hsiao, 
Chiu-Jung Lu, and Ching-chun Hsieh. 2001. 
From Language Archives to Digital 
Museums: Synergizing Linguistic Databases. 
Presented at the IRCS workshop on linguistic 
Databases. University of Pennsylvania. 
Huang, Chu-Ren, Keh-Jiann Chen, and Lili Chang. 
1997. Segmentation Standard for Chinese 
Natural Language Processing. 
Computational Linguistics and Chinese 
Language Processing. 2(2):47-62.  
Kilgarriff, Adam and Tugwell, David. Sketching 
Words. 2002. In Marie-H?l?ne Corr?ard (ed.): 
Lexicography and Natural Language 
Processing. A Festschrift in Honour of B.T.S. 
Atkins. 125-137. Euralex.  
Kilgarriff, Adam, Chu-Ren Huang, Pavel Rychl?, 
Simon Smith, and David Tugwell. 2005. 
Chinese Word Sketches. ASIALEX 2005: 
Words in Asian Cultural Context. Singapore.  
Kilgarriff, Adam, Pavel Rychl?, Pavel Smrz and 
David Tugwell. 2004. The Sketch Engine. 
Proceedings of EURALEX, Lorient, France. 
(http://www.sketchengine.co.uk/) 
Leech, Geoffrey. 1992. 100 million words of 
English: the British National Corpus (BNC). 
Language Research 28(1):1-13 
Lin, Dekang. 1998. An Information-Theoretic 
Definition of Similarity. Proceedings of 
International Conference on Machine 
Learning. Madison, Wisconsin. 
(http://www.cs.umanitoba.ca/~lindek/publica
tion.htm) 
Tsai, Mei-Chih, Chu-Ren Huang, Keh-Jiann Chen, 
and Kathleen Ahrens. 1998. Towards a 
Representation of Verbal Semantics--An 
Approach Based on Near Synonyms. 
Computational Linguistics and Chinese 
Language Processing. 3(1): 61-74. 
Wu, Yiching and Liu, Mei-Chun. 2003. The 
Construction and Application of Mandarin 
Verbnet. Proceedings of the Third 
International Conference of Internet Chinese 
Education. 39-48. Taipei, Taiwan. 
Xia, Fei, Martha Palmer, Nianwen Xue, Mary Ellen 
Okurowski, John Kovarik, Fu-Dong Chiou, 
Shizhe Huang, Tony Kroch, and Mitch 
Marcus. 2000. Developing Guidelines and 
Ensuring Consistency for Chinese Text 
Annotation. Proceedings of the second 
International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2000), 
Athens, Greece.  
    (http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~chinese/ctb.html)
Xue, Nianwen and Palmer, Martha. 2003. 
Annotating Propositions in the Penn Chinese 
Treebank. Proceedings of the Second Sighan 
Workshop. Sapporo, Japan. 
     (http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~xueniwen/) 
Xue, Nianwen and Palmer, Martha. 2005. 
Automatic Semantic Role Labeling for 
Chinese Verbs. Proceedings of the 19th 
International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence. Edinburgh, Scotland. 
     (http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~xueniwen/) 
Websites
Sinica Corpus.  
http://www.sinica.edu.tw/SinicaCorpus/  
British National Corpus (BNC). 
http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/  
Center for Chinese Linguistics, PKU.  
http://ccl.pku.edu.cn/#  
Corpora And NLP (Natural Language Processing) 
for Digital Learning of English (CANDLE). 
http://candle.cs.nthu.edu.tw/candle/     
FrameNet.  
http://www.icsi.berkeley.edu/~framenet/  
Penn Chinese Treebank. 
http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~chinese/ctb.html  
Proposition Bank.  
http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~ace/  
Sinica Treebank.   
http://treebank.sinica.edu.tw/  
Sketch Engine (English).  
http://www.sketchengine.co.uk/     
Sketch Engine (Chinese).  
http://corpora.fi.muni.cz/chinese/  
Sou Wen Jie Zi-A Linguistic KnowledgeNet. 
http://words.sinica.edu.tw/ 
55
