Defining and identifying the roles of geographic references within text:
Examples from the Great Britain Historical GIS project
Humphrey Southall
Department of Geography
University of Portsmouth
Buckingham Building
Lion Terrace
Portsmouth PO1 3HE
ENGLAND
Humphrey.Southall@port.ac.uk
Abstract
Reliably recognizing, disambiguating,
normalizing, storing, and displaying
geographic names poses many challenges.
However, associating each name with a
geographical point location cannot be the final
stage.  We also need to understand each name?s
role within the document, and its association
with adjacent text.  The paper develops these
points through a discussion of two different
types of historical texts, both rich in
geographic names: descriptive gazetteer entries
and travellers? narratives.  It concludes by
discussing the limitations of existing mark-up
systems in this area.
1  The Great Britain Historical GIS
The Great Britain Historical GIS is a very large
assembly of historical information about Britain, all in
some sense tied to particular places.  The earliest data in
the system was computerised in the late 1970s, and it
was established as a relational database in 1989-91.
Until recently, however, almost our entire content was
either statistical or locational:  by now, we have
computerised or acquired from collaborators a
substantial fraction of the information published in the
reports of the Censuses of Population for England and
Wales, and for Scotland;  and of the information
published in vital registration reports for the same areas
since the 1840s.
In general, our coverage ends in the early 1970s,
when the relevant information began to be published in
digital form.  Our statistical database by now comprises
over 33m. data values, and is closely linked to digital
mapping containing the changing boundaries of the
various statistical reporting units:  counties, various
types of district, and approaching 20,000 parishes.  This
material has formed the basis for studies of
demographic, economic and social change.
However, our largest source of current funding has a
different focus.  A grant from part of the UK National
Lottery is turning the GBH GIS into an on-line resource
for ?life-long learners?, which in practice means the
general public.  Our system is not a conventional on-line
GIS as our most obvious audience are people interested
in local history:  the most basic functionality of our site
allows users to specify a location by a place-name or,
preferably, a postal code which in the UK identifies a
group of maybe ten houses, and therefore a fairly
precise location;  they will then be taken to a page
providing information on how their current local
authority ? there are 408 in Great Britain ? has changed
over the last 200 years, with the option to drill deeper by
accessing information for the various past
administrative units which contained the location they
specified.  An initial system, limited to the above
functions for the modern units, should go live during
May 2003:
www.VisionOfBritain.org.uk
Later versions of the site will contain vastly greater
content.  We will provide access to data for the original
historical units, using ?point-in-polygon? searching of a
spatial database to identify relevant units, having first
converted the users? postal code into a geographic
coordinate.  The site will draw on both vector mapping
of historic boundaries and two complete set of geo-
referenced image scans of historic maps of Great Britain
at one inch-to-the-mile scale:  Firstly, we are scanning
two complete editions of Ordnance Survey One Inch-to-
the-Mile maps of Great Britain:  the New Popular
Edition, published in the late 1940s and the first to
include National Grid lines, simplifying geo-referencing
all the scanned maps;  and the nineteenth century First
Series.  Geo-referencing the latter will be challenging,
and require extensive ?rubber sheeting?.
We are computerising two existing inventories of
historical administrative units covering England and
Wales, and constructing an equivalent digital resource
covering Scotland.  These inventories are not gazetteers
but systematic lists of all the counties, parishes and
various kinds of districts that ever existed, with their
hierarchic relationships and some information on variant
names.  This information provides the absolute core of
our system, structured as an ontology rather than as a
strictly hierarchic thesaurus.  The core ontology does
not require locational information for units, but if
available locations are stored as polygons representing
the boundaries, with dates of creation and abolition.
In our final system, we will be able to offer ?home
pages? not just for the 408 modern districts but for over
20,000 historic units, including the parishes which were
the lowest level of administration until recently, and
generally correspond with individual villages.  Each
home page will contain a map showing the overall
location within Britain and a short description generated
from the database and highlighting key statistics.  From
the home page, users will be able to access a more local
map showing the unit?s boundary, a range of statistics
mostly presented graphically, and information on the
unit?s history including boundary changes and
hierarchic relationships.
Relative to the overall size and scope of the site, our
own capacity to author descriptive and explanatory text
is limited.  We will concentrate on the text to
accompany maps showing national patterns.  However,
a site that was largely limited to statistics, even
presented as maps and graphs, would be pretty boring
and we are therefore computerising a large quantity of
text from existing publications.  This text forms the
main subject of this paper.
There are in fact three types of text.  Firstly, we are
computerising the introductions to all the census reports
between 1801 and 1851, to provide a description of the
country as a whole.  This aspect of the project is not
further discussed here.
Secondly, we are computerising three descriptive
gazetteers published in the late nineteenth century,
totalling over 4,000 pages and containing about 5m.
words:
? John Bartholomew?s Gazetteer of the British Isles
(Edinburgh, 1887).  This covers the whole British
Isles, including Ireland.
? John Goring?s Imperial Gazetteer of England and
Wales (Edinburgh, 6 vols., 1870-72)
? Frances Groome?s Ordnance Gazetteer of Scotland,
(Edinburgh,  6 vols., 1882-85).  Our work on this is a
collaboration with the Gazetteer for Scotland project.
Even with the gazetteer text, it will be very easy for
users to locate information about very specific places,
but much harder for them to move around the system to
explore the relationships between places, and form a
?vision of Britain through time? as a whole.  This
justifies our third and final type of new content:
narratives describing historical journeys around Britain.
We are computerising four well known accounts, as
well as some shorter accounts written by radical
agitators as they moved around in the mid-19
th
 century:
? William Cobbett, Rural Rides (London, 1830).
? Daniel Defoe, A Journey through the whole island of
Britain divided into circuits or journies (London,
1724-7).
? Celia Fiennes, Through England on a side saddle in
the time of William and Mary, being the diary of
Celia Fiennes (London, 1888).
? Arthur Young, Tours in England and Wales,
Selected from the Annals of agriculture (London,
1784-98).
This list has been deliberately kept short, as we
almost certainly have the capacity to digitise more
books via our Optical Character Recognition system but
not necessarily to mark them up.  Three obvious
additions would be the journals of John Wesley, the
Torrington Diaries and Boswell and Johnson?s tour of
the Hebrides.
2  Descriptive Gazetteers
The descriptive gazetteers form a very large body of
text, but fortunately they are highly structured, making
automated parsing feasible.  The parsing software runs
within our Oracle database and is written in SQL and
PL/SQL.  I have no doubt that it would be both more
efficient as well as more effective if it were written in,
say, Perl.  Little more will be said about the software,
other than to note that its relative effectiveness is mainly
evidence of the vital importance of having a large
database of placenames already built.
Although we are working with three different books,
all are written to a broadly similar formula:
? Each consists of alphabetically arranged entries;  each
entry begins with a head-word, i.e. the place-name
usually in bold or upper case letters.
? The head-word is followed by an indication of the
feature type (?a parish?, ?a river?, etc).
? Third comes some indication of where the feature is,
which almost always indicates a county, sometimes a
relative location (?9 miles SW of Worcester?) and
never an absolute location such as latitude and
longitude.
The main differences between the books is that
Bartholomew?s consists of a very large number of short
entries while the Imperial Gazetteer and Groome?s
provide longer entries, those for major cities and
counties covering several pages.  Mostly, however, we
focus on the first sentence as outlined above.  Here are
some samples, firstly from the very beginning of
Bartholomew?s:
? A'an, or Avon, lake, S. Banffshire, among the
Cairngorm mountains, 1_ mile long, at alt. of 2250
ft.; it is the head-water of river Avon: which see.
? Aasleagh, place, co. Mayo, 16 m. S. of Westport; P.O.
? Abbas and Temple Combe, par., mid. Somerset,
4miles S. of Wincanton sta., 1850 ac., pop. 590.
? Abbenhall. See ABENHALL.
? Abberley, par. and seat, W. Worcestershire, 4 miles
SW. of Stourport sta., 2636 ac., pop. 605; P.O.
? Abbert, seat, 10 miles NE. of Athenry, co. Galway.
? Abbertoft, hamlet, Willoughby par., mid. Lincoln-
shire, 2 miles SE. of Alford.
? Abberton.?par., E. Essex, on Roman road, 4 milesS.
of Colchester, 1068 ac., pop. 244; P.O.?2. Abberton,
par. and seat, E. Worcestershire, on river Piddle,
4miles NE. of Pershore sta., 1001 ac., pop. 92.
? Abberwick, township, Edlingham par., N.
Northumberland, on river Alne, 3 miles W. of
Alnwick, 1680 ac., pop. 109.
? Abbess Roding. See ABBOTS ROOTHING.
? Abbethune, seat, 1 m. from Inverkeilor sta., Forfarsh.
Secondly, from the Imperial Gazetteer:
? AFTON , a village 2 miles S of Yarmouth, Isle of
Wight. Afton House adjoins it, on a pleasant slope
toward the Yar. Afton Down rises in the south-eastern
neighbourhood, overhangs the English Channel, has
an altitude of about 500 feet, and is crowned by
tumuli.
? BINSTEAD, a small village and a parish in the Isle
of Wight. The village stands on the coast of the
Solent, amid charming environs, 1_ mile W by N of
Ryde. The parish comprises 1,140 acres of land and
335 of water; and its post-town is Ryde. Real
property, ?2,775. Pop., 486. Houses, 105. The manor
belonged, at the Conquest, to William Fitz-Stur; and
passed to the Bishops of Winchester. Several
picturesque villas, one of them belonging to Lord
Downes, stand near the village and on the coast.
Quarr Abbey House is the seat of Admiral Sir
Thomas J. Cochrane. Remains of a Cistertian Abbey,
called Quarr Abbey, founded in 1132, by Baldwin de
Redvers, afterwards Earl of Devon, stand at a
farmstead, 5 furlongs west of the village; and, though
fragmentary and mutilated, show some interesting
features. A siliceous limestone, containing many
fossils, and well suited for building, has been
extensively quarried since at least the time of William
Rufus. The living is a rectory in the diocese of
Winchester. Value, ?80.* Patron, the Bishop of
Winchester. The church was rebuilt in 1842; is in the
early English style; and embodies some sculptured
stones of a previous Norman edifice.
? BRAMBLE CHINE, a small ravine on the NW coast
of the Isle of Wight; at Colwell bay, 2 miles SW of
Yarmouth. A thick bed of oyster shells, in a fossil
state, is here; the shells in the same position as in life,
but entirely decomposed.
? CALBOURNE, a village, a parish, and a sub-district
in the Isle of Wight. The village stands 5 miles WSW
of Newport; and-has a post-office under Newport.
The parish includes also Newtown borough; and
extends from Brixton Down to the Solent. Acres,
6,397; of which 265 are water. Real property, ?4,471.
Pop., 728. Houses, 145. The property is divided
among a few. Westover manor belonged to the Esturs;
passed to the Lisles and the Holmeses; and belongs
now to the eldest son of Lord Heytesbury, in right of
his wife, the daughter of the late Sir Leonard W.
Holmes. The house on it is modern; and the grounds
are tasteful. Calbourne Bottom, 1_ mile SSW of the
village, is a depression between Brixton and
Moltestone downs. The living is a rectory, united with
the p. curacy of Newtown, in the diocese of
Winchester. Value, ?675.* Patron, the Bishop of
Winchester. The church is early English, much
modernized; and has a brass of 1480.?The sub-
district contains eight parishes. Acres, 25,050. Pop.,
5,417. Houses, 1,071.
? WIGHT (Isle of), an island in Hants; bounded, on
the N, by the Solent,?on the other sides, by the
English channel. Its outline is irregularly rhomboidal,
and has been compared to that of a turbot, and to that
of a bird with expanded wings. Its length from E to
W, from Bembridge Point to the Needles, is nearly 23
miles; its greatest breadth from N to S, from West
Cowes to St. Catherine?s Point, is 13_ miles; its
circuit is about 56 miles; and its area, inclusive of
foreshore, is 99,746 acres. The general surface has a
considerable elevation above sea-level. The coast,
along the N, is low; around the W angle, is rocky,
broken, precipitous, and romantic; and along the SW,
the S, and the SE, breaks down in a richly varied
series of cliffs, often abrupt or mural, extensively
terraced and lofty, including all the magnificent range
known as the Undercliff, and everywhere replete with
scenic interest. The water-shed uniformly follows the
trending of the S coast; and is distant from it never
more than 2_ miles, generally less than 1 mile. A
range of downs extends about 6 miles from St.
Catherine?s Hill to Dunnose; rises from the shore,
with excessive steepness, to a height of nearly 800
feet; and is marked, along its steep sea-front, with the
picturesque terraces of the Undercliff. A diversified
range of downs extends about 22 miles, from the
Needles on the W to Culver cliff on the E;
commences in grand cliffs about 600 feet high; runs 9
miles nearly due east, in a single, sharp, steep ridge,
to Mottiston; attains there its highest altitude, at 662
feet above sea-level; makes several debouches in its
subsequent progress; suffers repeated cleaving and
disseverment, in the form of gaps or depressions;
assumes, for some distance, in the neighbourhood of
Carisbrooke, the character of a double or a triple
range; is, in some parts of its course, saddle-shaped
and slender,?in other parts, broad-based and
moundish; and divides the island into two pretty
nearly equal sections. A transverse ridge, about 400
feet high, extends about 3 miles in the contiguous to
the river Yar; and another transverse ridge, tame in
feature, but sometimes of considerable height,
extends between the Medina and the Brading. The
rest of the surface is either undulating or gently
sloping, and has little or no claim to be called
picturesque. The chief streams are the Yar, the
Newton, the Medina, the Wooton, and the Main or
Brading. The geognostic structure comprises chiefly
lower greensand in most of the S, chalk in part of the
centre, and upper eocene in most of the N; but
includes many details, possesses deep interest, and
may advantageously be studied with the aid of
Mantell?s and Martin?s manuals. [just the first
paragraph of a long entry]
The second example from the Imperial Gazetteer
demonstrates the main reason we need to do a limited
amount of work on the whole entry, not just the first
sentence.  For Binstead, the feature type clause is ?a
small village and a parish?, meaning that the place-name
is associated with more than one entity.  In extreme
cases, a single entry covers four distinct entities, so for
example Ledbury in Herefordshire was described as
being ?a small town, a parish, a sub-district and a
district?.  The last three of these terms are all distinct
entities within our ontology, and the entries for such
places are in fact divided into a series of sections, each
beginning with the type of sub-entry.  For Binstead, the
first part begins ?The village? and is just a single
sentence;  the second part begins ?The parish?.
The texts begin by being scanned in by a specialised
Optical Character Recognition system optimised for
historic materials, operated by our team based with the
Centre for Data Digitisation and Analysis at the Queen?s
University Belfast.  The OCR output is then visually
scanned and tidied up by Information Technology
trainees there, and delivered to the project?s main team
as Microsoft Word files replicating the source
documents as closely as possible.
The first stage in our work is breaking the text down
into the individual entries, each of which is then loaded
as a separate record into our database.  The way the text
so clearly divides into such discrete sections greatly
simplifies how we handle it.  One consequence is that,
for now, we are not applying any mark-up system to the
text itself, other than basic HTML tags to preserve basic
formatting, such as bold and italics.  Instead, additional
structure and search facilities are provided by adding
additional columns to the table.
What follows describes the parsing process for
entries from Bartholomew?s:
? Firstly, the end of the head word is identified simply
from it being in bold face, and the head word is
copied into another column.  NB with the gazetteers,
identifying the most important geographical name
within the text is fairly trivial.
? Entries which are cross-references are identified from
their containing specific phrases immediately after the
head word:  ?See?, ?also called XXX, which see?,
?another name of XXX, which see? and, at present,
?Welsh name of XXX, which see?.  The system then
searches for the cross-referenced name elsewhere in
the table.
? The system then tries to identify the feature type by
brute force methods:  all the strings immediately
following the headword in the first two thousand
entries were extracted and sorted, and the section
identifying the feature type isolated to give 410
distinct type strings.  Each of these was then marked
up firstly with a version of itself in which all
abbreviations were expanded, and secondly with three
flags indicating whether the type indicated the entry
was for a county, a parish or a borough.  Longer term,
these ?original? feature types will be mapped onto the
Alexandria Digital Library Gazetteer Feature Type
thesaurus.
? The next major stage is the identification of the
county, which almost every entry includes.  Our core
ontology contains a complete list of all counties in the
British Isles, together with some variant names.  We
know that one of these names must appear in each
entry, so brute force methods are used to find them,
starting with the first clause of the first sentence, then
looking at the second clause and so on up to the
eighth.
? A similar method is used to find parish names,
looking for various text strings which indicate a
reference to a parish, such as ?and forming part of
XXX? or ?the hamlet is in XXX?.  NB as we have
already identified the county, the system matches
only parish names in the correct county.
What current procedures do not do is systematically
associate each entry with a point location.  This may not
be necessary.  Almost every single entry is associated
with a county defined within our ontology, and the
county will be associated with a polygon.  Further, a
great many entries are also associated with parishes, or
actually are entries for a parish:  each parish covers a
few square miles, which is sufficiently precise for many
purposes.  However, we are examining methods for
linking each entry with a single grid reference.  Three
approaches are possible:
? In principle, it would be possible to parse the data on
relative locations within the entries, such as  ?16 m. S.
of Westport? or ?2 miles SW of Yarmouth?.
? In practice, we will first attempt to add locations by
running the entries against a modern gazetteer.  One
possibility is to use the Geo-X-walk gazetteer
constructed by collaborators at EDINA and query it
via the ADL gazetteer service protocol, using our
county polygons to specify the area to be searched.
? As always, neither method is likely to be totally
effective, and a small number of entries could be
located manually.
So far, we are not trying to systematically extract
other information from the entries.  Although parish and
district entries contain certain items of statistical data in
a largely predictable way, this is almost all taken from
census reports which we have separately computerised.
For example, the district entries always including data
on numbers attending each type of church, but this
comes from the report of the 1851 census of religion,
which we also hold.
We have built a demonstration system containing a
variety of information for the Isle of Wight, an island
and small county just off the south coast of England.
This includes all relevant entries from the Imperial
Gazetteer, and the system also includes the first 1,720
entries from Batholomew?s.  Of these, 54 are cross-
references to other entries, and of the remaining 1,666
the parsing software has associated 1,609 (97%) with
counties.  This system can be accessed on-line at:
http://www.gbhgis.org/demo_gaz.htm
Although this prototype currently lacks mapping
capabilities, it does show the high level of integration
we have been able to achieve between the descriptive
gazetteers and other content.
Summing up this discussion of our work with
descriptive gazetteers, the formulaic nature of the
original texts is of great assistance in automated parsing.
For any given type of entry, we know what kinds of
geographical names to expect:
? Subject : the name of the place itself.  Easily
identified as it is the head word.
? Containers:  higher level units that contain the
subject.  We always look for a county, and sometimes
look for a parish.  In either case, our existing database
provides an authoritative list of valid units.
? Relatives: these are the generally larger settlements
that are mentioned in relative locations.  Identifying
them from the surrounding phrasing should be
straightforward, and it may prove helpful in
identifying ?larger? places that our database also
contains a mass of population statistics.
3  Travellers? Accounts
The travellers? accounts are much less formulaic than
the descriptive gazetteers and constitute a smaller body
of text.  While work on the gazetteers is well advanced,
methodologies for the travel narratives are still being
explored and our expectation is that we will use semi-
manual methods, identifying place-names and other
elements by reading through the text but using software
to assist in adding mark-up.  The paper?s concern is not
with this process, but with what features we should be
identifying and how best to mark them up.
Celia Fiennes? travels in the 1690s are perhaps the
purest example of journeys both undertaken and
described for purely personal reasons.  They were
?begun to regain my health by variety and change of aire
and exercise? (p. ix), and her account was not published
for nearly two hundred years.  Here is her account of
visiting Stonhenge:
Thence 6 miles to Blandford, thence 18 to
Salsebury and 8 mile to Newtontony which stands
in y
e 
midst of y
e 
downs 8 mile from Andover a
market town in Hampshire and y
e 
roade to London.
It lyes 15 mile from Winchester?it is three mile
from Amesbury and 2 mile more to Stoneage that
stands on Salsebury plaine?eminent for many
battles being faught there?this Stoneage is
reckon'd one of the wonders of England how such
prodigeous stone should be brought there, as no
such Stone is seen in y
e 
Country nearer than 20
mile. They are placed on the side of a hill in a rude
jregullar form?two stones stands up and one laid
on their tops with morteses into each other and
thus are severall in a round like a wall with spaces
between, but some are fallen down, so spoyle the
order or breach in the temple, as some think it was
in the heathen tymes; others thinke it the Trophy
of some victory wone by one Ambrosious, and
thence the town by it has its name of. Amsebury.
There is severall rows of lesser stones within the
others set up in the same forme of 2 upright and
one lies on the top like a gateway. How they were
brought thither or whether they are a made stone is
not resolved? they are very hard yet I have seen
some of them scraped? the weather seemes not to
penetrate them. To increase the wonder of the
story is that none Can Count them twice alike?they
stand confused and some single stones at a
distance but I have told them often, and bring their
number to 91. This Country is most Champion and
open, pleasant for recreations?its husbandry is
mostly Corn and sheep, the Downs though short
grass y
e 
feed is sweet, producing the finest wooll
and sweet meat though but small.  (pp. 9-10)
We are also including narratives written by radical
agitators.  These reflect a personal interest which began
with tramping artisans and moved onto working class
autobiographies written by men who used the tramping
system (see Southall 1991a, 1991b, 1996).
Autobiographies generally described mobility in early
adulthood, artisans being encouraged to travel to widen
their experience after they completed their
apprenticeships but before they married.  Narratives
written long after the events described tend to describe
journeys very vaguely:  ?for sixteen months I tramped
through the principal towns of Middlesex, Lancashire,
and Yorkshire? or, unhelpfully, ?I need not follow my
wanderings for some years, as my life at that time was
of the ordinary kind.?  In contrast, the texts described
here as ?agitators? narratives? were written immediately
after the events described, and themselves formed part
of the agitation:  they typically appeared in the relevant
movement?s weekly or monthly newspapers.  For now,
we are concerned with three such narratives, although a
number of others have been examined:
The movements of Feargus O?Connor, arguably the
principal leader of the Chartists movement of the 1830s
and 1840s, were extensively reported in the Northern
Star, which he edited;  it also sold signed engravings of
him.  Scattered through the Star are a number of shorter
narratives.  For example, the issue of January 19
th
 1839
contained a 4,500 word letter describing an eight day
tour of Scotland.
Secondly, ?The Life and Rambles of Henry Vincent,
written by himself?, which appeared as a series of
articles in The Western Vindicator, a newspaper owned
and edited by Vincent.  The articles total c. 30,000
words, appeared in issues 3 (9th March 1839) to 13
(18th May 1839) and cover the period between February
26
th
 and May 10
th
 1839.  Vincent, the ?Demosthenes of
the West?, was arguably the leading figure in the
Chartist movement in the west of England and South
Wales.  The narrative ends with Vincent in Monmouth
gaol, and his release was the supposed aim of the
Newport uprising in October 1839.
Finally, a series of articles about and fairly clearly by
Edwin Russell, an organiser employed by the National
Agricultural Labourers? Union in the 1870s.  Between
September 1872 and February 1873 a series of articles
in the Labourers? Union Chronicle, totalling about
10,000 words, described Russell?s travels, mainly in
Herefordshire and Gloucestershire, in the autumn of
1872.
All narratives will reflect the biases of the author, and
both Cobbett and Young had well-defined agendas, but
the agitators? narratives are distinguished by the purpose
not of their writing but of the journeys themselves.  On
occasion they adopted the conventions of orthodox
travel writing;  here, for example is Vincent?s
description of his journey to Ledbury:
Took coach for Ledbury, in Herefordshire.  The
scenery along the road is very beautiful.  On the
right, within four miles of Ledbury, stands
Eastnor Castle, the residence of Lord Somers.
The castle is a fine building, situate on a piece of
rising ground, surrounded by a sheet of water, and
bounded on either side by extensive plantations.
The entrance into Ledbury is exceedingly pleasing.
To the right, amidst a profusion of trees and
shrubs, is Ledbury church.
However, their basic goal was not to describe places
but to change them, by creating new local branches of
their organisations and establishing a sense of solidarity
spanning places.  This was very much a job of work:
For March 27
th
 1839 Vincent reported:
A meeting was called in Newport for seven.
Just before the meeting commenced the dark
clouds rolled away ? the rain ceased ? and the
silver moon looked smilingly upon us.  We had
above 4000 persons present.  Edward Thomas took
the chair.  I delivered a thrilling oration to the
people, which produced a pleasing effect.  I felt in
excellent spirits and tone notwithstanding my
continued travelling and speaking;  for I find, on
calculating, I have spoke about two hours a day for
thirteen months, and travelled six thousand and
seventy-one miles.  The Newport boys are
advancing bravely.
Here is Russell:
I enrolled the 65 members? names on the
Madley branch book, filled up a lot of members?
cards, and put them in thorough good working
order, and I think now they will be able to go on,
but they do want  such a lot of leading and
guiding.  I then walked on to  Hereford, six or
seven miles, in the pouring rain, it pouring all the
way, and, as a consequence, I got wet though.  I
had a meeting planned for  tonight at Wellington,
but on account of the heavy rains which had fallen
the rivers Lugg and Wye have overflowed their
bank to such an extent that the roads are
impassable, and I could not go to Wellington, but
as I have got to arrange for a fortnight?s meeting
on the other side of the county, I shall not be able
this afternoon.
4   Marking-Up Travel Narratives
Given these sources, how can we organise them to
make them more accessible, and in particular to make it
possible for, firstly, users to access information on
specific places and, secondly, to generate maps of where
travellers went?  By now, this almost inevitably means
some kind of mark-up system, i.e. adding tags to the
text.  Both common sense and the requirements of the
program funding our work mean we should as far as
possible follow existing standards rather than invent our
own.  The obvious starting point is the work of the Text
Encoding Initiative (TEI).  The TEI?s Guidelines for
Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange were first
published in April 1994 and were initially based on
Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML).  The
current version, TEI P4, is also compatible with XML
(Extensible Markup Language), a subset of SGML
which is now far more widely used than its parent
(Sperberg-McQueen and Burnard, 2002).  The full
Guidelines can be downloaded from:
http://www.tei-c.org
The Guidelines are just that, and any specific project
will need a more specific mark-up system.  Before
discussing the facilities within the Guidelines for
identifying locations and geographic terms, it should be
noted that some key TEI-compatible mark-up schemes
make no use of them:
? ?TEI Lite? is defined by the TEI itself as ?a
manageable subset of the full TEI encoding scheme?,
but the only place-name tagging it provides for is
place of publication.
? The American Memory DTD (Document Type
Definition) was developed by the Library of Congress
to mark up historical texts included within its very
d i v e r s e  A m e r i c a n  M e m o r y  s y s t e m
(http://lcweb2.loc.gov/ammem).  This is of particular
interest to us as our project is a major component
within a consortium led by the British Library aiming
to create a UK equivalent to American Memory.
However, the AMS DTD again excludes geographical
and place-name tags, and in fact the introduction to
the DTD specifically states ?it is too expensive to
identify geographic names?.
? The Minnesota ?Women?s Travel Writing, 1830-
1930? project have developed a WTW DTD based on
the TEI.  They use a TEI-defined mechanism for
adding interpretative information on four themes:
ethnicity, gender marking, transportation and
women?s occupations.  However, they do not tag
place-names or geographic features.  They note that
issues have arisen in three main areas, gender,
language and geography, and that ?our work [on
geography] has not progressed as far as in the first
two categories? (Remnek et al.
This cannot pretend to be a systematic survey of TEI-
based DTDs, but it is still surprising that so little use is
made of the available facilities for geographical
description.  One project that is using these features is
the Perseus Project, primarily concerned with classical
literature.  Their work is described in Crane et al 2001,
but the remainder of this section discusses the facilities
provided by the overall TEI Guidelines for geographical
mark-up, and their suitability for travellers? tales.
Firstly, the Guideline allow simple tagging of place-
names such as:
I went from <placeName>New
York</placeName> to
<placeName>Boston</placeName>.
Additional attributes can be added to simplify
processing:  ?key? provides an alternative identifier for
the object being named, such as a database record key,
while ?reg? can provide a regularized form of the name
used so part of the earlier excerpt from Fiennes
becomes:
Thence 6 miles to <placeName
reg=?Blandford Forum?> Blandford
</placeName>, thence 18 to <placeName
reg=?Salisbury?>Salsebury </placeName>.
Secondly, they allow a degree of hierarchy to be
identified, which is often essential to eliminate
ambiguity in common place-names, so an excerpt from
Vincent would become:
Took coach for
<placeName>
  <settlement type="town">
Ledbury</settlement>, in <region
type="county">Herefordshire</region>
</placeName>.
Thirdly, they provide quite a sophisticated
mechanism for identifying relative locations via
?offsets?, so that Vincent?s statements that ?On the right,
within four miles of Ledbury, stands Eastnor Castle,
the residence of Lord Somers? becomes:
On the right, within <placeName>
   <distance>four miles</distance>
   <offset>of</offset>
   <settlement type="town">
      Ledbury</settlement>
   stands
   <name>Eastnor Castle</name>,
   </placeName>
the residence of Lord Somers?.
Finally, the <geog> tag can be used to identify types
of geographical features, so that an excerpt from Russell
would become:
? on account of the heavy rains which
had fallen the
<geogName>
   <geog>rivers</geog>
   <name>Lugg</name> and
   <name>Wye</name>
</geogName>
rivers Lugg and Wye
have overflowed their bank to such an
extent that the roads are impassable.
Overall, the TEI Guidelines try very hard to capture
locational information embedded within otherwise
unstructured text, although writing software to make
systematic use of some of these tag structures might be
complex.  However, enabling conversion of locational
information into spatial co-ordinates is only one part of
the problem of marking up travel narratives, and
arguably the least interesting.  Equally important is
understanding the role a reference to a place plays
within the text.  Consider this excerpt from Defoe:
From Lemster it is ten miles to Hereford, the
chief city, not of this county only, but of all the
counties west of Severn: 'Tis a large and a
populous city, and in the time of the late
Rebellion, was very strong, and being well
fortify?d, and as well defended, supported a
tedious and very severe siege; for besides the
Parliament's Forces, who could never reduce it, the
Scots army was call?d to the work, who lay before
it, 'till they laid above 4000 of their bones there,
and at last, it was rather taken by the fate of the
war, than by the attack of the besiegers.
Not far from Lidbury, is Colwal; near which,
upon the waste, as a countryman was digging a
ditch about his cottage, he found a crown or a
coronet of gold, with gems set deep in it. It was of
a size large enough to be drawn over the arm, with
the sleeve. The stones of it are said to have been so
valuable' as to be sold by a jeweller for fifteen
hundred pounds.
It is truly an old, mean built, and very dirty city,
lying low, and on the bank of Wye, which
sometimes incommodes them very much, by the
violent freshes that come down from the
mountains of Wales; for all the rivers of this
county, except the Driffin-Doe, come out of
Wales.
Defoe is describing a journey from north to south
from Shropshire through Herefordshire into Monmouth,
but his text refers to many places off the line of his
route:  the river Severn, about 30 miles east of Hereford;
the town of Ledbury, ten miles to the east and the
village of Colwall, fifteen miles east;  the mountains of
Wales to the west, where the rivers come from.  It
should be immediately obvious that while a computer
program could be written to map the locations named in
the text, and draw a series of lines between them
following their order of appearance, this would not be a
remotely accurate map of his route.  Further, the
relationship between the geographical names and the
text relating to them is complex.   The anecdote about
Colwall is both preceded and followed by information
about the city of Hereford;  and to some extent all of
this text should be seen as information about the county
of Herefordshire.
The problems become still larger when we examine
the agitators? narratives, where placed appear regularly
in their speeches as well as in descriptions of their
journeys, and geography provides an important part of
their rhetoric.  Consider this from a report of a speech
by O?Connor in 1838:
He could not conclude without expressing his
delight at having thus perfected the great chain
between London and Edinburgh and Glasgow.  All
the links were now perfect.  London, Newcastle,
Carlisle, Glasgow, and Edinburgh had now
become forged as it were together, and although
the wages of corruption were taken from the
provinces to support the idle in the metropolis, yet
a spirit was now growing up which nothing but
justice could put down.
The same basic metaphor, but used less
geographically, appears again here:
You cannot move partially, because you are as
one link in the great chain.  (Cheers.)  There is an
end to sectional agitation;  you are each
answerable to the other for the manner in which
you should handle this cause.  (Cheers.)  Society is
as a great chain.  On one end is a rotten link which
represents the Whigs, and on the other a rotten link
which represents the Tories (cheers and laughter);
while you, the people, form the bulk of the chain,
which is made stronger by the loss of the rotten
links.  (Cheers.)
Sometimes, of course, geographical names
themselves are used as metaphors.  Curiously, the TEI
Guidelines include this example:
After spending some time in our
<placeName key="NY1">modern
<placeName key="BA1">
Babylon</placeName></placeName>,
<placeName key="NY1">New
York</placeName>,
I have proceeded to the
<placeName key="PH1">City of Brotherly
Love</placeName>
In this case New York and Babylon are named together
in such a way that it is quite clear that the ?modern
Babylon? refers to New York.  However, the mark-up
does not really make this relationship clear, and one
wonders how the TEI would encode these excerpts from
early nineteenth century autobiographers:
A month?s stay in modern Babylon was quite
sufficient for me, and, gasping like a fish out of
water, I set my face towards the open country.
On entering the ?Modern Babylon? I was
almost confounded by its ?huge uproar? together
with the incessant bustle and hurry in which I
found myself suddenly involved.
Spent a night on the road then at about a quarter
to eleven I entered the modern Babylon.  The din
and bustle and the never ceasing stream of vehicles
of every description rattling backwards and
forwards here completely bewildered me.
In all three cases, it is entirely clear from the context
that ?Babylon? refers to London, and it is the use of one
placename as code for another that gives these excerpts
their interest.
The TEI Guidelines are designed to be extended, and
it is not too hard to envisage a set of additional tags or
keywords designed to bring out how a geographical
name is being used within the text of a travel narrative.
The main possibilities would seem to be:
? As the author?s current location.
? As a reference back to a previous location.
? As a reference forward to a planned location.
? As a reference to a place which is not part of the
author?s route.
? As a metaphor for another place.
As important is a mechanism for associating sections
of text with specific place-names, and this needs to
embody some notion of hierarchy:  even in the most
conventional linear narrative, a series of descriptions of
villages passed through also form a description of some
larger area.
5   Conclusion
This paper is an initial discussion of a large topic,
mainly concerned with practical examples and
problems.
Although the descriptive gazetteers and travellers?
accounts are very different kinds of material, the second
far less structured than the first, in both cases analysis
requires not simply the identification of place-names but
an identification of their roles.
With the gazetteer entries, identifying the actual
subject of each entry is trivial, as it always appears at
the very beginnings of each entry.  However, to
discover the geographical location of each entry we
need to extract additional ?containing? place-names.
This is also relatively straightforward provided these
names appear in our existing ontology/gazetteer.  This is
well illustrated by one of the few mistakes made by the
existing parsers:  the following entry is placed in Dorset,
a mainland county, because the Channel Islands did not
appear in the gazetteer:
? Alderney, one of the Channel Islands, about 7 miles
from the coast of Normandy and 50.miles SE. from
Portland Bill, Dorset; separated from Cape La Hague
in France by the Race of Alderney.
Roles in the travellers? tales are clearly more diverse,
and harder to define, but some notion of subjects,
containers and relatives still seems appropriate, along
with the rarer but more interesting metaphors.  Work is
clearly needed to extend and possibly to substantially
change current mark-up systems to capture such
information.
References
Gregory Crane, Clifford E. Wulfman, David A. Smith.
2001. Building a Hypertextual Digital Library in the
Humanities: A Case Study on London.  Paper
presented at JCDL 2001, Roanoke, Virginia, June
2001. (www.perseus.tufts.edu/Articles/jcdl01.pdf)
Remnek, M.B., Skemp, B. and Wadsworth, S.,
?Technologizing Women's Travel Writing: Issues &
Implications?, available on-line from WTW site.
Sperberg-McQueen, C.M.. and Burnard, L., eds. 2002.
TEI P4: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and
Interchange. Text Encoding Initiative Consortium.
XML Version: Oxford, Providence, Charlottesville,
Bergen.
Humphrey Southall. 1991. The tramping artisan revisits:
labour mobility and economic distress in early
Victorian England Economic History Review, 2nd
ser., 44: 272-96.
Humphrey Southall. 1991. Mobility, the Artisan
Community, and Popular Politics in early nineteenth
century England. In G. Kearns and C.W. Withers
(eds.) Urbanising Britain:  class and community in
the nineteenth century.  Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
Humphrey Southall. 1996. Agitate! Agitate! Organise!:
Political travellers and the construction of a national
politics, 1839-1880. Transactions of the Institute of
British Geographers, NS, 21: 177-93.
