c? 2003 Association for Computational Linguistics
Document Structure
Richard Power? Donia Scott?
University of Brighton University of Brighton
Nadjet Bouayad-Agha?
University Pompeu Fabra
We argue the case for abstract document structure as a separate descriptive level in the anal-
ysis and generation of written texts. The purpose of this representation is to mediate between the
message of a text (i.e., its discourse structure) and its physical presentation (i.e., its organization
into graphical constituents like sections, paragraphs, sentences, bulleted lists, figures, and foot-
notes). Abstract document structure can be seen as an extension of Nunberg?s ?text-grammar?;
it is also closely related to ?logical? markup in languages like HTML and LaTEX. We show that
by using this intermediate representation, several subtasks in language generation and language
understanding can be defined more cleanly.
1. Introduction
When language is written, it appears as a collection of words set out on one or more
(actual or virtual) pages. In fact, much of what we tend to call ?text? has a strong
graphical component (Schriver 1997; Scott and Power 2001). Not only are the words
often accompanied by conventional graphics such as pictures or diagrams, but they
themselves form graphical elements such as titles, headings, chapters, sections, cap-
tions, paragraphs, and bulleted lists.
The overlay of graphics on text is in many ways equivalent to the overlay of
prosody on speech. Just as all speech has prosody (even if it is a monotone), so too do
all texts have layout (even if it is simple wrapped format, in a single face and font, and
makes rudimentary use of white space). And just as prosody undoubtedly contributes
to the meaning of utterances, so too does a text?s graphical presentation contribute to its
meaning. However, although there is a long tradition and rich linguistic framework for
describing and representing speech prosody (e.g., Halliday 1967; Chomsky and Halle
1968; Crystal 1969; Bolinger 1972; Pierrehumbert 1980; ?t Hart, Collier, and Cohen 1990;
Ladd 1996), the same is not true for text layout. Perhaps not surprisingly, therefore, few
natural language understanding (NLU) systems use graphical presentational features
to aid interpretation, and few natural language generation (NLG) systems attempt to
render the output texts in a principled way.
Of course, since all texts have a graphical dimension, all NLG systems will, by
definition, produce laid-out texts. In all but a few recent cases (the ICONOCLAST sys-
tem (Power 2000; Bouayad-Agha, Power, and Scott 2000; Bouayad-Agha, Scott, and
Power 2001; Bouayad-Agha 2001) and the DArtbio system (Bateman et al 2001)), this
is achieved by mapping directly from the underlying discourse structure (Arens and
? Information Technology Research Institute, University of Brighton, Lewes Road, Brighton BN2 4GJ,
UK. Email: {firstname.lastname}@itri.bton.ac.uk.
? Departament de Tecnologia, University Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. Email: Nadjet.Bouayad@
tecm.upf.es.
212
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
Hovy 1990; DiMarco et al 1995; Paris et al 1995; Power and Cavallotto 1996; Lavoie
and Rambow 1997; Mittal et al 1998). In other cases, the text is mapped onto pre-
determined genre-specific layout patterns?for example, for verbalizing mathematical
proofs (Huang and Fiedler 1997) or producing letters for customers (Coch 1996). If we
take, as most do, the level of discourse structure as representative of the underlying
message of a text, such systems are subject to a fundamental limitation. Simply put, for
each message there will be but one possible form of presentation.
As an illustration let us briefly consider the well-known consensus architecture
for NLG systems proposed by Reiter (1994). This architecture, based on a survey
of NLG systems from the 1980s and early 1990s, takes the form of a ?pipeline? in
which five modules are applied in sequence: content determination, sentence planning,
surface generation, morphology, and formatting. Sentence planning maps ?conceptual
structures into linguistic ones . . . grouping information into clauses and sentences?
(Reiter 1994, page 164), but formatting (specified, for example, by LaTEX markup) occurs
only in the final formatting stage. In consequence, the organization of material into
paragraphs, bulleted lists, etc., is considered only after the wording has been fixed.
Graphical presentation, however, clearly interacts with wording. For example, the
section of a message that, at the level of discourse, is composed of a list relation,
will be expressed differently depending on whether, at the presentational level, it is
mapped onto a vertical or horizontal list. Consider a simple example like the following,
taken from a patient information leaflet (PIL):
(1) Are you taking any of the following:
? Anticoagulants?
? Lithium?
? Methotrexate?
? Any other medicines which your doctor does not know about?
(Voltarol leaflet, Geigy; from APBI 1997)
If the very same content were presented instead as a horizontal list, we would expect
to get something like:
(2) Are you taking anticoagulants, lithium, methotrexate, or any other medicines which
your doctor does not know about?
Now all the information is packed into one sentence, with some missing and addi-
tional words, wildly different punctuation, and less generous use of upper-case letters.1
Mapping directly from discourse structure to graphical presentation during generation
therefore limits not only the choice of possible layout, but also the choice of possible
wording.
There have been some recent attempts to develop NLG systems that generate doc-
uments rather than just texts. Instead of producing text plans, they produce document
plans. Typically these are the text plans of old (i.e., structures of ordered content ele-
ments represented in terms of rhetorical structure theory (Mann and Thompson 1986,
1987)), but extended to include pictures or diagrams as content elements, and with
additional annotations for metalevel elements such as paragraph or sentence bound-
aries. Figure 1 shows the type of document plan proposed by Reiter and Dale (2000).
1 Indeed, it appears to be the case that the more graphical the presentation is, the greater the difference
in wording is likely to be over the unmarked case of plain text (Bouayad-Agha, Scott, and Power 2000).
213
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
still very depleted.  Heavy rain fell on the 27th and 28th.
The month was slightly warmer than average with almost exactly the average rainfall, but rainfall for the year is 
Weather Summary for July 1996
DocumentPlan 
Relation = Sequence
Document Plan
Relation = NarrativeSequence
RainEventMsg
     [28th]
DocumentPlan
Relation = Contrast
DPDocument
Title = "Weather Summary for July 1996"
Relation = Sequence
RainEventMsg
     [27th]
MonthlyTemperatureMsg
MonthlyRainfallMsg TotalRainSoFarMsg
Nucleus Satellite
Figure 1
A document plan and associated text (Reiter and Dale 2000).
Although this approach allows for a more reasoned presentational format, by conflat-
ing discourse and presentational features into one structure, the possible generated
expressions of any given message are once again strongly limited relative to the set of
all possible valid expressions.
We wish to argue the case for a separate descriptive level in the analysis and gen-
eration of written texts, which we will call document structure. Informally, document
structure describes the organization of a document into graphical constituents like
sections, paragraphs, sentences, bulleted lists, and figures; it also covers some features
within sentences, including quotation and emphasis. Although document structure
applies equally to NLU and NLG, we will focus our attention here on its role in the
generation of appropriate presentations (both wording and layout) of texts. As we will
try to show, texts (unless they are fairly simple) cannot be produced to a satisfactory
standard unless document structure is specified earlier in the process than suggested
in previous works (e.g., Reiter 1994; Reiter and Dale 2000), so that interactions with
meaning and wording are taken into account.
The plan of the article is as follows. In section 2 we explain more fully what we
mean by document structure, acknowledging its origins in Nunberg?s (1990) work and
text markup languages such as LaTEX and HTML. Section 3 discusses the relationship
of document structure to rhetorical organization and syntax. Section 4 presents the
formal theory of document structure, and Section 5 shows how it is applied in the
ICONOCLAST system. Finally, Section 6 summarizes the argument and discusses some
other approaches to the representation and generation of layout.
214
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
2. Defining Document Structure
2.1 Nunberg?s Text Grammar
Our point of departure has been the theory of text structure proposed by Nunberg
(1990) in The Linguistics of Punctuation. This book introduces two crucial clarifications.
First, it distinguishes text structure,2 which is realized by punctuation and layout, from
syntactic structure. Second, it distinguishes abstract features of text structure from the
concrete (or graphical) features through which they are expressed.
The distinction between text structure and syntax can best be explained by consid-
ering two interpretations of the word sentence. In linguistics, sentence is used mainly as
a syntactic category, defined by phrase structure rules such as S ? NP+VP. However,
a sentence can also be viewed orthographically as a portion of text starting with a
capital letter and ending in a period; to distinguish this from the syntactic category,
Nunberg calls it a text-sentence. Sometimes the two categories of sentence coincide,
but often they do not. Thus in the following passage:
(3) He entered the office. Disaster. The safe was open and the money had gone.
the first text-sentence is also a syntactic sentence, but the second is merely a noun,
and the third comprises two syntactic sentences (or three, if we count the whole as
well as its parts). Nunberg argues that if we have two kinds of category, then we need
two kinds of grammar: he calls them the lexical grammar (we prefer syntactic gram-
mar) and the text-grammar. In addition to text-sentence, the text-categories include
text-clause, paragraph, and section, and the text-grammar allows us to formulate con-
stituent structure rules such as
St ? Ct+
meaning that a text-sentence comprises one or more text-clauses.
In introducing the concepts text-sentence, text-clause, etc., it is convenient to explain
them in terms of their realization in punctuation and layout: thus a text-sentence
starts with a capital letter and ends in a period; a text-clause ends in a semicolon;
a paragraph begins on a new line with a tab. However, this is not strictly correct.
In Nunberg?s theory, these concepts represent abstract structural properties of the text
that may be realized differently according to context or convention. In the case of
paragraph this distinction is obvious, since we are all familiar with several devices for
expressing paragraph boundaries: instead of a new line with a tab, for example, an
editor might prefer two new lines (or some other vertical space) with no tab. However,
the abstract/concrete distinction also applies to the other text-categories. For example,
the passage:
(4) The safe was open; the money had gone.
contains two text-clauses, but the second has no semicolon because its ending coincides
with the closure of a larger unit, a text-sentence, which is marked by a period. Similarly,
the stop at the end of a text-sentence is often dropped when the sentence is an item
2 This should not be confused with the use of this term within the NLG literature to refer to the
discourse structure of a text.
215
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
in a vertical list, for instance, in a sequence of instructions:
(5) To save the file:
1. Open the Save dialogue-box
2. Enter the filename
3. Click on the Save button
Thus text structure is realized by punctuation (and layout), but the two are not equiv-
alent.
2.2 Markup Languages
Nunberg?s notion of text structure, or our wider notion of document structure, has an
obvious connection to the markup languages (e.g., LaTEX, SGML) now in common use
as a method for specifying layout in an ASCII source file. The common philosophy
of these languages is that markup should abstract from the visual appearance of the
document, using concepts like paragraph that might be realized graphically in different
ways, depending on a separate style definition.
This approach has several advantages, of which the most obvious is flexibility.
An exact specification of the desired spatial layout can yield only one printed form
of the document; by employing abstract categories, definitions using LaTEX or SGML
can produce a range of printed forms, depending on which style file is used. Less
obviously, the markup language can be tailored to the genre of the document, so that,
for example, a poem may have a constituent marked stanza, whereas a letter may have
one marked address.
In practice, this separation of abstract structure from visual realization is not car-
ried through consistently; for reasons of convenience, authors sometimes prefer to
have direct control over appearance. Thus LaTEX, for example, allows both the abstract
tag em, meaning emphasis, and the visual tag it, meaning italic face. Vertical separation
is usually achieved through abstract tags like section and itemize but may also be
imposed directly using vspace. All these devices have counterparts in HTML: thus
a typical reference guide to HTML (Ford and Dixon 1996) explicitly distinguishes
?logical? tags such as <EM> from ?visual? tags such as <I>.
More subtly, the markup languages in common use do not attempt to cover struc-
tural units that are realized through punctuation rather than layout. Paragraphs may
be marked (albeit implicitly in LaTEX), but lower units such as text-sentence and text-
clause are not. No doubt there are good practical reasons for this approach, but some
opportunities for stylistic variation are thereby lost. Consider, for example, the simple
case of reported speech in example (6a). If this were marked up as a sentence contain-
ing a quotation, it could be punctuated differently, with the period outside the closing
quotation mark (6b), perhaps, or using double quote (6c), or even using a dash with
no quotation marks at all (6d) (as in James Joyce?s Ulysses):
(6)
(a) She said ?Come up and see me sometime.?
(b) She said ?Come up and see me sometime?.
(c) She said ?Come up and see me sometime.?
(d) She said?Come up and see me sometime.
Thus although markup languages provide some guidance toward a formal treat-
ment of document structure, they often deviate, for practical reasons, from the philo-
sophical ideal of separating abstract structure from visual presentation. On the one
216
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
hand, some tags (e.g., italic face) are clearly visual and should not be included in
abstract document structure at all. On the other hand, some abstract categories (e.g.,
text-sentence, quoted speech) are omitted from the tag set and thus cannot be realized
in a range of different graphical styles.
Despite these compromises, markup languages are based on a key insight that is
highly relevant to natural language analysis and generation: layout can be matched to
wording through the mediation of abstract document structure. Consider the following three
versions of a passage adapted from a patient information leaflet:
(7)
(a) Elixir is a white cream.
It is used in the treatment of cold sores.
It contains aliprosan. This is effective against a range of viral skin disorders.
It should be used only on your lips and face.
(b) Elixir is a white cream.
It is used in the treatment of cold sores.
It contains aliprosan. This is effective against a range of viral skin disorders.
It should be used only on your lips and face.
(c) Elixir is a white cream. It is used in the treatment of cold sores. It contains aliprosan.
This is effective against a range of viral skin disorders. N.B. Elixir should be used only
on your lips and face.
Suppose that example (7a) has been produced by author A, a novice in document
design, and passed to a more experienced designer B for revision. The passage looks
odd because it has four very short paragraphs, but short paragraphs are common
in this genre, and B decides that the ugly appearance can be corrected simply by
realizing paragraphs through a vertical space with no tab. In addition, B notices that
boldface has been used for two different purposes: highlighting the product name
and emphasizing only; this ambiguity is removed by changing emphatic boldface to
small caps. Both these revisions, shown in version (7b), concern realization rather than
abstract structure, and consequently they do not affect the validity of the wording.
For final checking the passage is then passed to a senior expert C, whose prefer-
ences are more traditional: in particular, C dislikes short paragraphs and variations
in typeface. Glaring at the waste of space in version (7b), C takes out the paragraph
boundaries and removes the emphasis on only. These are not merely changes in graph-
ical realization: they also affect the abstract document structure. In general, such changes
endanger the validity of the wording. Reading through the new version, C notices that the
pronoun it in the final sentence now seems to refer to aliprosan, not Elixir, so it has
to be replaced by the product name. To reinstate the emphasis in this sentence, C also
inserts the expression N.B. These changes lead to version (7c).
In summary, abstract document structure interacts with wording, whereas visual
realization does not. This principle explains why abstract markup is useful; it also
shows where the boundary should be drawn. By applying this principle, we might
discover that a category previously treated as visual should be reclassified as abstract.
If, for example, the change in the realization of paragraph boundaries in examples
like version (7b) required a rewording of the text, we would have to extend our set
of abstract document categories so that there were two types of paragraph instead of
one.
217
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
3. Document Structure and Rhetorical Structure
3.1 Form and Meaning
Logically there are four possible relationships between document structure (DS) and
rhetorical structure (RS): either DS is part of RS, or RS is part of DS, or they partially
overlap, or they are distinct from one another. Our view is that they should be distinct,
just as syntax is distinct from semantics. Document structure, like syntax, describes
the form of a (mainly) linguistic product. Rhetorical structure, like semantics, describes
meaning, interpreting meaning in a broad sense that includes pragmatic features.
As an example, suppose that approve(fda, elixir) is a semantic formula meaning that
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approves the medicine Elixir. This semantic
formula can be realized (in English) through a range of syntactic forms, including
[S [NP [DET the][N FDA]][VP [V approves][NP Elixir]]]
which would yield ?the FDA approves Elixir?; alternative syntactic forms could be
obtained by replacing descriptions with pronouns, or by putting the whole sentence
into the passive (e.g., ?it is approved by the FDA?). Now, suppose that we add a
second semantic formula contain(elixir, gestodene), and suppose that the author knows
that gestodene is a controversial ingredient. On this basis, a rhetorical relation of
concession might be applied to the two formulas:
concession(contain(elixir, gestodone), approve(fda, elixir))
where the second argument of concession is the central one and is supported by the
first argument.3 To realize this more complex message, we may need a linguistic form
that cannot be described only by a syntactic phrase marker. In other words, we need
to consider document structure as well as syntax. Ignoring possibilities for variations
in the wording of the constituent propositions and assuming that concession may be
marked with the discourse connectives although and however, we can choose among
the following realizations of the whole message:
(8)
(a) Although Elixir contains gestodene, it is approved by the FDA.
(b) The FDA approves Elixir although it contains gestodene.
(c) Elixir contains gestodene; however, it is approved by the FDA.
(d) Elixir contains gestodene. However, it is approved by the FDA.
(e) Elixir contains gestodene.
However, it is approved by the FDA.
In versions (8a) and (8b), the rhetorical relationship is realized within a single
syntactic sentence, although before adding punctuation we need to know that this
syntactic sentence is also a text-sentence. In versions (8c)?(8e), the arguments of the
concession relation are expressed in separate syntactic sentences, so that the rela-
tionship is realized through document structure as well as syntax. In each case, the
3 These are termed nucleus and satellite in RST (Mann and Thompson 1987).
218
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
units realizing the arguments are coordinated in document structure, satellite precedes
nucleus, and the discourse connective however is placed within the nucleus.
Our claim, then, is that document structure combines with syntax in the real-
ization of the meaning of a document, and that rhetorical structure should be re-
garded as part of meaning, not part of document structure. However, as we will now
show, this principle of clear separation of meaning and form has not always been
observed.
3.2 Rhetorical Structure Theory
Rhetorical structure theory (Mann and Thompson 1986, 1987) was developed as a
method of analyzing the rhetorical organization of texts. Formally, the theory is re-
markably simple. It proposes that a text can be analyzed, by rhetorical function, into
a set of nested spans, each span being represented by a node on an ordered tree. Each
nonterminal node on this tree is labeled with a single term describing the relationship
that holds among its constituents. These constituents may have equal importance, in
which case the relation is said to be multinuclear, or one may be rhetorically subor-
dinated to the other, in which case they are said to fulfill the roles of satellite and
nucleus. Although this scheme is obviously intended as a first approximation, it has
been widely adopted, not only by literary analysts, but also by computational linguists,
especially in the NLG community.
One aspect of RST, perhaps more presentational than substantial, has led, in our
view, to confusion: both in the text of their article and the accompanying diagrams,
Mann and Thompson seem to assert that rhetorical relations hold between spans of
text, rather than between the meanings of these texts. In other words, they treat rhetor-
ical structure as part of document structure. Mann and Thompson assert this explicitly
(1987, page 4):
Relations are defined to hold between two non-overlapping text spans,
here called the nucleus and the satellite, denoted by N and S.
where
A text span is an uninterrupted linear sequence of text.
However, it is unclear whether their claim is intentional or simply the result of an
informal style of presentation.
Would it make any sense to treat rhetorical relations as holding literally between
text spans? For clearly pragmatic relations, such as restatement, this seems a possible
position. A text span, after all, is an instrument of the writer, so it makes sense to make
a statement about the function that the instrument is supposed to serve. For clearly
semantic relations, such as nonvolitional-cause, the position is harder to maintain.
In a text like ?Mary was sad because she lost her doll?, the causal relation plainly holds
between two events, not between two spans of text.
Leaving aside intuitive plausibility, the crucial question, we think, is whether the
argument in a document can be formalized without reference to the particular text
spans through which it is realized. Could the same argument be realized by two
English texts with a different structure, or by an English text and a French text? Could
someone forget a text but remember its argument? If so, it must be possible to treat
relations like concession and nonvolitional-cause as holding between ideas rather
than units of text. Rather than creating two kinds of rhetorical relation, it seems more
parsimonious to treat the relation between ideas as primary, so that the argument of
219
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
concession
NUCLEUSSATELLITE
however, it is approved by the FDA.Elixir contains gestodene; 
concession
The FDA approves Elixir although it contains gestodene.
NUCLEUS SATELLITE
(8c)
(8b)
Figure 2
RST analysis.
a document can be planned before the writer (or NLG system) has considered issues
of wording or linear order.4
To illustrate this point, let us go back to example (8). Suppose that we want to
show that versions (8b) and (8c) express the same argument.
(8b) The FDA approves Elixir although it contains gestodene.
(8c) Elixir contains gestodene; however, it is approved by the FDA.
Figure 2 shows RST annotations for these texts, on the assumption that rhetorical
relations hold between text spans; note, incidentally, that since related spans must
be consecutive, the discourse connectives although and however have to be included
somewhat arbitrarily in one span or the other. These annotations fail to bring out that
the two texts express the same argument, since at a textual level the spans in (8b) and
(8c) are simply different, both in wording and position.
In Figure 3, instead, different document structures are specified for versions (8b)
and (8c) and linked to a common rhetorical structure; the dotted arrows express the
relation realizes, so that, for example, each text-sentence realizes the whole rhetori-
cal structure governed by the concession relation. Note that rhetorical structures are
always unordered, whereas document structures are ordered trees. Thus the two un-
ordered propositions in the rhetorical structure of Figure 3 are realized in different
orders in the two document structures.
This distinction between rhetorical structure and document structure accounts for
some of the difficulties encountered when RST is applied as an analytic tool. The
core of the problem is that when faced with a text to analyze, the analyst applies the
principles of RST analysis to the text itself rather than to the message underlying the
text. What the analyst really needs to do is, in some way, to ?get behind the text?
to its constituent propositions and the rhetorical relations that hold between them
(Scott and Paris 1995). But instead, by applying relations to text-spans, he or she is
heavily constrained by the evident document structure of the text, and the result is a
rhetorical structure that is isomorphic to the document structure. However, as we have
4 This proposal was first made by Scott and Souza (1990).
220
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
TEXT?SENTENCE
TEXT?PHRASE TEXT?PHRASE
TEXT?PHRASE
although
Elixir is approved by the FDA
it contains gestodene
TEXT?PHRASE
TEXT?SENTENCE
TEXT?CLAUSE TEXT?CLAUSE
Elixir contains gestodene
TEXT?PHRASE TEXT?PHRASE
however it is approved by the FDA
approve(fda, elixir) contain(elixir, gestodene)
SATELLITE
concession
NUCLEUS
RHETORICAL STRUCTURE DOCUMENT STRUCTURE (8c)DOCUMENT STRUCTURE (8b)
Figure 3
Document structure realizes rhetorical structure.
seen from the above example, the underlying rhetorical structure is not necessarily
isomorphic to the document structure;5 this means that the analysis obtained in this
way is not necessarily an accurate representation of the actual discourse structure
of the text. Consider, for example, the following excerpt from a patient information
leaflet:
(9) IF you find your condition gets worse during treatmentA you may be allergic to the
creamD or have a skin infectionE.
STOP USING THE CREAMB AND TELL YOUR DOCTOR AS SOON AS POSSIBLEC
(Betnovate leaflet, Glaxo; from APBI 1997)
Careful reading of the text, combined with world knowledge, suggests that the
following logical condition holds between the propositional content of A and the pair
B and C:
IF <condition of patient worsens during treatment>
THEN <patient must stop taking cream>
AND <patient must tell patient?s doctor>
ENDIF
In other words, the rhetorical relation of condition holds between A as satellite and
the complex of B and C (joined by a list relation) as nucleus. We learn additionally
that the reason why the patient must carry out the imperative actions of B and C is
that he or she may be either allergic to the cream (D) or have a skin infection (E). In
other words, there is a causal relation between the complex of B and C (the effect) and
complex of D and E (the cause). Representing all this in RST would yield the structure
in Figure 4.
Most people would probably agree that what is depicted in the RST structure
shown in Figure 4 captures the intended meaning of the text in the example, and that
the text itself is of reasonable quality. However, a traditional RST analysis (i.e., of the
text itself, as opposed to its underlying meaning) would not be able to produce the
structure shown here. To explicate, let us go through what the typical RST analyst
would do with this text.
The analyst would probably start by segmenting the text into elementary ?text
spans? (i.e., clauses); this would lead to the same assignment of A?E given above. The
next step would focus on the first sentence: the discourse marker if clearly suggests
the condition relation; similarly, the marker or suggests the alternative relation.
So far so good. However, the next step would be to find a relation that holds among
5 This is discussed in more detail in Bouayad-Agha, Power, and Scott (2000) and Bouayad-Agha (2001)
and in section 5.3.
221
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
PARAGRAPH
TEXT?SENTENCE
TEXT?PHRASETEXT?PHRASE TEXT?PHRASE TEXT?PHRASE
TEXT?PHRASE
TEXT?SENTENCE
D E
B
CA
D EC
list alternative
cause
condition
A
B
SN
N S
RHETORICAL STRUCTURE DOCUMENT STRUCTURE
Figure 4
Document structure is not always isomorphic with rhetorical structure.
SN
list
N
N N NN
C D E
A
B
alternative
condition
S
result
Figure 5
Analysis when RST is applied directly to text.
the text spans in the sentence; if this cannot be done, then according to the tenets of
RST, the text is not coherent. Following this rule, the analyst is likely to make D and E
the components of the identified (multinuclear) alternative relation. Next he would
attempt to assign the satellite and nucleus of the identified condition relation; the
choice would be between A and the complex of D and E. Since the marker if must
attach to the satellite of condition, the answer seems clear:
condition(alternative(D,E),A)
(corresponding to the RST structure shown in Figure 5). But it is also clearly wrong,
since we know from our semantic analysis that what really holds is that shown in
Figure 4:
condition(list(B,C),A)
Indeed, even the layout of the text reinforces, through the use of capital letters, the
strong relationship between A and the pair B and C.
In principle, an RST structure that is derived from the analysis of a given text
should, when used as the input to an NLG system, produce the very same text and
other semantically equivalent versions of it. By separating rhetorical structure from doc-
ument structure, we can now provide a coherent framework for achieving this result.
222
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
For instance, we can now produce not only the original text of example (9) (shown
here with neutral layout):
(9b) If you find your condition gets worse during treatment, you may be
allergic to the cream or have a skin infection. Stop using the cream and
tell your doctor as soon as possible.
but also the following (in some contexts perhaps better) variant
(9c) If you find your condition gets worse during treatment, stop using the
cream and tell your doctor as soon as possible; you may be allergic to
the cream or have a skin infection.
Of course, NLG systems that ignore the level of document structure would still be able
to produce the text in version (9b) from the RST structure in Figure 5, but they would
not be able to produce version (9c). Moreover, they could also end up producing the
following incorrect text:6
(9c) # Stop using the cream and tell your doctor as soon as possible because
you may be allergic to the cream or have a skin infection if your
condition gets worse during treatment.
A number of other researchers have identified cases in which ?orthodox? RST
analysis of a text is problematic (e.g., Moore and Pollack 1992; Moser and Moore 1996;
Knott et al 2001). For example, Knott et al (2001) report on texts from a corpus of
museum labels that violate the RST principle of continuous constituency (i.e., adjacent
units must be linked by a relation) but are nonetheless coherent. These are cases in
which the satellite of a relation is not adjacent to its own nucleus in the text. In
all the texts that Knott et al discuss, the ?dislocated? relation is elaboration, and
they attribute the source of the problem to the relation itself: elaboration is not, they
claim, a proper relation; it is a very weak relation that commands a different treatment
from the other stronger ones.
Although there may well be a strong case to be made for the ?demotion? of
elaboration and for a special treatment of it in NLG systems, the phenomenon
of dislocated satellites that Knott et al (2001) describe is not, in fact, confined to
elaboration. Indeed, it corresponds precisely to the problem we have just seen with
example (9), which involves not elaboration, but condition. We have also reported
elsewhere other similar examples of nonisomorphic rhetorical and document structures
(Bouayad-Agha, Power, and Scott 2000). In all cases that we have seen, the principles of
RST (e.g., compositionality, nuclearity, continuous constituency) appear to be violated
only because they are being applied (in the orthodox manner) to the surface text
(i.e., at the level of document structure) rather than more properly to the underlying
propositional structure of the text (i.e., at the level of rhetorical structure).
But why would one want to produce a text whose document structure is not iso-
morphic with its rhetorical structure? One rather practical reason is that as a rhetorical
structure becomes more complex, it becomes increasingly difficult for the writer to pro-
duce a text that satisfies both the demands of coherence (as defined by theories such
6 This text would result from systems that treat the leaves of a rhetorical or text plan as ordered.
223
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
as RST) and those of syntax. This happens quite frequently, for example, with condi-
tionals: syntax dictates that expressions using the subordinating discourse marker if
must have the antecedent and consequent in the same sentence. For example:
(10) If you eat too many sweets, you will become ill.
but not
(11) # If you eat too many sweets. You will become ill.
As the consequent or its antecedent becomes more complex, the chances of satis-
fying the syntactic constraints are reduced. Here is a typical example from a PIL:
(12) If you get any of the following:
Stomach pain, indigestion, heartburn or feeling sick for the first time.
Any sign of bleeding in the stomach or intestine, for example, passing black
stools.
. . .
An unexpected change in the amount of urine produced and/or its
appearance.
STOP taking the tablets and tell your doctor.
(Voltarol leaflet, Geigy; from APBI 1997)
Here the conditional is expressed within one big sentence that itself contains several
other sentences?indeed, paragraphs?each describing a set of symptoms organized
around areas of the body. In writing this text, the author has clearly chosen to remain
faithful to the rhetorical structure at the expense of syntax.
At other times, such as the example in Figure 6, taken from Knott et al (2001), it
is the rhetorical structure that loses out. In this case, the author has decided that the
content of the satellite associated with (9) warrants its own paragraph (perhaps for
reasons to do with its size).
4. Formal Theory of Document Structure
We will describe here the formal theory of document structure that we have developed
as part of the ICONOCLAST system (Power 2000; Bouayad-Agha, Power, and Scott
2000; Bouayad-Agha 2000; Bouayad-Agha, Scott, and Power 2001), which generates
multiple versions of the same message in different styles (i.e., with different wording
and layout). In describing the theory, we will concentrate on units above the level
of text-sentence; our treatment of the lower levels varies only slightly from that in
Nunberg?s theory, which is described in great detail in Nunberg (1990).
4.1 Basic Hierarchy of Document Units
Informally it seems clear that units of document structure are ranked: sentences are
grouped into paragraphs, paragraphs into sections, sections into chapters, and so forth.
The hierarchy of categories differs from one document type to another, but there is
always some hierarchy;7 there might for instance be subsubsections and subsections
7 Exceptionally, some elements?in particular, footnotes and pictures?will be ?floating.?
224
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
2 3 . . .
. . .
. . .< >
. . .< >
(1) In the women?s quarters the business of running the household took place.
(2) Much of the furniture was made up of chests (3) arranged vertically in matching
pairs. ... (4) Female guests were entertained in these rooms, (5) which often had
beautifully carved wooden toilet boxes (6) with fold?away mirrors and sewing
boxes, (7) and folding screens, (8) painted with birds and flowers.
(9) Chests were used for storage of clothes. ...
1
N S
DOCUMENT STRUCTURE
4 8
TEXT
PARAGRAPH
TEXT?SENTENCETEXT?SENTENCETEXT?SENTENCE
PARAGRAPH
1
N S
N N
4 8
TEXT?SENTENCE
9
3
RHETORICAL STRUCTURE
2
N S
N S
9
Figure 6
Another example of nonisomorphic rhetorical and document structures.
between paragraphs and sections. As a basis for discussion, let us assume a hierarchy
of six levels, which we will number from 0 (assumed to be the lowest possible level
of document structure) to 5:8
0 text-phrase
1 text-clause
2 text-sentence
3 paragraph
4 section
5 chapter
The fundamental organizing principle of document structure is that a unit of a
given level is composed of one or more units of the next level down. This observation
could be expressed by a set of constituent structure rules, one for each level:
chapter ? section+
section ? paragraph+ (etc.)
Alternatively, we could generalize over this set of rules by introducing the symbol LN
to denote a unit of level N (so that L0 means text-phrase, L1 means text-clause, etc.).
A single rule will now cover units of all levels:
LN ? LN?1+ (N > 0)
8 We use text-sentence and text-clause in Nunberg?s sense, as units typically marked by a period and a
semicolon. However, unlike Nunberg, we use text-phrase for any constituent of a text-clause, whether it
is marked by a comma or not.
225
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
(a)
(b)
SECTION
PARAGRAPH PARAGRAPHTEXT?SENTENCE
PARAGRAPH PARAGRAPH
SECTION
TEXT?SENTENCE
PARAGRAPH
Figure 7
Ill-formed (a) and well-formed (b) document structures.
Two consequences of this rule should be noted. First, it disallows document struc-
tures in which a unit contains a subunit of higher level?for instance, a text-sentence
may not contain a paragraph. Second, it disallows document structures in which
coordinated units have different levels. A section, for example, may not be formed
by coordinating two paragraphs and a text-sentence, as in Figure 7(a); the sentence
should be the only constituent of a further paragraph unit, as in Figure 7(b), so
that when the abstract document structure is realized graphically, the sentence will
be formatted with a paragraph break as well as with a capital letter and a
period.
This deals with the basic organization of text into hierarchical document units;
however, a full description should take account of many other patterns including
headings, bulleted lists, footnotes, and figures. We cannot deal with all these pat-
terns here, so we focus on what is probably the most complex problem: the treat-
ment of indented structures such as quotations, bulleted lists, and enumerated
lists.
4.2 Indented Document Units
At first sight it might seem that indentation is a feature of graphical realization
rather than underlying structure: in other words, that it belongs to concrete rather
than abstract document structure. We have several reasons for rejecting this view.
First, it is at least suggestive that both LaTEX and HTML include tags for indented
structures:
Pattern HTML tag LATEX tag
Quotation <QUOTE> \begin{quote}
Bulleted list <UL> \begin{itemize}
Enumerated list <OL> \begin{enumerate}
Description list <DL> \begin{description}
Second, one can find examples of vertical lists that seem structurally equivalent to
(say) a bulleted list but are presented without item markers and without the use of
horizontal indentation. Here is a case in point, taken from a PIL with formatting exactly
226
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
preserved:
(13) If you experience any of the following or any other unusual effects,
tell your doctor:
Poor appetite or a slight sick feeling
Mild abdominal pains or fullness
Alterations in your sense of taste
Diarrhoea
Itching or rash
Pain in your muscles or joints
If you notice yellowing of the skin or eyes, tell your doctor
straight away.
(Lamisil, Sandoz; from APBI 1997)
Third, and most important of all, indented structures may introduce apparent viola-
tions of the hierarchical ranking described in the last section: for instance, a sentence
may contain a paragraph, provided that the paragraph is indented. We have already seen
this in the case of complex conditionals in example (12). However, the phenomenon
is much more widespread:
(14) In rare cases the treatment can be prolonged for another week; however, this is risky
since
? The side-effects are likely to get worse. Some patients have reported severe
headache and nausea.
? Permanent damage to the liver might result.
(15) The opening of Pride and Prejudice
It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession of a
good fortune, must be in want of a wife. However little known the feelings
or views of such a man may be on his first entering a neighbourhood, this
truth is so well fixed in the minds of the surrounding families, that he is
considered as the rightful property of some one or other of their daughters.
is one of the most famous paragraphs in English literature.
In these examples, too, note that the important issue is not graphical indentation, but
what we might call logical indentation. Thus in the case of the quotation, the logical
indentation of the quoted paragraph might be shown without graphical indentation
(e.g., by using a distinctive font or character size):
(16) The opening of ?Pride and Prejudice?
It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession of a good fortune, must be in want of a
wife. However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on his first entering a neighbourhood,
this truth is so well fixed in the minds of the surrounding families, that he is considered as the rightful property
of some one or other of their daughters.
is one of the most famous paragraphs in English literature.
How can the formation rules for document structure be extended so as to ac-
commodate these patterns? Our main proposal, implemented in the ICONOCLAST
document planner, is that a document unit should be defined by (at least) two fea-
tures: its level and its indentation. The level is the usual ranking from L0 (text-phrase)
227
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
"however, this is risky since"
"In rare cases ... for another week;"
"Permanent damage ... might result.""The side effects ... and nausea."
TEXT?CLAUSE (0)
TEXT?SENTENCE (0)
TEXT?PHRASE (0) TEXT?PHRASE (0)
PARAGRAPH (1) PARAGRAPH (1)
TEXT?CLAUSE (0)
Figure 8
Indented document structure (example (14)).
to L5 (chapter) or whatever hierarchy of units the author decides to employ; the inden-
tation is a value in the range I0 . . . IMax, where I0 means that the unit is not indented at
all, I1 means it is indented one place, and so forth, with IMax representing the deepest
embedding that the author is prepared to contemplate. The passages in examples 14?16
can then be described formally as unindented text-sentences (i.e., units with the cat-
egory [L2, I0]), which have among their constituents indented paragraphs (units with
the category [L3, I1]). Such structures can be permitted if we change the basic rule of
the last section so that a unit of indentation IN always outranks a unit of indentation
IN+1, no matter what their respective levels may be. Instead of one general rule, we
now need two: the first for unindented constituents, the second for indented ones.
Unindented constituents [LN, IM] ? [LN?1, IM]+
Indented constituents [LA, IM] ? [LB, IM+1]+
In the second rule, LA and LB are unrelated, so LB could represent a higher level than
LA (e.g., a paragraph inside a text-sentence). For most document types one would
presumably prefer to set an upper limit on the level of an indented constituent (e.g.,
an indented chapter seems ridiculous); this could be done for instance by adding the
constraint B < 4.
Figures 8 and 9 give document structures for examples (14) and (15), respectively;
the latter also describes example (16), which differs from (15) only in the graphical
realization of the indented paragraph. One feature of these analyses might at first
sight appear strange: they assign the minimal text level L0 to the node representing
the quotation or the bulleted list. How, one might ask, can a paragraph, or indeed a
list of paragraphs, be regarded as a text-phrase? Should it not be a unit higher than the
paragraph, perhaps some kind of section, or better, a new text category vertical list?
On first tackling indented structures, we followed precisely this reasoning, in-
troducing vertical list as a text category. However, despite its initial plausibility, this
decision has several irritating consequences. First, the concept vertical list has no re-
lationship to the text-level hierarchy. Does it belong between text-sentence and para-
graph, or perhaps between paragraph and section? Any placement seems arbitrary.
Second, since the vertical list in a document structure like that in Figure 8 is clearly
coordinated with a text-phrase, such an analysis would violate the rule that coordi-
nated constituents have the same level. Third, and perhaps most persuasively of all,
228
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
"is one of ... English literature.""The opening of Pride and Prejudice"
"It is a truth universally ... daughters."
TEXT?SENTENCE (0)
TEXT?CLAUSE (0)
TEXT?PHRASE (0) TEXT?PHRASE (0)
PARAGRAPH (1)
TEXT?PHRASE (0)
Figure 9
Indented document structure (examples (15) and (16)).
it turns out that in their interactions with discourse connectives, vertical lists behave
like text-phrases, not like sentences, paragraphs, or higher units. Thus the vertical list in
Figure 8 is coordinated with the discourse connective since, which would not normally
link constituents higher than text-phrases (we will discuss this constraint more fully
in the next section).9
All these difficulties are removed by denying appearances and assigning the
vertical-list node a text-level of L0. With this treatment, no new arbitrary level in the
hierarchy of units is needed, the basic rule of document structure holds (i.e., coordi-
nated constituents have the same level), and the interaction of the unit with discourse
connectives can be described using the same rules that hold for nonindented struc-
tures. Note also that the difference in indentation between the node and its daughters
is sufficient to identify it as a vertical list; any extra feature (such as a new value in
the text-level hierarchy) would be redundant.
5. Methods of Document Structuring
5.1 Defining the Task
The aim of document structuring within NLG is to create a document structure that
satisfactorily realizes a particular rhetorical structure. This can be achieved through a
variety of architectures, as reflected in the RAGS framework.10 For example, systems
aimed at generating technical abstracts or captions for graphics would probably need
to specify a ?one paragraph only? limit quite early on in the process; in such cases,
document structuring would start before any rhetorical or syntactic decisions were
made (e.g., the RAGS reimplementation of the Caption Generation System [Mellish
et al 2000]). Alternatively, systems that need to generate texts with rich layout might
prefer to interleave document structuring with rhetorical structuring (e.g., Cahill et al
2001).
9 Note that a vertical list can also be coordinated with units larger than text-phrases, such as
text-sentences or paragraphs. The formal rules allow this because a text-phrase can be the only
constituent of a text-clause, which can in turn be the only constituent of a text-sentence, and so forth.
10 See The RAGS Reference Manual, http://www.itri.bton.ac.uk/projects/rags/RefMan/refman.ps.
229
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
For simplicity of presentation, we will assume here an NLG architecture in which a
preliminary module selects simple propositions from a knowledge base and organizes
them into some kind of argument; the document structurer distributes the various
parts of this argument among units like paragraphs and text-sentences; a syntactic
realizer takes over in order to determine the wording of the propositions; finally, a
formatter decides how the abstract categories and features of document structure will
be realized graphically (e.g., whether paragraphs will be marked by a tab on a new
line, or by a vertical space). In the context of such an architecture, two issues are crucial:
what input does the document structurer receive from the earlier planning module,
and how does the output of the document structurer guide syntactic realization?
In ICONOCLAST, our initial assumption, following Scott and Souza (1990), was
that the rhetorical structure would take the form of a graph in which terminal nodes
represent simple propositions and nonterminal nodes represent rhetorical relation-
ships. By organizing all propositions into a single hierarchy, such an input simplifies
the task of the document structuring module; indeed, it could be argued that part
of the work has been done already. An alternative assumption is that the rhetorical
structure takes the form of a set of assertions, each describing a rhetorical relationship
between two propositions (Marcu 1997). With this flat representation, the document
structurer must take more responsibility for grouping the propositions. In this article,
we will focus on the first of these methods (i.e, starting from a hierarchical rhetori-
cal input). The second method (starting from a flat rhetorical input) is described in
Bouayad-Agha (2001).
Regarding the interface between document structuring and syntax, the difficult
issue is where the boundary should be drawn. Above the level of text-clause, it seems
clear that syntax plays little part; however, at the level in which text-phrases combine
to form text-clauses, there is an interplay between the ?syntactic? grammar and the
?text? grammar, as Nunberg (1990) has shown. As an example, consider the simple
rhetorical structure discussed earlier (example (8) and Figure 2):
concession(contain(elixir, gestodene), approve(fda, elixir))
As mentioned earlier, this rhetorical-semantic input could be realized through a text-
sentence comprising two text-clauses:
(8c) Elixir contains gestodene; however, it is approved by the FDA.
In this case it seems clear where the boundary should lie: the document structurer
decides that approve(fda, elixir) should be expressed in the first text-clause, and that
contain(elixir, gestodene) should be expressed in the second, along with the connec-
tive however. It might also impose constraints on the clauses that will realize these
propositions, for instance, by requiring declarative clauses rather than imperative or
interrogative ones. The rest is left to the syntactic realizer, which must decide how the
two propositions should be worded, and how the second clause should be combined
with the connective. Several alternative versions might result, each having exactly the
same document structure:
(8?) Elixir contains gestodene; the FDA, however, approves it.
(8?) Elixir contains gestodene; however, the FDA approves it.
230
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
(8??) Gestodene is an ingredient of Elixir; Elixir is approved, however, by the
FDA.
Suppose, however, that the document structurer decides to realize the two propo-
sitions within the same text-clause, as in the following version:
(8??) Elixir is approved by the FDA although it contains gestodene.
Where now does the boundary lie? Should the document structurer create a text-
sentence containing a single text-clause, leave instructions that this text-clause should
express the whole concession relationship, and then wash its hands of the affair, leaving
everything else to the syntactic realizer? Or should it trespass into the domain of
syntactic realization by constructing a syntactic clause of the form S1 although S2, with
instructions that a subclause realizing approve(fda, elixir) should be inserted in position
S1 and a second subclause realizing contain(elixir, gestodene) in position S2?
In ICONOCLAST we have found it more convenient to adopt the latter policy. The
linguistic structure of a document is represented using a single tree in which nodes
may be labeled both with document structure features and with syntactic features.
The document structurer?s task is to build the upper part of this tree, extending from
the root all the way down to the nodes that express simple propositions. In the upper
reaches of the tree, nodes will be labeled with units like section and paragraph, and
syntactic features will be irrelevant; lower down, the document structure may have to
assign some syntactic features when constructing compound clauses. To simplify, we
assume that conjunctive adverbs like however will always be placed at the beginning
of a clause; this means that discourse connectives can be placed into the tree by the
document structurer, thereby limiting the task of the syntactic realizer to the wording
of the simple clauses that realize propositions.
Having clarified the document structurer?s task, we posed the following question:
given a well-formed rhetorical structure, together with a set of formation rules for
document structure and a set of discourse connectives for realizing rhetorical rela-
tions, can we enumerate all document structures that correctly realize the rhetorical
structure?and further, can we evaluate these document structures by some metric so
that we can choose the best? The generation of many alternative solutions was es-
sential to the project, which focused on the problem of controlling style in an NLG
system: by varying a set of stylistic parameters, the user of the system can influence
the evaluation metric that is applied to the set of potential solutions and so influence
the type of solution that will be preferred.
As mentioned above, we have explored two methods of enumerating and evaluat-
ing document structures, one (the focus of this article) assuming a hierarchical input,
the other (described in Bouayad-Agha [2001]) assuming a nonhierarchical input. The
two methods have much in common: they share the same formation rules for doc-
ument structure, the same discourse connectives, and (mainly) the same constraints
on the correct realization of rhetorical relationships. Before describing the hierarchical
method in detail, it will be useful to review the constraints that they share; these con-
straints will be needed, in some form or other, in any system that performs document
structuring.
5.2 Constraints on Realizing Rhetorical Structure
In order to realize a rhetorical structure R(A1, A2) as a document structure, several
decisions must be made:
231
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
? What should be the level (e.g., section, paragraph, text-sentence) of the
document unit that realizes the whole relationship R(A1, A2)?
? What should be the levels of the units realizing the arguments A1 and
A2?
? Should the units realizing A1 and A2 be indented items, or should they
have the same indentation as the unit realizing R(A1, A2)?
? In what linear order should the units realizing A1 and A2 occur?
? Should the rhetorical relation R be expressed using a discourse
connective or left implicit?
? If a discourse connective is used, should it be linked to the span
realizing A1 or the span realizing A2?
These decisions are closely related, as the following examples show:
? If R(A1, A2) is realized through a text-sentence, then the arguments A1
and A2 cannot be realized through a higher unit, such as a paragraph,
unless they are indented one place further than R(A1, A2). (This follows
from the formation rules for document structure.)
? If R is a nucleus-satellite relation rather than a multinuclear one, the
arguments A1 and A2 should not be realized through indented items.11
? If a subordinating conjunction like although is used to express the
relation R, the arguments A1 and A2 should be realized within the same
syntactic clause; hence they should be text-phrases, rather than
text-clauses or some higher unit. Moreover, although should be attached
to the clause expressing A1 (assuming this is the satellite).
Constraints arising from the formation rules for document structure have already
been covered; we will therefore focus here on constraints that concern the realization
of rhetorical relations.
Leaving aside quotations for the time being, our first suggestion is that indentation
should be employed only for the arguments of a multinuclear relation. Vertical lists are
typically used when the items in the list play the same role in the discourse?for
instance, they might be symptoms of a disease or potential side effects of a medicine.
By definition, the arguments of a nucleus-satellite relation have different purposes; the
nucleus makes the main point, whereas the satellite?s role is supportive. Consider, for
example, the following rhetorical structure:
justify(list(tested(elixir), approve(fda, elixir)), safe(elixir))
which gives two reasons why Elixir is safe to use. The LIST relation is multinuclear,
whereas JUSTIFY is nucleus-satellite; according to our rule, then, the document struc-
tures in (17) and (18) should be avoided, whereas those in (19) and (20) should be
11 This constraint is based on the intuition that the items in a vertical list should have parallel roles in the
argument, a condition that clearly fails to hold for a nucleus-satellite relation.
232
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
acceptable:
(17) ? Elixir is safe to use
? because it has been carefully tested and is approved by the FDA.
(18) ? Elixir has been carefully tested and is approved by the FDA,
? therefore, it is safe to use.
(19) Elixir is safe to use because
? it has been carefully tested
? it is approved by the FDA
(20) ? Elixir has been carefully tested
? Elixir is approved by the FDA
Therefore, it is safe to use.
Note that when the arguments of a multinuclear relation are presented within a
text-clause, syntax requires a connective like and or or. When they are presented as
indented items, the connective is instead often omitted, leaving the relation implicit;
the reader has to use common sense to divine whether the list represents a conjunction
or a disjunction.
5.2.1 Discourse Connectives. A comprehensive treatment of discourse connectives
will not be attempted here, but we will cover the three main categories identified by
Knott (1996): subordinating conjunctions, coordinating conjunctions, and conjunctive
adverbs.
The properties of a discourse connective can be fully specified by four features:
MEANING, SYNTAX, LOCUS, and SPELLING. As examples, here are three definitions for
the CONCESSION relation:
MEANING concession
SYNTAX subordinating conjunction
LOCUS satellite
spelling ?although?
meaning concession
syntax coordinating conjunction
locus nucleus
spelling ?but?
meaning concession
syntax conjunctive adverb
locus nucleus
spelling ?however?
The locus specifies which argument of the relation carries the discourse connec-
tive. For a nucleus-satellite relation, the argument is identified either by nucleus or
satellite; for a multinuclear relation it is identified by an ordinal specification such
as initial or final.
For each type of discourse connective, it is possible to state specific constraints on
the order of arguments, and on the document units that express them.12
12 Some of these are also mentioned by Scott and Souza (1990) and Rosner and Stede (1992).
233
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
5.2.1.1 Subordinating Conjunction. The spans linked by a subordinating conjunction
can be arranged in either order (nucleus first or satellite first) but must be expressed
within the same text-clause. For example:
(21) Although it has no significant side effects, never give Elixir to other patients.
(22) Never give Elixir to other patients, although it has no significant side effects.
(23) # Although it has no significant side effects; never give Elixir to other patients.
(24) # Although it has no significant side effects. Never give Elixir to other patients.
(25) # Never give Elixir to other patients; although it has no significant side effects.
(26) # Never give Elixir to other patients. Although it has no significant side effects.
5.2.1.2 Coordinating Conjunction. Spans linked by a coordinating conjunction can oc-
cur in the same text-clause or in different text-clauses (or higher units) but must be
ordered so that the discourse connective is located in the final span (i.e., the second
span in the case of a nucleus-satellite relation):
(27) Elixir has no significant side effects, but never give it to other patients.
(28) # But never give Elixir to other patients, it has no significant side effects.
(29) Elixir has no significant side effects; but never give it to other patients.
(30) # But never give Elixir to other patients; it has no significant side effects.
(31) Elixir has no significant side effects. But never give it to other patients.
(32) # But never give Elixir to other patients. It has no significant side effects.
Of course examples (28), (30), and (32) are prohibited only as a means of realizing
a concession relation between the two propositions. They might be acceptable in a
text realizing a different rhetorical structure in which the satellite had already been
expressed.
5.2.1.3 Conjunctive Adverb. Spans linked by a conjunctive adverb can occur in differ-
ent text-clauses (or higher units), but not in the same text-clause. For a nucleus-satellite
relation they must be ordered so that the discourse connective is located in the second
span:
(33) # Elixir has no significant side-effects, however, never give it to other patients.
(34) # However, never give Elixir to other patients, it has no significant side-effects.
(35) Elixir has no significant side-effects; however, never give it to other patients.
(36) # However, never give Elixir to other patients; it has no significant side-effects.
(37) Elixir has no significant side-effects. However, never give it to other patients.
(38) # However, never give Elixir to other patients. It has no significant side-effects.
Again, examples (33), (34), (36), and (38) would be acceptable in realizations of different
rhetorical structures in which the satellite had already been presented.
5.3 Planning Document Structure Using Hierarchical Input
Using the hierarchical method, the input rhetorical structure is a tree in which the
terminal nodes are formulas representing elementary propositions (i.e., propositions
having no internal rhetorical complexity), whereas the nonterminal nodes are labeled
with rhetorical relations (see, for example, Figure 10). This tree is unordered: the roles
234
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
concession
justifyapprove(fda, elixirplus)
ban(fda, elixir) contain(elixir, gestodene)
SATELLITE
NUCLEUS SATELLITE
NUCLEUS
Figure 10
Example of rhetorical structure.
of daughter nodes are shown by labels on the arcs (nucleus or satellite in the
case of a nucleus-satellite relation, or an integer greater than zero in the case of a
multinuclear relation).
The output is a linguistic structure, represented formally by an ordered tree in
which each node corresponds to a span of the document. Nodes are labeled with
document structure features (e.g., the level and indentation of the unit) and also with
syntactic features, which usually become relevant only at the level of text-clause or
below. Discourse connectives are already selected and positioned correctly in the tree;
the only task left to the syntactic realizer is to elaborate the tree further by generating
clauses that express the elementary propositions.
Our aim in ICONOCLAST has been to find a document-structuring method that
will generate all document structures that correctly realize an input rhetorical struc-
ture, given certain simplifying assumptions about the composition of the document
structure and the discourse connectives available in the lexicon. During this initial
enumeration of potential solutions, we are not concerned with good style: the pro-
cedure should generate clumsy realizations as well as elegant ones. But we do re-
quire a minimal standard of correctness. There is no point in considering solutions
that leave propositions in the rhetorical structure unexpressed in the document struc-
ture or group them wrongly. The strategy is first to define a procedure that gen-
erates all solutions that are worth considering at all; using this minimally correct
set as a basis, we can then posit further constraints that impose particular stylistic
preferences.
We assume that a minimally correct solution must satisfy three conditions:
1. The terminal nodes of the document structure must express all the
propositions in the rhetorical structure.
2. In addition to satisfying the document structure formation rules, the
solution must conform to correct syntax within text-clauses. For example,
two elementary propositions within a text clause must be linked by a
conjunction placed in the right position.
3. The document structure must be structurally compatible with the
rhetorical structure.
The first two of these conditions are obvious, but the third needs clarification. What
exactly is meant by ?structurally compatible??
We have explored two definitions of structural compatibility that are closely re-
lated to the mathematical notions of isomorphism and homomorphism (Landman
235
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
(a)
approve(fda, elixirplus)
ban(fda, elixir) approve(fda, elixirplus)contain(elixir, gestodene)
ban(fda, elixir)
(b)
contain(elixir, gestodene)
PARAGRAPH
TEXT?SENTENCETEXT?SENTENCE
TEXT?CLAUSETEXT?CLAUSE TEXT?CLAUSE
TEXT?SENTENCETEXT?SENTENCE
PARAGRAPH
TEXT?SENTENCE
Figure 11
Isomorphic (a) and homomorphic (b) document structures.
1991; Bouayad-Agha, Power, and Scott 2000). Each notion can be conveniently ex-
pressed in terms of groupings of propositions in the rhetorical structure and the dis-
course structure. For an isomorphism (the strongest definition of compatibility), two
conditions must hold:
1. If a node in the document structure represents a span in which the set of
propositions expressed is P, there must be a corresponding node in the
rhetorical structure that dominates exactly the same set P of propositions.
2. If a node in the rhetorical structure dominates a set P of propositions,
there must be a node in the document structure representing a span in
which exactly this set P is expressed.
Informally, for an isomorphism, all groupings of propositions in the rhetorical struc-
ture must be transmitted faithfully to the document structure, and no new groupings
should be introduced. For a homomorphism from rhetorical structure to document
structure, only the first condition is required to be fulfilled. Any grouping found in
the document structure must correspond to a grouping in the rhetorical structure, but
the document structure may ?flatten out? the rhetorical structure by leaving some
groupings unexpressed.
These two kinds of compatibility, isomorphism and homomorphism, are illustrated
by document structures (a) and (b), respectively, in Figure 11, which are alternative
realizations of the rhetorical structure in Figure 10; to simplify, discourse connectives
have been left out. Solution (a) is isomorphic with the rhetorical structure, since the
propositions dominated by the justify relation are grouped together in a separate
text-sentence. Solution (b) is homomorphic only with the rhetorical structure, since
the propositions are expressed in three separate text-sentences, the internal grouping
236
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
remaining implicit. Here are two texts that might result:
(39)
(a) Elixir contains gestodene; therefore, it is banned by the FDA. However, the FDA ap-
proves ElixirPlus.
(b) Elixir contains gestodene. Therefore, it is banned by the FDA. However, the FDA ap-
proves ElixirPlus.
Note that by losing a grouping from the rhetorical structure, (39b) introduces an
ambiguity: its form would also be consistent with an alternative rhetorical structure in
which the relation justify dominated concession. From the point of view of express-
ing the rhetorical input precisely, the isomorphic solution is always better. However,
when the resulting document structure is complex, or when the correct interpretation
can be inferred easily from the content, there might be stylistic reasons for preferring
a looser homomorphic solution. As a criterion for generating all minimally correct
solutions, therefore, we believe the homomorphic definition of compatibility is more
appropriate.13
Having decided what counts as a correct solution, our next task is to find an
efficient algorithm that will generate all and only these solutions. In ICONOCLAST,
this is accomplished through a constraint-solving method that formalizes the options
for realizing each part of the rhetorical structure, then eliminates those combined
choices that violate constraints. The technique has been explained fully elsewhere
(Power 2000), so we will confine ourselves here to a sketch of the main points.
For each node NR on the rhetorical structure, we can lay out some options on
how the rhetorical fragment dominated by this node will be realized in the document
structure. The crucial choices are as follows:
? What should be the level and indentation of the document structure
node that realizes the proposition or relationship NR?
? If NR is a nonterminal node, labeled with a rhetorical relation, what
discourse connective (if any) should express this relation in the
document structure?
? If NR is nonterminal, in what linear order should its daughter nodes be
realized in the document structure?
These decisions can be formalized by associating with each node four variables that
we will call level, indentation, connective, and position. The potential values
of these variables represent options for realizing the relevant part of the rhetorical
structure, and these options will be reduced by considering constraints on which com-
binations of values are allowed. Initially, the possibilities are as follows:
level: The level of the document structure unit realizing NR will be a document
unit along the hierarchy from text-phrase to chapter. In the program, it
13 We actually believe that even the less strict requirement of a homomorphism from RS to DS is too
strong, because one occasionally finds natural texts that violate it. For example, in Figure 4, RS and DS
are not only nonisomorphic, but nonhomomorphic, because there is a grouping in the DS (propositions
A, D, E) that is not found in the RS (no node in the RS dominates just these three propositions). This
raises the question of how one can distinguish nonhomomorphic solutions that are acceptable (like that
in Figure 4) from ones that are unacceptable (probably the great majority). To defer this difficult issue,
we have preferred in this article to confine our attention to homomorphic solutions. For further
discussion see Bouayad-Agha, Power, and Scott (2000).
237
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
is convenient to represent this with an integer, so that constraints on a
higher or lower level can be implemented using the operations > and <;
we will here continue the notation introduced in Section 4.1, in which L0
means text-phrase, L1 means text-clause, and so forth.
indentation: The indentation of the document structure unit will be a value in
the range I0 to IMax, as explained in Section 4.2. Again, in the implemen-
tation, it is convenient to use an integer.
connective: The value of this variable is either ?, meaning that no connective
should be used, or a word from the lexicon. Thus if the node NR has
the label concession, the potential values might be ?, although, but, and
however.
position: This variable represents the order in which NR will be realized in the
document structure, in comparison with its sisters. The value must lie in
the range 1 . . .S, where S is the total number of sisters (including NR).
Thus if NR is an argument in a nucleus-satellite relation, the range will be
1 . . . 2; if it is an argument in a multinuclear relation, the range may be
larger.
The solution process consists in determining the set of options for each variable (these
are known in constraint logic programming as the domain of the variable), then im-
posing constraints on combinations of values, then enumerating all combinations that
satisfy the constraints. Each admissible combination of values can then be used as a
blueprint for building one of the document structures that may realize the input rhetor-
ical structure. The constraints imposed during the second phase of this algorithm are
essentially those described in the last section.
6. Examples of Document Structuring
We now give two examples of the document-structuring method outlined in the last
section. First, we look in detail at a very simple task, to make it clear how the method
works. Then we show some output for a more complex task, for which the program
will generate dozens of solutions even if the wording of individual propositions is
held constant.
6.1 Simple Example
To view the document-structuring method from close up, we will use a simplified
version of the task discussed in the last section. The rhetorical structure will comprise
just two propositions linked by a concession relation:
concession(ban(fda, elixir), approve(fda, elixirplus))
The method works by computing the options for realizing each constituent of the
rhetorical structure, where a constituent is any node in the rhetorical structure tree
along with its descendents. Thus in the present example there are three constituents?
the two propositions and the whole relationship?and for convenience we will label
them as follows:
A: approve(fda, elixirplus)
B: ban(fda, elixir)
C: concession(ban(fda, elixir), approve(fda, elixirplus))
238
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
We can now begin to characterize the units in the document structure that will
realize the rhetorical constituents A, B, and C. For each unit, four choices must be
made: its level, its indentation, its position in relation to its sisters, and its connective.
We therefore have a total of twelve variables. Any combination of values that satis-
fies the constraints (as discussed in the last section) will serve as the blueprint for a
solution.
Following the usual technique for solving constraint satisfaction problems (Hen-
tenryck 1989), we assign to each variable a domain of potential values:
Constituent Level Indentation Position Connective
A (approve) {L0 . . . L3} {I0, I1} {P1, P2} C0
B (ban) {L0 . . . L3} {I0, I1} {P1, P2} C0
C (concession) {L0 . . . L3} {I0, I1} P1 {C0, Calt, Cbut, Chow}
Some of these assignments require some explanation:
? We make the simplifying assumption that the highest unit required will
be the paragraph (formalized as level L3), and that the maximum
indentation will be one place (formalized as I1).
? Since constituents A and B are sisters in the rhetorical structure, their
relative order is formalized by a choice between two positions, P1 and
P2. Constituent C, in contrast, has no sister in the rhetorical structure, so
as an ?only child,? it can have only one position value.
? Constituents A and B are not associated with a discourse connective,
because they are elementary propositions, so their value for the
connective variable is C? (meaning no connective). Constituent C is instead
associated with the concession relation, for which we assume that the
lexicon offers three connectives: although (Calt), but (Cbut), and however
(Chow). The initial domain for the variable connective(C) therefore
comprises these three possibilities along with C?, the option of leaving
the relation implicit.
Having assigned the initial domains, we next proceed to apply some constraints;
these will have the effect of reducing some of the domains. First of all, there are some
constraints applicable to the unit that will serve as the root of the whole document
structure:
Root Level: In a document generation task, we usually have some preconception
about the size of the whole document (e.g., it might be a chapter, or a
section). Since this is a small rhetorical structure, we might decree that the
whole text should consist of a paragraph, so that level(C) = L3.
Root Indentation: It makes no sense for a whole document to be an indented item,
so to realize the root constituent C we may stipulate that indentation(C) =
I0.
Having applied these constraints to the variables realizing C, we can impose some
further constraints that arise from the relationship between C and its direct constituents
A and B:
239
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
Argument Indentation: As pointed out in the last section, it is permissible to
indent the arguments of a multinuclear relation, but not a nucleus-satellite
relation. Therefore, given that the indentation of C has been fixed as I0,
the indentations of A and B must also be I0.
Parental Domination: Since A and B are constituents of C in the rhetorical struc-
ture, the units realizing A and B in the document structure will occur
within the constituent realizing C. Given that all indentations have been
set to I0, this means that level(C) should outrank both level(A) and level(B),
and that consequently the option L3 should be removed from the domains
of the last two variables.
Sister Equality: Because A and B are sisters in the rhetorical structure (i.e., argu-
ments of the same relation), it is appropriate that they should be realized
in the document structure by units of the same level. We can therefore im-
pose the constraint level(A) = level(B). This does not immediately affect
the domains of these variables, but it does mean that as soon as one is
fixed, so is the other.
Sister Position: The units realizing the sisters A and B must occur in one of two
linear orders in the document structure?they cannot both come first, or
both second. We may therefore set the constraint position(A) = position(B).
Again this has no immediate effect on the domains, but as soon as one
value is fixed, so is the other.
Obligatory Connective: As Scott and Souza (1990) point out, an NLG system is
ill-equipped to judge when a rhetorical relation may be left implicit, so it
makes sense to play safe by always realizing the relation using a discourse
connective. Following this policy, we can remove C0 from the domain of
connective(C).
Through applying these constraints, the domains of the variables have been reduced
as follows:
Constituent Level Indentation Position Connective
A (approve) {L0 . . . L2} I0 {P1, P2} C0
B (ban) {L0 . . . L2} I0 {P1, P2} C0
C (concession) L3 I0 P1 {Calt, Cbut, Chow}
Before enumerating solutions, we need to impose a final set of constraints that are
conditional on the choice of discourse connective for C. These constraints have been
explained fully above, so here we only point out how they are stated in terms of our
variables.
Subordinating Conjunction: The units connected by although may occur in any
order, but they must be text-phrases. Therefore, if connective(C) = Calt,
then level(A) = level(B) = L0.
Coordinating Conjunction: We will assume that a coordinating conjunction like
but may link spans within a text-clause, or across text-clauses and text-
sentences, so that no constraint on the levels of A and B results. However,
the satellite must precede the nucleus, so we have position(B) = P1 (and
hence, by Sister Position, position(A) = P2).
240
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
Conjunctive Adverb: A conjunctive adverb like however should link spans in units
of text-clause or higher,14 so we can impose the constraints level(A) > L0
and level(B) > L0. (Note that in the implementation, only one of these need
be applied, since the other results from Sister Equality.) For however, the
satellite must precede the nucleus, so again we have position(B) = P1 and
position(A) = P2.
With all potential interactions among decisions taken care of, enumeration can
proceed. In an implementation in constraint logic programming, this is accomplished
through a method called labeling, in which the remaining possible values for each
variable are tried one by one, with backtracking, until all permitted combinations
have been produced. For this example, this process can be understood most easily if
we explore in turn the possible values for connective(C).
Suppose first that connective(C) = Calt (i.e., that we try although). Through the
constraint Subordinating Conjunction, this choice immediately fixes all values of level,
yielding the following domains:
Constituent Level Indentation Position Connective
A (approve) L0 I0 {P1, P2} C0
B (ban) L0 I0 {P1, P2} C0
C (concession) L3 I0 P1 Calt
The only remaining issue is the relative orders of the spans realizing A and B. Enu-
merating arbitrarily on position(A), we first try the value P1; by Sister Position this
immediately yields position(B) = P2, whereupon all values in the table are fixed. We
therefore have our first complete solution:
Constituent Level Indentation Position Connective
A (approve) L0 I0 P1 C0
B (ban) L0 I0 P2 C0
C (concession) L3 I0 P1 Calt
This is still only a blueprint for a document structure, but with these specifications
the rest can be inferred. First, since the units realizing A and B are text-phrases, whereas
the root unit realizing C is a paragraph, the program can interpolate the units needed
to make a well-formed document structure: the paragraph has a single text-sentence,
which has a single text-clause, which comprises the two text-phrases. Next, since
although attaches to the satellite, the program coordinates it with the clause that will
syntactically realize B. The document structure is now complete, and after syntactic
realization of the two propositions we might obtain the following paragraph:
Solution 1: The FDA approves ElixirPlus, although it bans Elixir.
Backing up, the program can now try the alternative order in which position(A) = P2.
After inferring the complete document structure in the same way, we thereby obtain
a second solution:
Solution 2: Although the FDA bans Elixir, it approves ElixirPlus.
14 As Oates (2001) has shown, this is not true if multiple discourse connectives are allowed: For instance,
one might say ?The FDA bans Elixir but, however, it approves ElixirPlus.? But in the present example,
we assume, for simplicity, that only single discourse connectives are used.
241
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
Having fully explored the possibilities with connective(C) = Calt, we back up and
try the next value, namely, Cbut. This time the constraint Coordinating Conjunction
applies, fixing the position values but leaving several possiblities for level:
Constituent Level Indentation Position Connective
A (approve) {L0 . . . L2} I0 P2 C0
B (ban) {L0 . . . L2} I0 P1 C0
C (concession) L3 I0 P1 Cbut
Enumerating on one of the level variables, for instance, level(A), we can now try in
turn the values L0, L1, and L2 (text-phrase, text-clause, and text-sentence); by Sister
Equality, any choice will be copied across to level(B), so that we obtain only three
further solutions rather than nine:
Solution 3: The FDA bans Elixir, but it approves ElixirPlus.
Solution 4: The FDA bans Elixir; but it approves ElixirPlus.
Solution 5: The FDA bans Elixir. But it approves ElixirPlus.
Finally, we try the remaining option, for which connective(C) = Chow. The constraint
Conjunctive Adverb now applies, fixing the order of A and B and ruling out solutions
for which these propositions are realized by text-phrases:
Constituent Level Indentation Position Connective
A (approve) {L1, L2} I0 P2 C0
B (ban) {L1, L2} I0 P1 C0
C (concession) L3 I0 P1 Chow
It remains to enumerate (as before) on level(A), trying in turn the values L1 and L2
(text-clause and text-sentence). Sister Equality again copies any selected value across
to level(B), so that we obtain just two more solutions:
Solution 6: The FDA bans Elixir; however, it approves ElixirPlus.
Solution 7: The FDA bans Elixir. However, it approves ElixirPlus.
Obviously further texts could be obtained by different wordings of the propo-
sitions or different placements of however (e.g., ?The FDA bans Elixir; the FDA ap-
proves ElixirPlus, however?). But these variations do not concern us here, since we
assume they are introduced during syntactic realization, not during document
structuring.
6.2 Complex Example
To examine a more complex example, it is convenient to use a version of ICONOCLAST
in which the wording of individual propositions is prespecified, so that the program?s
only task is to explore the set of possible document structures. The input to this
program is provided in the form of an XML file using the tags RhetRep (for rhetorical
relationships) and SemRep (for propositions) (Cahill et al 1999). The roles of satellite
and nucleus are distinguished implicitly by the order of the elements (satellite precedes
nucleus). Thus the example discussed in the last section
concession(ban(fda, elixir), approve(fda, elixirplus))
242
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
Figure 12
Running the document planner.
could be encoded as follows:
<RhetRep relation=concession>
<SemRep prop="the FDA bans Elixir"/>
<SemRep prop="the FDA approves ElixirPlus"/>
</RhetRep>
Obviously this will sometimes lead to some clumsy wording (e.g., through inappro-
priate decisions on whether to use pronouns), but we can try to ignore this when
evaluating the generated document structures.
As a more complicated example we will consider a rhetorical structure with
two nucleus-satellite relations (evidence, concession) and one multinuclear relation
(list):
<RhetRep relation=concession>
<SemRep prop="Elixir contains gestodene"/>
<RhetRep relation=evidence>
<RhetRep relation=list>
<SemRep prop="the medicine has been thoroughly tested"/>
<SemRep prop="it has no significant side effects"/>
</RhetRep>
<SemRep prop="Elixir is safe to use"/>
</RhetRep>
</RhetRep>
The main idea here is that Elixir is safe to use although it contains gestodene; the
claim that Elixir is safe is supported by evidence comprising two conjoined facts: It
has been thoroughly tested, and it has no significant side effects.
Figure 12 shows a snapshot of the program running on this example. Through the
control panel on the left, the user can decide which XML model to use as input; in
the figure, this is set to ?Concession-Evidence-Conjunction,? the name given to this
243
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
input model. Using the button labeled ?Number of versions,? the user can determine
the maximum number of versions that will be generated; since this has been set to
500, the program will return the first 500 solutions that it finds.15 The other buttons
control hard constraints and have been set deliberately to rather restrictive values (e.g.,
indented items have been allowed only to one level of indentation and may consist
only of text-phrases, not larger units like text-sentences or paragraphs). Even with
these restrictive settings, 58 solutions have been generated; they are presented in the
pane on the right, ordered (partially) from best to worst. The scores in parentheses
after the version number report the number of defects that the program detected for
that particular version: thus for each of the solutions that appear in the snapshot,
no defects were found.16 As a comparison, here is version 58, which came up at the
bottom of the class with six defects:
Version 58 (6)
Elixir contains gestodene.
However, the medicine has been thoroughly tested.
It has no significant side effects.
Consequently, Elixir is safe to use.
The specific defects cited here were ?Single-sentence paragraph? (occurring four times)
and ?Lost rhetorical grouping? (occurring twice). (The defects are explained below, and
the full set of solutions is given in the Appendix.)
At present the program looks for six stylistic defects, which are formulated mainly
by looking at generated solutions and making an intuitive judgment as to why they
are bad. We have not tried to give the stylistic assessment a sound theoretical or
empirical basis; the aim at this stage is to confirm that by applying some simple
intuitive principles, we can separate reasonably good solutions from obviously horrible
ones. The six defects are as follows (and we stress again that they are only provisional):
Nucleus precedes satellite: It is generally the case for English that the more im-
portant information is placed at the end of the sentence (i.e., end focus
[Quirk et al 1985]). For example, the rheme of a sentence comes after its
theme, and new information is typically placed after given information
(Halliday 1985; Givo?n 1988). There is also psycholinguistic evidence to
suggest that sentences that conform to this general pattern are processed
more easily (Yekovich, Walker, and Blackman 1979). Since by definition the
nucleus is more important than the satellite (Mann and Thompson 1986,
page 6), it thus makes sense to place the nucleus second. Obviously this
principle is debatable, and the best order might differ from one relation
to another, but we have noticed that for the very common relations such
as concession and evidence, the order satellite-nucleus seems to work
better. The program therefore scores a defect every time that a nucleus is
placed before its satellite.
Left-branching structure: Fodor, Bever, and Garrett (1974) report that left-branching
structures take more time to process and remember than right-branching
15 Obviously, if there are fewer than 500 solutions, it will return all the solutions it finds.
16 When it finds a defect in a version, the system also reports on the type of defect that it finds.
244
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
ones. We have also noticed that when a document structure coordinates
two units of different sizes, it reads best when the smaller unit is placed
first. We believe that this may be related to the more general organizational
principle of end weight (Quirk et al 1985). Thus in the program, when
an elementary proposition is coordinated with a unit containing several
propositions, a defect is scored whenever the elementary proposition is
placed second.
Lost rhetorical grouping: As discussed, our method of document structuring does
not demand an isomorphism between rhetorical structure and document
structure; consequently, a grouping that is present in rhetorical structure
may be left implicit in the document structure. Although we allow a group-
ing to be lost in this way, a defect is scored every time it is found to have
occurred.
Single-sentence paragraph: Paragraphs containing a single text-sentence usually
look strange, so they are scored as a defect.
Oversimple text-clauses: We noticed this subtle defect only as a result of experi-
ence with the program. In most cases it looks odd to compose a sentence
from two text-clauses, each expressing a single proposition:
Elixir contains gestodene; therefore, it is banned by the FDA.
The FDA bans Elixir; however, it approves ElixirPlus.
Assuming it is agreed that these sentences are a little strange, why should
this be so? We would suggest the following reason. The semicolon is a
somewhat unusual device, more sophisticated than the comma, and one
therefore expects it to be used only when ordinary methods are unsatis-
factory. In these examples, containing only two propositions, a single text-
clause using conjunctions (e.g., since, although) instead of adverbs would
express the meaning equally clearly, so the semicolon seems unnecessary,
and therefore distracting. A defect is therefore scored every time this is
found to have happened.
Repeated discourse connective: If a rhetorical structure contains two relations of
the same type, one dominating the other, a defect is scored if they are
expressed using the same discourse connective. Here is a simple example
of this defect (repetition of although), followed by an alternative solution
that avoids the defect:
The FDA approves ElixirPlus although it bans Elixir although Elixir has
been thoroughly tested.
The FDA approves ElixirPlus but it bans Elixir although Elixir has been
thoroughly tested.
7. Discussion and Conclusion
Our main aim has been to introduce and motivate abstract document structure as an
important representational level in natural language processing. This proposal rests
on two separate claims: first, that it is useful to distinguish abstract document structure
from concrete graphical realization; second, that abstract document structure should
also be distinguished from rhetorical structure.
245
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
7.1 Abstract versus Concrete
We argue that the transition from a rhetorical-semantic message to a fully specified
document can usefully be divided into two stages. During the first stage, the author
puts the message into words and organizes the words into higher linguistic units like
sentences, paragraphs, and bulleted lists. All decisions pertaining to the realization of
literal content take place during this stage. During the second stage, detailed format-
ting takes place: quotations are realized either by single or double quotes (or some
other method); emphasis is realized through italics, boldface, small capitals, or under-
lining; paragraphs are realized through an introductory tab or double line spacing;
and so forth. Decisions about format do not affect the factual or logical content of the
document, although they might convey ?meanings? of a subtler sort, communicated
through the typographical preferences of the authors (e.g., traditional versus trendy,
ornamental versus puritanical, compact versus expansive).
It is worth noting that similar distinctions are made in other branches of linguistics.
Thus in phonology, a distinction is made between a phonemic level and a phonetic
level. The word grass has a single phonemic representation but will be pronounced
differently by people from different regions or different social classes; these distinctions
are phonetic, not phonemic. To refer to an area in the garden as grass rather than lawn
is one kind of decision; to pronounce grass with a short or long vowel is another. A
theory that mapped directly from the semantic concept to the phonetic form would
miss a generalization that is not only obvious theoretically, but useful practically. The
invention of writing provides additional support for an intermediate phonemic level,
because the different pronunciations of grass are all written down in the same way;
similarly, we would argue, the representational level of abstract document structure
has received more recent support from the invention of markup languages like HTML
and LaTEX.
The concept of abstract document structure is not linked to any particular architec-
ture for natural language generation or understanding. In the RAGS ?reference archi-
tecture? for NLG (Mellish et al 2000; Cahill et al 2001), document structure is distin-
guished from rhetorical structure as a data type, with no commitment as to when these
two data structures are created during the generation process. The ICONOCLAST sys-
tem, described in this article, assumes that rhetorical planning fully precedes document
structuring: in other words, the RST tree has to be complete before the process of cre-
ating a document structure can begin. Such an architecture could be thought of as a
refinement of the standard pipeline (Reiter 1994), with the document-planning phase
divided into two parts (rhetorical planning and document structuring). However, the
ICONOCLAST method would work equally well if a partial assignment of document
structure was part of its input: This would be treated merely as a more specific set of
constraints on possible solutions, which is precisely the arrangement that is used in
the RAGS reimplementation of the Caption Generation System (Mellish et al 2000).
7.2 Document Structure versus Rhetorical Structure
In the terminology of HTML and other mark-up languages, tags like section and
description list are sometimes called logical, suggesting that they are rhetorical
rather than linguistic categories. We have argued that this is a mistake, comparable to
a confusion of syntax with semantics. In our view, the term rhetorical structure should
properly be applied to the higher-level pragmatic and semantic organization of the
message, with no commitment to the means by which this message will be expressed?
whether by speech, or gesture, or diagram, or written document. By contrast, the
categories section and description list are specific to a particular medium, the
written document; hence the term document structure. The two levels are easily confused
246
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
because we often refer to spans of a document using a noun that describes their
rhetorical role (e.g., summary in an academic paper).
Some of the distinctions made in this article have parallels in work on document
analysis. Various representations for document structure have been proposed in the
document analysis community, of which the most developed is the Document Attribute
Format Specification (DAFS) (Dori et al 1997). In DAFS, the physical structure of a
document is distinguished from its logical structure; typical physical units are block,
frame, page, and page set, and typical logical units are sentence, paragraph, section,
and header. More formally, the units of logical structure, called textons, are organized
into levels from character (level 0), word (level 1), and sentence or phrase (level 2) up
to sections and whole documents; the lower levels (up to paragraph) are called sim-
ple textons, and the higher levels are called compound textons. Simple textons are
realized through blocks of text, whereas compound textons additionally have a head-
ing and (optionally) a trailer. There is considerable overlap here with our distinction
between concrete and abstract document structure; differences arise because the anal-
ysis community is concerned mainly with the relationship between logical structure
and physical structure (to use that community?s terminology), whereas the generation
community, coming from the opposite direction, is concerned mainly with the rela-
tionship between logical structure (i.e., abstract document structure) and rhetorical
structure.
Having drawn these distinctions, we have sketched a formal theory of abstract
document structure and shown through an implemented NLG system that this theory
allows us to enumerate systematically the high-level linguistic structures that can real-
ize a given rhetorical-semantic input. The formal description of document structure is
based on Nunberg?s (1990) text-grammar, which we have extended in two ways. First,
we introduce larger units such as sections and chapters; Nunberg instead focuses on
the levels relevant for punctuation (i.e., text-sentence and below). Secondly, we intro-
duce a second feature, abstract indentation. Whereas Nunberg categorizes units only
according to the feature we have called level (the hierarchy from text-phrase, text-
clause, etc., up to section and chapter), we categorize units according to two features,
level and indentation. This allows the generation of such patterns as bulleted lists,
including more complex cases in which one list is embedded within another. Using
this descriptive scheme, it has proved relatively easy to state constraints on the inter-
action between content, layout, and wording, especially as regards the use of discourse
connectives.
By introducing a formal scheme for representing document structure, we have
been able to define the task of document structuring in a simple and clear way. Fol-
lowing Scott and Souza (1990) and many other researchers on NLG, it is assumed
that the rhetorical input takes the form of an RST tree; the output is a tree rep-
resenting high-level linguistic structure, each node being labeled with a document
structure category defined by the features level and indentation. Our scheme is by
no means complete (e.g., it has no treatment of tables, or figures, or text presented
in boxes); however, it is sufficient to generate hundreds of alternative solutions even
for a rhetorical structure containing only four or five elementary propositions. By
clarifying the task of document structuring in this way, we have been able to de-
fine it as a constraint satisfaction problem and thus to implement a system in which
the relevant constraints are defined declaratively; this means that constraints can be
added or removed without changing the rest of the program. Such a system is use-
ful not only as a module in an NLG architecture, but also as a tool for theoretical
investigation: the results of any proposed combination of constraints can be quickly
tested.
247
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
In pursuing this investigation, our methodology has been essentially the same as
Nunberg?s, relying largely on intuition as a means of separating the wheat from the
chaff. Moreover, by implementing the theory in a system that can enumerate solutions
systematically, we are able to test more thoroughly any proposed rule or constraint, at
least for simple examples. This methodology assumes, first, that intuition is a reliable
guide, and second, that constraints derived from small examples will apply also to
full-scale examples. In the initial stages of an investigation, these assumptions seem
reasonably safe. Many of the solutions generated by the program are so obviously
good or bad that there is no point in submitting them to the judgment of literary
experts or subjecting them to some other kind of empirical test. No doubt large-scale
examples will require additional constraints, but much can still be learned from simple
ones: an intrinsically bad paragraph will usually remain bad when placed into a larger
context.
As a contrast, it is interesting to consider the investigation into layout by Bateman
et al (2001). Their approach could not be more different from ours. Instead of sim-
ple examples, they analyze (and regenerate) an exceedingly complicated page from a
magazine. This page, which describes the game of hockey, includes several drawings,
a photograph, diagrams of the pitch, boxes of text, two headers, and a glossary, all laid
out in five different grids, each having a different division into columns. Their RST
analysis of this page is correspondingly complex, with 45 elementary propositions
and the same number of rhetorical relationships (the whole RST tree therefore has
nearly 100 nodes). To analyze such an example informally may be a useful source of
insights, but to attempt a complete formal analysis (and generation) of the page seems
bold in the extreme. However, despite this difference in approach, the framework
that emerges from Bateman et al?s work is broadly similar to ours. First, a distinc-
tion is made between ?layout structure? and ?physical layout? (Bateman et al 2001,
section 3.1); although the discussion concerns boxes in a grid rather than more con-
ventional linguistic units like section and paragraph, this distinction reflects the need
for an abstract level of representation that can be related more easily to the rhetor-
ical structure of the message. Secondly, in sections 4 and 5 of their article, Bateman
et al distinguish clearly between layout structure and rhetorical structure, pointing
out that the two are not necessarily isomorphic and that constraints on the mapping
must therefore be considered:
Mapping is generally achieved by placing parts of the RST-structure
in correspondence with particular nodes in layout structure. [. . .] As
we have now seen, however, this correspondence is complicated by
the fact that the layout structure and the RST tree need not remain
congruent.
(Bateman et al 2001, page 430)
However, Bateman and his colleagues do not provide a detailed account of the forma-
tion rules for layout structure, or of the constraints on the mapping between the RST
tree and the layout structure. We are unsure, for example, whether ?layout structure?
would include such patterns as sections, paragraphs, and bulleted lists. Nevertheless,
the role played by these two abstract representations seems similar?they mediate be-
tween rhetorical structure and physical layout?so there is some reason to think that
the two approaches are yielding results that are compatible.
Both in the Bateman et al study and in our own work, a problem arises as to how
the proposed representations and constraints should be validated. Our own approach,
at least provisionally, has been that the theory should be embodied in a program
248
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
that can generate many alternative solutions and rank them using some kind of cost
function; at this point, we rely on intuition to judge whether the system has generated
a plausible set of solutions and ranked them in an appropriate order. For the very
complex examples considered by Bateman et al, the set of solutions could only be
sampled: Even keeping the wording of individual propositions constant, they would
number billions. Evaluation in this field has to take account of style as well as quality;
in other words, it has a subjective side as well as an objective one. The problem
is not just to generate a good solution, but to generate one that satisfies a set of
subjective preferences, so that, for example, different documents produced for the
same company will exhibit the desired consistency of style. Eventually, some kind
of empirical investigation will be needed (e.g., an expert evaluation, or a study of
the impression made on the intended readers). At the present state of knowledge,
however, such refinements seem exaggerated: If we can separate the satisfactory from
the barbaric, we will be more than content.
Acknowledgments
The research presented in this article was
carried out as part of the ICONOCLAST
project
(http://www.itri.bton.ac.uk/projects/iconoclast),
with funding from Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council grant
number L77102. We are extremely grateful
to Kees van Deemter and three anonymous
reviewers for their critical feedback on an
earlier draft of this article.
References
Arens, Yigal and Eduard Hovy. 1990. Text
layout as a problem of modality selection.
In Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on
Knowledge-Based Specification, RADC
Workshop, pages 87?94, Syracuse, New
York.
Association of British Pharmaceutical
Industry (ABPI). 1997. Compendium of
Patient Information Leaflets. Association of
British Pharmaceutical Industry, London.
Bateman, John, Thomas Kamps, Jorge
Kleinz, and Klaus Reichenberger. 2001.
Towards constructive text, diagram, and
layout generation for information
presentation. Computational Linguistics,
27(3):409?449.
Bolinger, Dwight, editor. 1972. Intonation.
Penguin, Harmonsworth, England.
Bouayad-Agha, Nadjet. 2000. Using an
abstract rhetorical representation to
generate a variety of pragmatically
congruent texts. In Proceedings of the 38th
Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL), Student
Workshop, pages 16?22, Hong Kong,
October.
Bouayad-Agha, Nadjet. 2001. The role of
document structure in text generation.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Brighton,
Brighton, U.K. Also available as Technical
Report ITRI-01-24, Information
Technology Research Institute, University
of Brighton, Brighton, U.K.
Bouayad-Agha, Nadjet, Richard Power, and
Donia Scott. 2000. Can text structure be
incompatible with rhetorical structure? In
Proceedings of the International Natural
Language Generation Conference, pages
194?200, Mitzpe Ramon, Israel, June
12?16.
Bouayad-Agha, Nadjet, Donia Scott, and
Richard Power. 2000. Integrating content
and style in documents: A case study of
patient information leaflets. Information
Design, 9(2):161?176.
Bouayad-Agha, Nadjet, Donia Scott, and
Richard Power. 2001. The influence of
layout on the interpretation of referring
expressions. In L. Degand, Y. Bestgen,
W. Spooren, and L. van Waes, editors,
Multidisciplinary Approaches to Discourse.
Amsterdam, Nodus, pages 133?141. Also
presented as a paper at the
Multidisciplinary Approaches to
Discourse (MAD) workshop, Ittre,
Belgium, August 2001. A slightly
modified version is also available as
Technical Report ITRI-01-23, Information
Technology Research Institute, University
of Brighton, Brighton, U.K.
Cahill, Lynne, John Carroll, Roger Evans,
Daniel Paiva, Richard Power, Donia Scott,
and Kees van Deemter. 2001. From rags to
riches: Exploiting the potential of a
flexible generation architecture. In
Proceedings of the 39th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL?01), Toulouse, France, pages 98?105.
Also available as Technical Report
ITRI-01-07, Information Technology
Research Institute, University of Brighton,
Brighton, U.K.
249
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
Cahill, Lynne, Christine Doran, Roger
Evans, Chris Mellish, Daniel Paiva, Mike
Reape, Donia Scott, and Neil Tipper. 1999.
Towards a reference architecture for
natural language generation systems.
Technical Report ITRI-99-14, Information
Technology Research Institute, University
of Brighton, Brighton, U.K.
Chomsky, Noam and Morris Halle. 1968.
The Sound Pattern of English. Harper and
Row, New York.
Coch, Jose. 1996. Overview of AlethGen. In
Demonstrations and Posters of the Eighth
International Natural Language Generation
Workshop (INLG?96), Herstmonceux Castle,
Sussex, U.K., pages 25?28.
Crystal, David. 1969. Prosodic Systems and
Intonation in English. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
DiMarco, Chrysanne, Graeme Hirst, Leo
Wanner, and John Wilkinson. 1995.
Healthdoc: Customizing patient
information and health education by
medical condition and personal
characteristics. In First International
Workshop on Artificial Intelligence in Patient
Education, Glasgow, August.
Dori, Dov, David Doermann, Christian Shin,
Robert Haralick, Ihsin Phillips, Mitchell
Buckman, and David Ross. 1997. The
representation of document structure: A
generic object-process analysis. In
P. Wang and H. Bunke, editors, Handbook
on Optical Character Recognition and
Document Image Analysis. World Scientific,
Singapore, pages 421?456.
Fodor, Janet, Thomas Bever, and Merril
Garrett. 1974. The Psychology of Language.
McGraw-Hill, New York.
Ford, Andrew and Tim Dixon. 1996.
Spinning the Web. International Thompson
Computer, London.
Givo?n, Talmy. 1988. The pragmatics of word
order: Predictability, importance and
attention. In M. Hammond, E. Moravcsik,
and J. Werth, editors, Studies in Syntactic
Typology. John Benjamins, Amsterdam,
pages 243?284.
Halliday, Michael. 1967. Intonation and
Grammar in British English. Mouton, the
Hague.
Halliday, Michael. 1985. An Introduction to
Functional Grammar. Edward Arnold,
Baltimore.
Hentenryck, Pascal Van. 1989. Constraint
Satisfaction in Logic Programming. MIT
Press, Cambridge.
Huang, Xiaorong and Armin Fiedler. 1997.
Proof verbalization as an application of
NLG. In Proceedings of the 16th International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(IJCAI?97), Nagoya, Japan, pages 965?970.
Knott, Alistair. 1996. A Data-Driven
Methodology for Motivating a Set of Coherence
Relations. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, U.K.
Knott, Alistair, John Oberlander, Mick
O?Donnell, and Chris Mellish. 2001.
Beyond elaboration: The interaction of
relations and focus in coherent text. In
T. Sanders, J. Schilperoord, and
W. Spooren, editors, Text Representation:
Linguistic and Psycholinguistics Aspects.
Benjamins, Amsterdam, pages 181?196.
Ladd, Robert. 1996. Intonational Phonology.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Landman, Fred. 1991. Structures for
Semantics, volume 45 in Studies in
Linguistics and Philosophy. Kluwer
Academic.
Lavoie, Benoit and Owen Rambow. 1997. A
fast and portable realizer for text
generation systems. In Proceedings of the
Fifth Conference on Applied Natural Language
Processing (ANLP?97), Washington, D.C.,
pages 265?68.
Mann, William and Sandra Thompson.
1986. Rhetorical structure theory:
Description and construction of text
structures. In Proceedings of the Third
International Workshop on Text Generation,
Nijmegen, the Netherlands, August.
Mann, William and Sandra Thompson.
1987. Rhetorical structure theory: A
theory of text organization. Technical
Report ISI/RS-87-190, Information
Sciences Institute, University of Southern
California, Marina del Rey.
Marcu, Daniel. 1997. From local to global
coherence: A bottom-up approach to text
planning. In Proceedings of the 14th National
Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
Providence, Rhode Island, July. AAAI,
Menlo Park, California, pages 629?635.
Mellish, Chris, Roger Evans, Lynne Cahill,
Christine Doran, Daniel Paiva, Mike
Reape, Donia Scott, and Neil Tipper. 2000.
A representation for complex and
evolving data dependencies in generation.
In Proceedings of the Sixth Applied Natural
Language Processing Conference (ANLP?00),
Seattle.
Mittal, Vibhu, Johanna Moore, Guiseppe
Carenini, and Steven Roth. 1998.
Describing complex charts in natural
language: A caption generation system.
Computational Linguistics, 24(3):431?468.
Moore, Johanna and Martha Pollack. 1992.
A problem for RST: The need for
multi-level discourse analysis.
Computational Linguistics, 18(4):537?544.
Moser, Megan and Johanna Moore. 1996.
250
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
Towards a synthesis of two accounts of
discourse structure. Computational
Linguistics, 22(3):409?419.
Nunberg, Geoff. 1990. The Linguistics of
Punctuation, volume 18 in CSLI Lecture
Notes. CSLI, Stanford, California.
Oates, Sarah. 2001. Generating multiple
discourse markers in text. Master?s thesis,
University of Brighton, Brighton, U.K.
Also available as Technical Report
ITRI-01-25, Information Technology
Research Institute, University of Brighton,
Brighton, U.K.
Paris, Cecile, Keith Vander Linden, Marcus
Fischer, Anthony Hartley, Lynne
Pemberton, Richard Power, and Donia
Scott. 1995. A support tool for writing
multilingual instructions. In Proceedings of
the Fourteenth International Joint Conference
in Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-95), pages
1398?1404. Also available as Technical
Report ITRI-95-11, Information
Technology Research Institute, University
of Brighton, Brighton, U.K.,
http://www.itri.bton.ac.uk/techreports/.
Pierrehumbert, Janet. 1980. The Phonology
and Phonetics of English Intonation. Ph.D.
thesis, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge.
Power, Richard. 2000. Planning texts by
constraint satisfaction. In Proceedings of the
18th International Conference in
Computational Linguistics (COLING),
Saarbru?cken, Germany, pages 642?648.
Power, Richard and Nico Cavallotto. 1996.
Multilingual generation of administrative
forms. In Proceedings of the Eighth
International Workshop on Natural Language
Generation, Herstmonceux Castle, Sussex,
U.K., pages 17?19.
Quirk, Randolph, Sidney Greenbaum,
Geoffrey Leech, and Jan Svartvik. 1985. A
Comprehensive Grammar of the English
Language. Longman, London.
Reiter, Ehud. 1994. Has a consensus NL
generation architecture appeared, and is it
psycholinguistically plausible? In
Proceedings of the Seventh International
Workshop on Natural Language Generation
(INLGW-1994), Kennebunkport, Maine,
pages 163?170.
Reiter, Ehud and Robert Dale. 2000. Building
Natural Language Generation Systems.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Rosner, Dietmar and Manfred Stede. 1992.
Customizing RST for the automatic
production of technical manuals. In
R. Dale, D. Roesner, E. H. Hovy, and
O. Stock, editors, Aspects of Automated
Natural Language Generation.
Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, pages
199?214.
Schriver, Karen. 1997. Dynamics in Document
Design: Creating Text for Readers. Wiley
Computer, New York.
Scott, Donia and Clarisse de Souza. 1990.
Getting the message across in RST-based
text generation. In R. Dale, C. Mellish,
and M. Zock, editors, Current Research in
Natural Language Generation, volume 4 in
Cognitive Science Series. Academic Press,
New York, pages 47?73.
Scott, Donia and Cecile Paris. 1995.
Identifying the mapping of semantics
onto language: Going beyond the text. In
Working Papers of the AAAI Symposium on
Empirical Methods in Discourse Interpretation
and Generation, Stanford University,
Stanford, California, March.
Scott, Donia and Richard Power. 2001.
Generating textual diagrams and
diagrammatic texts. In H. Bunt and R-J.
Beun, editors, Cooperative Multimodal
Communication, volume 2155 in Lecture
Notes in Artificial Intelligence.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pages 13?29. Also
available as Technical Report ITRI-01-02,
Information Technology Research
Institute, University of Brighton,
Brighton, U.K.
?t Hart, Johan, Rene? Collier, and Antonie
Cohen. 1990. A Perceptual Study of
Intonation, in series Cambridge Studies in
Speech Science and Communication.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Yekovich, Frank, Carol Walker, and Harold
Blackman. 1979. The role of presupposed
and focal information in integrating
sentences. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 18:535?548.
251
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
Appendix. Solutions Found for the Example in Section 6.1
Number of versions = 58
Version 1 (0)
Elixir contains gestodene. However, the medicine has been thoroughly tested and it
has no significant side effects; consequently, Elixir is safe to use.
Version 2 (0)
Elixir contains gestodene; however, since
? the medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects
Elixir is safe to use.
Version 3 (0)
Elixir contains gestodene. However, since
? the medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects
Elixir is safe to use.
Version 4 (0)
Elixir contains gestodene; however,
? the medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects
so Elixir is safe to use.
Version 5 (0)
Elixir contains gestodene. However,
? the medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects
so Elixir is safe to use.
Version 6 (0)
Elixir contains gestodene. However,
? the medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects;
consequently, Elixir is safe to use.
Version 7 (1)
Elixir contains gestodene. However, the medicine has been thoroughly tested and it
has no significant side effects. Consequently, Elixir is safe to use.
Lost rhetorical grouping
252
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
Version 8 (1)
Elixir contains gestodene. However, the medicine has been thoroughly tested and it
has no significant side effects. Consequently, Elixir is safe to use.
Single-sentence paragraph
Version 9 (1)
Although Elixir contains gestodene since
? the medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects
Elixir is safe to use.
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 10 (1)
Although Elixir contains gestodene
? the medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects
so Elixir is safe to use.
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 11 (1)
Elixir contains gestodene but since
? the medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects
Elixir is safe to use.
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 12 (1)
Elixir contains gestodene but
? the medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects
so Elixir is safe to use.
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 13 (1)
Elixir contains gestodene; however, Elixir is safe to use since
? the medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects.
Nucleus precedes satellite
253
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
Version 14 (1)
Elixir contains gestodene. However, since the medicine has been thoroughly tested
and it has no significant side effects Elixir is safe to use.
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 15 (1)
Elixir contains gestodene. However, Elixir is safe to use since
? the medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects.
Nucleus precedes satellite
Version 16 (1)
Elixir contains gestodene; however, the medicine has been thoroughly tested and it
has no significant side effects so Elixir is safe to use.
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 17 (1)
Elixir contains gestodene. However, the medicine has been thoroughly tested and it
has no significant side effects so Elixir is safe to use.
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 18 (1)
Elixir contains gestodene; however, the medicine has been thoroughly tested and it
has no significant side effects; consequently, Elixir is safe to use.
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 19 (1)
Elixir contains gestodene; however,
? the medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects;
consequently, Elixir is safe to use.
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 20 (1)
Elixir contains gestodene; however, since the medicine has been thoroughly tested and
it has no significant side effects Elixir is safe to use.
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 21 (1)
Elixir contains gestodene. However,
? the medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects.
Consequently, Elixir is safe to use.
Lost rhetorical grouping
254
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
Version 22 (1)
Elixir contains gestodene.
However,
? the medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects.
Consequently, Elixir is safe to use.
Single-sentence paragraph
Version 23 (2)
Elixir contains gestodene but since the medicine has been thoroughly tested and it has
no significant side effects Elixir is safe to use.
Lost rhetorical grouping
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 24 (2)
? The medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects
so Elixir is safe to use although Elixir contains gestodene.
Nucleus precedes satellite
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 25 (2)
Elixir contains gestodene but the medicine has been thoroughly tested and it has no
significant side effects so Elixir is safe to use.
Lost rhetorical grouping
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 26 (2)
Elixir contains gestodene but Elixir is safe to use since
? the medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects.
Nucleus precedes satellite
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 27 (2)
Elixir contains gestodene; however, Elixir is safe to use since the medicine has been
thoroughly tested and it has no significant side effects.
Nucleus precedes satellite
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 28 (2)
Although Elixir contains gestodene since the medicine has been thoroughly tested and
it has no significant side effects Elixir is safe to use.
Lost rhetorical grouping
Lost rhetorical grouping
255
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
Version 29 (2)
Elixir contains gestodene. However, Elixir is safe to use since the medicine has been
thoroughly tested and it has no significant side effects.
Nucleus precedes satellite
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 30 (2)
Elixir contains gestodene.
However, the medicine has been thoroughly tested and it has no significant side
effects; consequently, Elixir is safe to use.
Single-sentence paragraph
Single-sentence paragraph
Version 31 (2)
Although Elixir contains gestodene the medicine has been thoroughly tested and it
has no significant side effects so Elixir is safe to use.
Lost rhetorical grouping
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 32 (2)
Elixir contains gestodene. However, the medicine has been thoroughly tested; it has
no significant side effects; consequently, Elixir is safe to use.
Lost rhetorical grouping
Oversimple text-clauses
Version 33 (2)
Elixir contains gestodene.
However, since
? the medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects
Elixir is safe to use.
Single-sentence paragraph
Single-sentence paragraph
Version 34 (2)
Elixir contains gestodene. However, the medicine has been thoroughly tested; it has
no significant side effects. Consequently, Elixir is safe to use.
Lost rhetorical grouping
Oversimple text-clauses
Version 35 (2)
Elixir contains gestodene. However, the medicine has been thoroughly tested. It has
no significant side effects. Consequently, Elixir is safe to use.
Lost rhetorical grouping
Lost rhetorical grouping
256
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
Version 36 (2)
Elixir contains gestodene.
However,
? the medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects
so Elixir is safe to use.
Single-sentence paragraph
Single-sentence paragraph
Version 37 (2)
Elixir contains gestodene.
However, the medicine has been thoroughly tested; it has no significant side effects.
Consequently, Elixir is safe to use.
Single-sentence paragraph
Oversimple text-clauses
Version 38 (2)
Elixir contains gestodene.
However, the medicine has been thoroughly tested. It has no significant side ef-
fects. Consequently, Elixir is safe to use.
Single-sentence paragraph
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 39 (2)
Since
? the medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects
Elixir is safe to use although Elixir contains gestodene.
Nucleus precedes satellite
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 40 (2)
Elixir contains gestodene.
However,
? the medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects;
consequently, Elixir is safe to use.
Single-sentence paragraph
Single-sentence paragraph
257
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
Version 41 (2)
Although Elixir contains gestodene Elixir is safe to use since
? the medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects.
Nucleus precedes satellite
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 42 (3)
Elixir contains gestodene.
However, Elixir is safe to use since
? the medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects.
Single-sentence paragraph
Nucleus precedes satellite
Single-sentence paragraph
Version 43 (3)
Since the medicine has been thoroughly tested and it has no significant side effects
Elixir is safe to use although Elixir contains gestodene.
Nucleus precedes satellite
Lost rhetorical grouping
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 44 (3)
The medicine has been thoroughly tested and it has no significant side effects so Elixir
is safe to use although Elixir contains gestodene.
Nucleus precedes satellite
Lost rhetorical grouping
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 45 (3)
Elixir contains gestodene.
However, since the medicine has been thoroughly tested and it has no significant
side effects Elixir is safe to use.
Single-sentence paragraph
Single-sentence paragraph
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 46 (3)
Although Elixir contains gestodene Elixir is safe to use since the medicine has been
thoroughly tested and it has no significant side effects.
Nucleus precedes satellite
Lost rhetorical grouping
Lost rhetorical grouping
258
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
Version 47 (3)
Elixir contains gestodene.
However, the medicine has been thoroughly tested. It has no significant side ef-
fects.
Consequently, Elixir is safe to use.
Single-sentence paragraph
Lost rhetorical grouping
Single-sentence paragraph
Version 48 (3)
Elixir is safe to use since
? the medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects
although Elixir contains gestodene.
Nucleus precedes satellite
Nucleus precedes satellite
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 49 (3)
Elixir contains gestodene but Elixir is safe to use since the medicine has been thor-
oughly tested and it has no significant side effects.
Nucleus precedes satellite
Lost rhetorical grouping
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 50 (3)
Elixir contains gestodene; however, the medicine has been thoroughly tested; it has
no significant side effects; consequently, Elixir is safe to use.
Lost rhetorical grouping
Lost rhetorical grouping
Oversimple text-clauses
Version 51 (3)
Elixir contains gestodene.
However, the medicine has been thoroughly tested and it has no significant side
effects so Elixir is safe to use.
Single-sentence paragraph
Single-sentence paragraph
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 52 (3)
Elixir contains gestodene.
However,
? the medicine has been thoroughly tested
? it has no significant side effects.
259
Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha Document Structure
Consequently, Elixir is safe to use.
Single-sentence paragraph
Lost rhetorical grouping
Single-sentence paragraph
Version 53 (4)
Elixir contains gestodene.
However, the medicine has been thoroughly tested; it has no significant side effects;
consequently, Elixir is safe to use.
Single-sentence paragraph
Single-sentence paragraph
Lost rhetorical grouping
Oversimple text-clauses
Version 54 (4)
Elixir is safe to use since the medicine has been thoroughly tested and it has no
significant side effects although Elixir contains gestodene.
Nucleus precedes satellite
Nucleus precedes satellite
Lost rhetorical grouping
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 55 (4)
Elixir contains gestodene.
However, the medicine has been thoroughly tested and it has no significant side
effects.
Consequently, Elixir is safe to use.
Single-sentence paragraph
Lost rhetorical grouping
Single-sentence paragraph
Single-sentence paragraph
Version 56 (4)
Elixir contains gestodene.
However, Elixir is safe to use since the medicine has been thoroughly tested and
it has no significant side effects.
Single-sentence paragraph
Nucleus precedes satellite
Single-sentence paragraph
Lost rhetorical grouping
Version 57 (5)
Elixir contains gestodene.
However, the medicine has been thoroughly tested; it has no significant side effects.
Consequently, Elixir is safe to use.
260
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 2
Single-sentence paragraph
Lost rhetorical grouping
Single-sentence paragraph
Oversimple text-clauses
Single-sentence paragraph
Version 58 (6)
Elixir contains gestodene.
However, the medicine has been thoroughly tested.
It has no significant side effects.
Consequently, Elixir is safe to use.
Single-sentence paragraph
Lost rhetorical grouping
Lost rhetorical grouping
Single-sentence paragraph
Single-sentence paragraph
Single-sentence paragraph
Can text structure be incompat ib le  with rhetorical structure? 
Nadjet Bouayad-Agha,  Richard Power and Donia  Scott 
Information Technology Research Institute 
University of Brighton 
Lewes Road 
Brighton BN2 4G J, UK 
first name. lastname@it ri.bton.ac.uk 
Abstract  
Scott and Souza (1990) have posed the problem 
of how a rhetorical structure (in which proposi- 
tions are linked by rhetorical relations, but not 
yet arranged in a linear order) can be realized 
by a text structure (in which propositions are 
ordered and linked up by appropriate discourse 
connectives). Almost all work on this problem 
assumes, implicitly or explicitly, that this map- 
ping is governed by a constraint on compatibil- 
ity of structure. We show how this constraint 
can be stated precisely, and present some coun- 
terexamples which seem acceptable ven though 
they violate compatibility. The examples are 
based on a phenomenon we call extraposition, 
in which complex embedded constituents of a 
rhetorical structure are extracted and realized 
separately. 
1 Introduct ion 
Text planning (or more broadly, document plan- 
ning) can be divided into two stages. In the 
first stage, material is selected, perhaps from a 
knowledge base, and organized rhetorically. In 
the second stage, the rhetorical structure is re- 
alized by a text structure (or document struc- 
ture), through which the material is distributed 
among sentences, paragraphs, vertical lists, and 
perhaps even diagrams. The RAtS (1999) pro- 
posal for a standard NLG architecture distin- 
guishes tile outputs of these two phases by the 
data types l:l.hetRep (rhetorical representation) 
and DocRep (document representation). 
We focus in this paper on the  second stage 
of text planning - -  the passage from RhetRep 
to DocRep. NLG researchers have addressed 
this issue in various ways, but everyone as- 
sumes some kind of structural compatibility be- 
tween rhetorical structure and text structure. 
The most popular discourse framework in NLG 
is R ST (Mann a.nd Thompson. 1988). which 
makes the crucial distinction between nucleus, 
which is the most important part of a message, 
and satellite, which is the peripheral part of the 
message. Scott and Souza (1990) provide guide- 
lines for the realisation of RST trees into a co- 
herent text. One of them is to avoid dangling 
sentences, that is, to avoid putting "information 
that is only weakly relevant o the message" in 
a separate sentence because it will feel as if it 
has been introduced as an afterthought or as 
introducing a new topic which is then abruptly 
abandoned, disrupting the comprehensibility of
the text. As an example, the authors provide 
the attributive satellite of an elaboration rela- 
tion. 
Marcu (1996), in order to build a valid text 
plan from a set of rhetorical assertions, uses 
the "nuclearity principle", that is the observa- 
tion in Mann and Thompson's framework that 
"whenever two large text spans are connected 
through a rhetorical relation, that rhetorical re- 
lation holds also between the most important 
parts of the constituent spans". Therefore, the 
resulting text plans are valid in the sense that 
they are isomorphic with one of the rhetorical 
structures that can be built from the rhetorical 
assertions using this nuclearity principle. 
Our aim in this paper is to formulate more 
precisely a notion of structural compatibility 
which is necessary in order to describe the real- 
isation of a RhetRep into various DocReps, and 
then .to discuss some examples (mostly taken 
from the domain of patient information leaflets) 
of apparently acceptable texts in which this no- 
.tion of compatibility is violated..:To discuss 
this issue clearly, an assmnption must be made 
about the kinds of information represented by 
rhetorical and text structure; we outline in sec- 
tion 2 the common assumption that these rep- 
resentations are trees, labelled respectively with 
rhetorical and textual categories, the rhetorical 
structure being unordered and the text struc- 
194 
ture ordered. Section 3 then defines a notion 
of .structural  compatibility that:is weaker than 
isomorphism; section 4 shows that we can find 
plausible counterexamples ven to this weaker 
formulation, and discusses why these passages 
occur. Section 5 discusses ome implications for 
NLG, and finally, section 6 raises further impor- 
tant issues. 
2 Rhetor ica l  s t ruc ture  and 
text  s t ruc ture  
To distinguish clearly between FthetRep and 
DocRep, we need to define the kinds of infor- 
mation that should be included in the two rep- 
resentations. Bateman and Rondhius (1997) 
compare several approaches to rhetorical rep- 
resentation, citing in particular RST (Mann 
and Thompson, 1988) and Segmented Discourse 
Representation Theory (Asher, 1993). These 
approaches share the idea that rhetorical repre- 
sentations are composed of propositions linked 
by rhetorical relations; SDRT includes as well 
the logical apparatus of DRT, thus covering 
notions like necessity and logical scope which 
are missing from RST. For the most part, 
NLG applications have used the RST frame- 
work, adapted in various ways; the most com- 
mon representation, proposed also as the RAGS 
standard, is that of a tree in which terminal 
nodes represent elementary propositions, while 
non-terminal nodes represent rhetorical rela- 
tionships. This representation, proposed for ex- 
ample by Scott and Souza (1990), is illustrated 
by figure 1, which might be realized by the fol- 
lowing passage: 
(1) Elixir occasionally provokes a mild allergic 
reaction B, because it contains gestodene C. 
However, Elixir has no serious side- 
effects A. 
Assuming an RST-based framework, an im- 
portant issue is whether the rhetorical represen- 
. tation should already.imply a linear order. Most 
researchers have followed Scott and Souza in as- 
suming that linear order should be left unspeci- 
fied; i t  is during the transition to the document 
representation that the material is distributed 
among linguistic units (or perhaps diagrams, in 
a multimedia document) arranged in a specific 
order. Thus the cause relation in figure 1. for 
example, could be realized with nucleus first, or 
satellite first, or satellite embedded within nu- 
cleus: 
not(serious-side -e ff ~ts(elixir)) 
NU~EUS S,~LLITE 
B C 
possible(allergic-reaction(elixir)) contain(elixir, gestodene) 
Figure 1: Rhetorical representation 
(2a) Elixir occasionally provokes a mild allergic 
reaction B, because it contains gestodene c. 
(2b) Because it contains gestodene C, Elixir 
occasionally provokes a mild allergic 
reaction B. 
(2c) Elixir, because it contains gestodene C, 
occasionally provokes a mild allergic 
reaction B . 
In the RAGS proposal, which aims to extract 
a useful common approach from current work 
in NLG, the DocRep comprises an ordered tree 
corresponding roughly to the 'logical markup' 
in notations like HTML and LaTeX. More pre- 
cisely, a distinction is made between abstract 
and concrete levels of representation, where the 
abstract representation corresponds to logical 
markup (e.g., concepts like 'paragraph' and :em- 
phasis'), while the concrete representation also 
covers graphical markup (concepts like ~vertical 
space' and 'bold face'). In terms of this dis- 
tinction, it is the AbsDocRep that is specified 
during text planning; graphical markup can be 
deferred to a later formatting stage. 
Figure 2 shows two alternative document rep- 
resentations expressing the rhetorical content in 
figure 1. Following Power (2000), the nodes of 
the tree are labelled with 'text-categories' us- 
ing a system that extends the 'text grammar' 
proposed by Nunberg (1990). 1 These document 
1Nunberg's terms 'text-phrase', 'text-clatise',and 
'text-sentence' refer to textual categories, which 
should not be confused with their syntactic oun- 
terparts. They are defined not by syntactic forma- 
tion rules but by their role in text-structure, which 
is typically marked as follows: tezt-sentences begin 
with a capital letter and end in a full stop; text- 
clauses are separated by semicolons; tezt-phrases are 
195 
PARAGRAPH 
TEXT-SENTENCE 
TEXT-PHRASE " TEXT-PHRASE 
B 
possible(allergic-reaction(elixir)) / 
TEXT-SENTENCE 
TEXT-PHRASE TEXT-PHRASE 
concession A 
"however" not(serious-side-effects(elixir)) 
TEXT-PHRASE TEXT-PHRASE 
cause C 
"because" contain(elixir, gestodene) 
TEXT-SENTENCE 
(b) ~ ~  / 
TEXT-CLAUSE TEXT-CLAUSE TEXT-CLAUSE 
C 
TEXT-PHRASE TEXT-PHRASE TEXT-PHRASE TEXT-PHRASE 
cause B concession A 
"consequently"possible(allergic-reaction(elixir)) "however" not(serious-side-effects(elixir)) 
Figure 2: Document  representations 
representations can now be passed to the tac- 
tical generator for the syntactic realization of 
the elementary propositions; the resulting texts 
might be as follows: 
(3a) Elixir occasionally provokes a mild allergic 
reaction B, because i t  contains gestodene C.
However, Elixir has no serious side- 
effects A. 
(3b) Elixir contains gestodeneC; consequently, 
it occasionally provokes a mild allergic 
reactionS; however, Elixir has no serious 
side-effects A .
3 Structural compatibi l i ty 
Summarising the argument so far. we have made 
three main points: 
o Rhetorical structure has typically been 
represented by unordered RST trees such 
as figure 1. 
o Document structure, which conveys in- 
formation similar to logical markup in 
HTML~ can be represented by ordered 
trees in which nodes are labelled with text- 
categories (figure 2). 
const i tuents  of text-clauses, ometimes eparated by 
commas, although within text-clauses the hierarchi- 
cal- structture is expressed mainly through syntax. 
A given rhetorical representation can be 
expressed by a variety of different docu- 
ment representations, in which the propo- 
sitions occur in different orders, and in 
different text-category configurations, and 
the rhetorical relations are expressed by 
different connectives. 
This formulation of the problem raises an obvi- 
ous question: how can we characterize the set of 
document representations that adequately real- 
ize a given rhetorical representation? Elsewhere 
(Power, 2000), we have argued that an adequate 
realization must meet three conditions: 
Cor rect  content :  
All propositions and 
nmst be expressed. 
rhetorical relations 
Wel l - fo rmed s t ructure :  
General formation rules for document 
structure must be respected (e.g. a text- 
sentence cannot  contain a paragraph, un- 
less tile paragraph is indented). 
S t ruc tura l  compat ib i l i ty :  
The docmnent representation mst orga- 
nize the propositions in a way that is com- 
patible with their organization in rhetori- 
cal structure. 
196 
The first two conditions are relatively straight- 
forward, but what is meant,exactly .by 'struc- 
tural compatibility'? 
Assuming that we are comparing two trees, 
the strongest notion of compatibility is isomor- 
phism, which can be defined for our purposes as 
follows: 
DocRep is isomorphic with RhetRep 
if they group the elementary propo- 
sitions in exactly the same way. 
More formally, every set of proposi- 
tions that is dominated by a node in 
DocRep should be dominated by a node 
in RhetRep, and vice-versa. 
Under this definition, the rhetorical representa- 
tion in figure 1 is isomorphic with the document 
representation i  figure 2a, but not with that in 
figure 2b: 
* Proceeding top-down and left-to-right, the 
five nodes in figure 1 dominate the proposi- 
tion sets {A,B, C}, {A}, {S,C},  {B}, and 
{c}. 
o Ignoring nodes that express discourse con- 
nectives, the nodes in figure 2a dominate 
the proposition sets {A,B,C},  {B,C},  
{B}, {C} (twice), and {A} (twice). These 
are exactly the same sets that were ob- 
tained for figure 1. 
* Tile corresponding sets for figure 2b are 
{A,B,C},  {C}, {B} (twice), and {A} 
(twice). Since the set {B,C} is missing 
from this list, there is a grouping in figure 
1 that is not realized in figure 2b, so these 
representations are not isomorphic. 
Since structures like figure 2b are common, iso- 
tnorphism seems too strong a constraint; we 
have therefore proposed (Power, 2000) the fol- 
lowing weaker notion of compatibility: 
DocRep is compatible with RhetRep 
if every grouping of the elementary 
propositions in Docgep is also found 
in R.hetRep. 
Formally, every set of propositionS 
that is dominated by a node in DocRep 
sh.ould be dominated by a node in 
RhetRep -- bat the converse is not re- 
quired. 
Under this constraint, we allow tim document 
representation t.oomit rhetorical groupings, but 
"you forfA~ T~ITE to take C ~  
your tablet" S U S _  1 NUC~USD 2 
"Go on as before" 
~,~J~ L EU S _ I N U C~.E~ S _2 
B C 
"take another assoon "wait until it is time 
as you remember" to take your next dose" 
Figure 3: Rhetorical representation of in- 
struct ion 
not to introduce new ones. The resulting struc- 
tures may be ambiguous, but this will not mat- 
ter if the unexpressed rhetorical relationships 
can .be inferred from the content. 
4 Extraposition 
The compatibility rule may be a useful text- 
planning heuristic, but as a constraint on ade- 
quacy it still seems too strong. Looking through 
our corpus of patient information leaflets, we 
have noticed some exceptions, especially in pas- 
sages giving conditional instructions: 
(4) If you forget to take your tablet A, take an- 
other as soon as you remember B or wait 
until it is time to take your next dose C. 
Then go on as before D. 
From the point of view of document structure, 
this passage is a paragraph comprising two text- 
sentences: thns the proposition D is separated 
from the other three propositions, which are 
grouped in tile .first sentence. However, rhetor- 
ically speaking, D belongs to the consequent of 
the conditional: it is the final step of the plan 
that should be activated .if_the patient forgets 
to take a dose (figure 3). Compatibility is vio- 
lated because tile DocRep contains a node (the 
first text-sentence) dominating the proposition 
set {A, B, C}. which is not dominated by any 
node in figure 3. 
Such examples might be explained as the re- 
sult of loose punctuation or layout, perhal)S 
197 
through imitation of the patterns of conversa- 
tion, in which extra:.materi~! is_often ~tagged. on- 
as an afterthought. Thus proposition D remains 
grouped with B and C - -  they occur consecu- 
tively - -  but through a minor relaxation of nor- 
mal punctuation it has been separated by a full- 
stop rather than a comma. However, this expla- 
nation fails to cover variations of the example 
in which the propositions in the consequent are 
not realized consecutively in the DocRep: 
(5) Consult your doctor immediately A if a 
rash develops B. It might become seriously 
infected C. 
In this example, A must be grouped rhetori- 
cally with C rather than with B, unless we take 
the radical step of allowing rhetorical structure 
to contradict logical structure. The proposition 
C cannot be logically conjoined with the con- 
ditional because it contains a hypothetical dis- 
course referent (the rash) that is bound to the 
antecedent, and is therefore inaccessible outside 
the conditional. 
If passages of this kind are not artifacts of 
loose punctuation, why do they occur? A plau- 
sible reason, we suggest, is that some com- 
plex rhetorical patterns cannot easily be real- 
ized in a way that maintains structural com- 
patibility, usually because text-clauses are over- 
loaded. Conditionals are especially prone to this 
problem because the only common discourse 
connective ('if') is a subordinating conjunction 
which can only link spans within a syntactic 
sentence (and thus within a text-clause). If ei- 
ther the antecedent or the consequent is com- 
plex, the author is faced with a tricky problem. 
We have found examples in patient informa- 
tion leaflets of conditional sentences so long that 
they are ahnost incomprehensible. More skilled 
authors, however, succeed in presenting the ma- 
terial clearly either by using layout (e.g., a com- 
plex antecedent is presented as an indented list), 
or by a trick of rhetorical reorganization that we 
will call eztraposition. It is this trick that intro- 
duces an incompatibility between RhetRep and 
DocRep. 
Extraposition typically occurs when a rhetor- 
ical representation R contains a complex em- 
bedded constituent C. To respect structural 
compatibility, R should be realized by a doc- 
ument unit that contains the realization of C: 
instead, in extraposition, a document unit real- 
ising/?. - C is coordinated with one realizing C. 
so that the extraposed material C is raised in 
the DocRep to the same level as R. To recon- 
...... struct ~:the:.: meanings.of .the:-.whole:. passage, .the 
reader has to plug C back into R. In most 
cases, the author facilitates this task through 
an explicit deictic reference to the extraposed 
material (Bouayad-Agha et al, 2000): 
(6) If you have any of the following, tell your 
doctor: 
difficulty in breathing 
. . . . . . . . . . .  al)dominal..Dains 
nausea or vomiting 
Occasionally, however, the author leaves the 
extraposition implicit, assuming that the reader 
can infer the correct location of C within R from 
the propositional content. In such cases, the ex- 
traposition looks like an afterthought, because 
the unit realizing R - C contains no signal that 
a gap in its content will be filled in later. 
We have also come across rare examples 
of another kind of incompatibil ity in which 
Marcu's (1996) principle of nuclearity is vio- 
lated by grouping together two satellites which 
have the same nucleus. Suppose that the rhetor- 
ical representation i figure 1 is realized by the 
following passage, in a context in which the 
reader knows nothing about gestodene: 
(7) Although Elixir has no serious side- 
effects A, it contains gestodene c. Conse- 
quently, it occasionally provokes a mild al- 
lergic reaction 8. 
The apparent concession relation between A 
and C here is paradoxical, since in rhetorical 
structure they are unrelated. Of course a con- 
trast between A and C nfight be perceived by 
a medical expert; however, one can construct 
similar examples in which the apparent relation 
is even less plausible: 
(8a) Although we usually work fl'om nine' to 
five A, today is Friday C. Consequently, we 
can go home early B. 
This may be rather loose, but many people find 
it acceptable. It could be explained as a rhetor- 
ical trick in which the sheer paradox of the con- 
cession serves as a signal that it is incomplete. 
The device might be spelled out as follows: 
Although Elixir has no serious side- 
effects A, there exists a contrasting 
state of a~hirs resulting fl'om the flzct 
that it contains gestodene c. This 
state of affairs is that it occasionally 
provokes a nfild allergic reaction t3. 
198 
Unlike the conditional examples above, this de- 
vice works only.when the-.rhetorically grouped 
propositions B and C are consecutive in the 
DocRep. Thus whatever view is taken of exam- 
ple (Sa) , everyone finds its variant (Sb) much 
worse: 
(Sb) # Today is Friday C although we usually 
work from nine to five A. Consequently, we 
can go home early s. 
5 Implications for NLG 
For many NLG applications, the notion of com- 
patibility defined above is a useful hard con- 
straint; even if violations of this constraint are 
sometimes acceptable, they are not essential. 
However, for some kinds of material (e.g., com- 
plex instructions), extraposition is a convenient 
rhetorical device which might improve the read- 
ability of the generated texts, so it is worth con- 
sidering how a text planner might be configured 
so as to allow solutions that violate compatibil- 
ity. 
In terms of the RAGS framework, there 
are broadly two possible approaches. First, 
we could introduce incompatibility by defin- 
ing transformations on the RhetRep; alterna- 
tively, we could relax the constraints govern- 
ing the transition from RhetRep to DocRep. 
The RAGS proposal (1999) allows for rhetorical 
transformations through a distinction between 
abstract and concrete rhetorical representa- 
tions. The abstract representation AbsRhetRep 
expresses the rhetorical content of the under- 
lying message, while the concrete RhetRep ex- 
presses the rhetorical structure directly realized 
in the text and corresponds to the representa- 
tion used by Scott and Souza (1990) to discuss 
textual realisation. If KhetRep is incompati- 
ble with AbsRhetRep, the text structure DocRep 
will also be incompatible with AbsRhetRep, 
even though the rules for realizing rhetorical 
structure by document structure are themselves 
compatibility-preserving, qYaalsformation oper- 
ations are also used by Marcu (2000) to map 
Japanese rhetorical structures onto English-like 
rhetorical structures, but these are mappings 
between two PdaetReps rather than from an 
AbsRhetRep to a RhetRep. 
If transformations are allowed, there are obvi- 
ous dangers that the message will be expressed 
in such a distorted way that the reader cannot 
recover the original intention. For this reason, 
rhetori(:al transformations must be defined with 
care. A fairly safe option would appear to be 
.... -the ..extraposition-iof.:a ,proposition. ~lab6rai~ing 
the antecedent of a conditional - - .even though 
such a transformation would violate Marcu's 
(1996) 'nuclearity principle' (assuming that the 
antecedent is regarded as the satellite). The fop - 
lowing examples how that this transformation 
leads to acceptable texts regardless of the order 
of nucleus and satellite within the conditional: 
(9a)~ Dcr.uot" use :Elixirif you :have had' an al: " 
lergic reaction to Elixir. An allergic reac- 
tion may be recognised as a rash, itching 
or shortness of breath. 
(9b) If you have had an allergic reaction to 
Elixir, do not use Elixir. An allergic re- 
action may be recognised as a rash, itching 
or shortness of'breath. 
However, the approach based on rhetorical 
transformations leads to difficulties when the 
acceptability of the resulting text depends on 
linear order as well as grouping. For instance, 
suppose that we try extraposing the elabora- 
tion of a satellite when the main relation is not 
a conditional, but a concession. The following 
passages how two texts that might result, but 
in this case the second version sounds anoma- 
lous: even if they are not grouped together in 
the DocRep, the satellite and its elaboration at 
least need to be consecutive. 
(10a) You should not stop taking Elixir, even 
though you might experience some mild 
effects. For example, feelings of dizziness 
and nausea are very common at the begin- 
ning of treatment. 
(lOb) # Even though you might experience some 
mild effects at tile beginning of tile treat- 
ment, you should not stop taking Elixir. 
For example, feelings of dizziness and nau- 
sea are very common at the beginning of 
treatment. 
A transformation from AbsKhetRep to 
RhetRep cannot distinguish these cases, so that 
10a is,allowed while 10b is protfibited; unless the 
l:l.hetRep is at least partially specified for linear 
order. Adhering strictly to the RAGS frame- 
work, where linear order is specified only in 
tbsDocRep, one would have to adopt the alter- 
native of building an incompatible /~bsDocRep 
from RhetRep. constraining the linear order at, 
this stage. 
199 
6 Conclusion 
We have discussed various examples Of extra- 
position. This phenomenon is due to various 
factors: the complexity of the material (exam- 
ple 4), the presence of logical information (5), 
the use of referring expressions to access infor- 
mation at various degrees of accessibility in the 
text structure (5,6,9), and the use of particular 
rhetorical strategies (7,8). This last group of ex- 
amples concerns.a concession constr.uction sim- 
ilar to the one discussed by Grote et al (1997), 
namely the substitution concession. This type 
of concession groups together the conceded part 
A and the explanation C but leaves the conclu- 
sion B unverbalised. The difference in the case 
of examples 7 and 8 is that A and C are grouped 
together but B is required to follow them be- 
cause there is not enough information for the 
reader to infer B from A and C. 
The extraposition phenomenon shows that 
the nucleus-satellite distinction is not the only 
factor influencing the segmentation f the mes- 
sage. In example 10, the injunction you should 
not stop taking Elixir obviously expresses the 
main intention of the author. However, the 
fact that the subordinated concession is placed 
after its main clause makes it available for 
further expansion. The sometimes compet- 
ing informational nd intentional roles of dis- 
course segments have been at the centre of 
the debate over the nucleus-satellite distinction 
(Moore and Pollack, 1992; Moser and Moore, 
1996; Bateman and Rondhius, 1997); the acces- 
sibility of discourse segments on the right fron- 
tier of a discourse structure is a phenomenon 
that has already been discussed by several re- 
searchers (Webber, 1991; Asher, 1993). Extra- 
position provides a useful and sometimes im- 
portant means of rearranging complex material 
in an abstract discourse representation in order 
to satisfy the constraints posed by linearisation 
into text. 
References 
N. Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract Objects 
in Discourse. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
Netherlands. 
J. Bateman and K. Rondhius. 1997. Coher- 
ence relations: Towards a general specifica- 
tion. Discourse Processes, 24(1):3-50. 
N. Bouayad-Agha, D. Scott, and R. Power. 
2000. Integrating content and style in doc- 
mnents: a case study of patient informa- 
tion leaflets. Information Design Journal, 
-9(2):161~176. - -  ? : - ' . : : -  
B. Grote, N. Lenke, and Stede M. 1997. 
Ma(r)king concessions in english and german. 
Discourse Processes, 24( 1):87-117. 
W. Mann and S. Thompson. 1988. Rhetorical 
structure theory: towards a functional theory 
of text organization. Text, 8(3):243-281. 
D. Marcu, L. Carlson, and M. Watanabe. 2000. 
The automatic translation of discourse struc- 
tures. In Proceedings of the North Ameri- 
can Chapter of the Association for Comptu- 
ational Linguistics (NAACL'2000), Seattle, 
Washington. 
D. Marcu. 1996. Building up rhetorical struc- 
ture trees. In Proceedings of AAAI-96. Amer- 
ican Association for Artificial Intelligence. 
D.J Moore and M.E. Pollack. 1992. A prob- 
lem for rst: The need for multi-level dis- 
course analysis. Computational Linguistics, 
18(4):537-544. 
M. Moser and J.D. Moore. 1996. Towards a 
synthesis of two accounts of discourse struc- 
ture. Computational Linguistics, 22(3):409- 
419. 
G. Nunberg. 1990. The Linguistics of Punctu- 
ation. CSLI, Stanford, USA. 
R. Power. 2000. Mapping rhetorical struc- 
tures to text structures by constraint satis- 
faction. Technical report, ITRI, University of 
Brighton. 
RAGS. 1999. The RAGS project: towards 
a reference architecture for natural lan- 
guage generation systems. Technical report, 
Information Technology Research Institute, 
Brighton, UK. 
D. Scott and C. de Souza. 1990. Getting the 
message across in RST-based text generation. 
In R. Dale, C. Mellish, and M. Zock, editors, 
Current Research in Natural Language Gen- 
eration. Cognitive Science Series, Academic 
Press. 
B.L Webber. 1991. Structure and ostension in 
the interpretation of discourse deixis. Lan- 
guage and Cognitive Processes, 6(2):107-135. 
200 
INLG 2012 Proceedings of the 7th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 146?149,
Utica, May 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Content Selection From Semantic Web Data
Nadjet Bouayad-Agha1
Gerard Casamayor1
Leo Wanner1,2
1DTIC, University Pompeu Fabra
2Institucio? Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avanc?ats
Barcelona, Spain
firstname.lastname@upf.edu
Chris Mellish
Computing Science
University of Aberdeen
Aberdeen AB24 3UE, UK
c.mellish@abdn.ac.uk
Abstract
So far, there has been little success in Natural
Language Generation in coming up with gen-
eral models of the content selection process.
Nonetheless, there has been some work on
content selection that employ Machine learn-
ing or heuristic search. On the other side, there
is a clear tendency in NLG towards the use of
resources encoded in standard Semantic Web
representation formats. For these reasons, we
believe that time has come to propose an initial
challenge on content selection from Semantic
Web data. In this paper, we briefly outline the
idea and plan for the execution of this task.
1 Motivation
So far, there has been little success in Natural Lan-
guage Generation in coming up with general mod-
els of the content selection process. Most of the
researchers in the field agree that this lack of suc-
cess is because the knowledge and context (commu-
nicative goals, user profile, discourse history, query,
etc) needed for this task depend on the application
domain. This often led in the past to template-
or graph-based combined content selection and dis-
course structuring approaches operating on idiosyn-
cratically encoded small sets of input data. Fur-
thermore, in many NLG-applications, target texts
and sometimes even empirical data are not avail-
able, which makes it difficult to employ empirical
approaches to knowledge elicitation. Nonetheless,
during the last decade, there has been a steady flow
of new work on content selection that employed Ma-
chine learning (Barzilay and Lapata, 2005; Duboue
and McKeown, 2003; Jordan and Walker, 2005;
Kelly et al, 2009), heuristic search (O?Donnell et
al., 2001; Demir et al, 2010; Mellish and Pan,
2008), or a combination thereof (Bouayad-Agha et
al., 2011). All of these strategies can deal with large
volumes of data.
On the other side, there is a clear tendency in NLG
towards the use of resources encoded in terms of
standard Semantic Web representation formats such
as OWL and RDF, e.g., (Wilcock and Jokinen, 2003;
Bontcheva and Wilks, 2004; Mellish and Pan, 2008;
Power and Third, 2010; Bouayad-Agha et al, 2011;
Dannells et al, 2012), to name but a few. However,
although most of these works make a good attempt
at realisation, the problem of content determination
from Semantic Web data is relatively untouched.
For these reasons, we believe that the time has
come to bring together researchers working on (or
interested in working on) content selection to par-
ticipate in a challenge for this task using standard
freely available web data as input. The availability
of open modular multi-domain multi-billion triple
data and of open ontological resources (Bizer et al,
2009) presented in a standard knowledge represen-
tation formalism make semantic web data a natural
choice for such a challenge.
As will be presented below, this initial challenge
presents a relatively simple content selection task
with no user model and a straightforward commu-
nicative goal so that people are encouraged to take
part and motivated to stay on for later challenges, in
which the task will be successively enhanced from
gained experience.
A content determination challenge would be a
chance to (i) directly compare the performance of
146
different types of content selection strategies; (ii)
contribute towards developing a standard ?off-the-
shelf? content selection module; and (iii) contribute
towards a standard interface between text planning
and linguistic generation.
To get the widest reception possible, the challenge
will be open to any approach, be it template-, rule-
or heuristic-based, or empirical. Furthermore, it will
be advertised in the Semantic Web Community to
get contributors from other horizons, see, e.g., (Dai
et al, 2010).
In what follows, we briefly outline the idea and
plan for the execution of the challenge. In Section 2,
we outline a description of the task. In Section 3,
the data and domain that will be used are presented.
Section 4 describes how this data is to be prepared
for the task, and Section 5 how it will be released to
the participants. In Section 6, we sketch the eval-
uation including the preparation of the evaluation
dataset. Section 7 gives a proposed schedule for
each of the tasks involved in organizing the chal-
lenge. Finally, in Section 8, we provide short bi-
ographies of the members of the organization team,
focusing on their experience in the proposed task.
2 Task Description
The core of the task to be addressed can be formu-
lated as follows:
Build a system which, given a set of RDF
triples containing facts about a celebrity
and a target text (for instance, a wikipedia-
style article about that person), selects
those triples that are reflected in the target
text.
The participants are also free to consider the se-
mantics defined by the data sources in their ap-
proach, rely on additional resources like ontologies
from other sources, or disregard the semantics com-
pletely.
The implemented system should output its results
in a predefined standard format that can be used for
automatic evaluation.
It could be that the RDF data does not contain ev-
erything that would ideally be included in such an
article, but that is ignored here. The task consists in
selecting content that is communicated in the target
text.
3 The data
The domain will be constituted by short biographies
of famous people. This is an interesting domain for
the challenge because Semantic Web data and corre-
sponding texts for this domain are available in large
quantities (e.g., DBPedia or Freebase for the data
and many other sources for biography texts, among
them Wikipedia).
The data will consist, for each famous person, of
a pair of RDF-triple set and associated text(s). For
each pair, the RDF data will include both informa-
tion communicated and excluded from the text. The
text may convey information not present in the RDF-
triples, but this will be kept to a minimum, always
subject to using naturally-occurring texts. All pairs
should contain enough RDF-triples and text to make
the pair interesting for the content selection task.
When choosing data for the challenge, we will
prefer semantic contents classified under consistent
ontologies over plain Linked Data with no explicit
semantics. The semantics of the RDF data (vocab-
ularies, ontologies) will be provided, preferably en-
coded in Semantic Web standards (e.g., in RDFS or
OWL).
4 Data Preparation
The task of data preparation consists in 1) data gath-
ering and preparation, which is to be carried out by
the organizers, and 2) working dataset selection and
annotation, which is to be carried out by both the
organizers and participants.
4.1 Data gathering and preparation
This preparatory stage consists in choosing the
repository sources, downloading the relevant on-
tologies (to the extent those will be provided), and
downloading and pairing the data and associated
texts (= the paired corpus).
4.2 Working Dataset selection and annotation
The participants will be asked to participate in a pre-
liminary task consisting in marking which triples are
included in the text given a subset of the paired cor-
pus (the size of the subset still has to be decided).
This task could be supported by some automatic
anchoring techniques such as used in (Duboue and
McKeown, 2003; Barzilay and Lapata, 2005). The
147
objectives of the task are threefold: (1) to provide all
participants with a common set of ?correct answers?
to be exploited in their approach, (2) to familiarize
the participants with the nature of the contents, their
semantics and the texts, and (3) to provide the task
with a ceiling for the evaluation, i.e. inter-annotator
agreement.
Annotation guidelines will be needed to ensure
that all participants follow the same procedure when
annotating texts. For this purpose, an early docu-
ment will be produced detailing the procedure to-
gether with examples and descriptions of relevant
problems such as ambiguities in the annotation. The
guidelines will be improved in multiple stages of an-
notation and revision with the goal of maximizing
inter-annotator agreement.
5 Data release
The participants in the challenge will be given ac-
cess to the set of all correct answers and a large
portion of the non-marked paired corpus, as well as
their semantics (i.e., ontologies and the like). The
remaining unseen, non-marked set will be kept for
evaluation.
6 Evaluation
The evaluation consists of 1) a preparatory stage for
selecting and annotating the evaluation dataset, and
2) an evaluation stage.
6.1 Evaluation dataset selection and annotation
Once all participants have submitted their exe-
cutable to solve the task, the evaluation set will be
processed. If timing is tight, however, this could be
done whilst the participants are still working on the
task or extra effort (for instance, from the organiz-
ers) could be brought in. A subset of the data is
randomly selected and annotated with the selected
triples by the participants. This two-stage approach
to triple selection annotation is proposed in order to
avoid any bias on the evaluation data.
6.2 Evaluation
Each executable is run against the test corpus and the
selected triples evaluated against the gold triple se-
lection set. Since this is formally a relatively simple
task of selecting a subset of a given set, we will use
for evaluation standard precision, recall and F mea-
sures. In addition, other appropriate metrics will be
explored?for instance, certain metrics for extrac-
tive summarisation (which is to some extent a simi-
lar task).
The organizers will explore whether it will be fea-
sible to select and annotate some test examples from
a different corpus and have the systems evaluated on
these as a separate task.
7 Schedule
Table 1 presents the different tasks, protagonists and
the schedule involved in the organization of the chal-
lenge. The challenge proper will take place between
November 2012 and May/June 2013.
8 Organizers
Nadjet Bouayad-Agha has been a lecturer and re-
searcher at DTIC, UPF, since 2002. She obtained
her PhD on Text Planning in 2001 from the Univer-
sity of Brighton and has been working ever since her
postgraduate studies at the University of Paris VII in
NLG, more specifically on Text Planning. In recent
years her focus has been on how to exploit semantic
web representations and technologies for Text Plan-
ning in general and content selection in particular.
Gerard Casamayor is a PhD student at DTIC,
UPF, working on text planning from general-
purpose semantic data. His main interests are ma-
chine learning and interactive, collaborative text
planning. As part of his thesis, he is developing a
text planning approach that can be trained directly
by domain experts, minimizing the need of encoding
or annotating prior knowledge about how to solve
the task.
Chris Mellish has been a professor at the Univer-
sity of Aberdeen since 2003, when he moved from a
similar position at the University of Edinburgh. He
has been doing research in NLG since 1984 and or-
ganised the second European NLG workshop. His
work on content selection includes the opportunis-
tic planning approach used by the ILEX system and
a rule-based approach to content selection from se-
mantic web data presented in ENLG 2011.
Leo Wanner has been ICREA Research Profes-
sor at DTIC, UPF, since 2005. Before, he was
148
What? Who? When?
Data gathering and preparation Organizers Summer 2012
Working dataset selection and annotation Organizers and Participants Sept/Oct 2012
Data Release Organizers November 2012
Evaluation dataset selection and annotation Organizers and Participants May 2013
Evaluation Organizers June 2013
Publication@INLG Organizers August 2013
Table 1: Content Selection Challenge Organization Schedule
affiliated as Assistant Professor with the Univer-
sity of Stuttgart. Wanner is involved in research
on multilingual text generation since the late 80ies.
Among his research foci are user-oriented con-
tent selection and the interface between language-
independent ontology-based and linguistic represen-
tations in text generation.
References
Regina Barzilay and Mirella Lapata. 2005. Collec-
tive Content Selection for Concept-to-Text Genera-
tion. Proceedings of the Joint Human Language Tech-
nology and Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing Conferences (HLT/EMNLP-2005) Van-
couver, Canada.
Christian Bizer, Tom Heath and Tim Berners-Lee 2009.
Linked Data - The Story So Far. International Journal
on Semantic Web and Information Systems 5(3) 1?22
Kalina Bontcheva and Yorick Wilks 2004. Automatic
Report Generation from Ontologies: the MIAKT ap-
proach Nineth International Conference on Appli-
cations of Natural Language to Information Systems
(NLDB?2004) 324?335.
Nadjet Bouayad-Agha, Gerard Casamayor and Leo Wan-
ner. 2011. Content selection from an ontology-based
knowledge base for the generation of football sum-
maries Proceedings of the 13th European Workshop
on Natural Language Generation (ENLG?2011) 72?
81 Nancy, France.
Yintang Dai, Shiyong Zhang, Jidong Chen, Tianyuan
Chen and Wei Zhang. 2010 Semantic Network Lan-
guage Generation based on a Semantic Networks Seri-
alization Grammar World Wide Web 13:307341
Dana Danne?lls, Mariana Damova, Ramona Enache and
Milen Chechev. 2012 Multilingual Online Genera-
tion from Semantic Web Ontologies Proceedings of
the 21st International Conference on World Wide Web
(WWW?12) 239?242
Seniz Demir, Sandra Carberry and Kathleen F. McCoy.
2010. A Discourse-Aware Graph-Based Content-
Selection Framework. Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Language Generation Conference. Sweden.
Pablo A. Duboue and Kathleen R. McKeown. 2003. Sta-
tistical Acquisition of Content Selection Rules for Nat-
ural Language Generation. Proceedings of the 2003
conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP). Sapporo, Japan.
Dimitrios Galanis and Ion Androutsopoulos. 2007. Gen-
erating Multilingual Personalized Descriptions from
OWL Ontologies on the Semantic Web: the Natu-
ralOWL System. Proceedings of the Eleventh Eu-
ropean Workshop on Natural Language Generation
(ENLG07)
Pamela W. Jordan and Marilyn A. Walker 2005 Learning
content selection rules for generating object descrip-
tions in dialogue Journal of Artificial Intelligence Re-
search 24, 157?194.
Colin Kelly, Ann Copestake, and Nikiforos Karamanis.
2009 Investigating content selection for language gen-
eration using machine learning. Proceedings of the
12th European Workshop on Natural Language Gen-
eration.. 130?137.
Chris Mellish and Jeff Z. Pan. 2008 Language Di-
rected Inference from Ontologies. Artificial Intelli-
gence. 172(10):1285-1315.
Mick ODonnell, Chris Mellish, Jon Oberlander, and Alis-
tair Knott. 2001. ILEX: an architecture for a dynamic
hypertext generation system. Natural Language Engi-
neering. 7(3):225?250.
Richard Power and Allan Third 2010 Expressing OWL
axioms by English sentences: dubious in theory, fea-
sible in practice Proceedings of the 23rd Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics (CI-
CLING?01). 1006?1013.
Graham Wilcok and Kristiina Jokinen 2003 Generat-
ing Responses and Explanations from RDF/XML and
DAML+OIL. IJCAI03 Workshop on Knowledge and
Reasoning in Practical Dialogue Systems. 58?63.
149
Proceedings of the 14th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages 98?102,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Overview of the First Content Selection Challenge from Open Semantic
Web Data
Nadjet Bouayad-Agha1
Gerard Casamayor1
Leo Wanner1,2
1DTIC, University Pompeu Fabra
2Institucio? Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avanc?ats
Barcelona, Spain
firstname.lastname@upf.edu
Chris Mellish
Computing Science
University of Aberdeen
Aberdeen AB24 3UE, UK
c.mellish@abdn.ac.uk
Abstract
In this overview paper we present the out-
come of the first content selection chal-
lenge from open semantic web data, fo-
cusing mainly on the preparatory stages
for defining the task and annotating the
data. The task to perform was described
in the challenge?s call as follows: given a
set of RDF triples containing facts about
a celebrity, select those triples that are re-
flected in the target text (i.e., a short bi-
ography about that celebrity). From the
initial nine expressions of interest, finally
two participants submitted their systems
for evaluation.
1 Introduction
In (Bouayad-Agha et al, 2012), we presented the
NLG challenge of content selection from seman-
tic web data. The task to perform was described
as follows: given a set of RDF triples contain-
ing facts about a celebrity, select those triples that
are reflected in the target text (i.e., a short biogra-
phy about that celebrity). The task first required
a data preparation stage that involved the follow-
ing two subtasks: 1) data gathering and prepara-
tion, that is, deciding which data and texts to use,
then downloading and pairing them, and 2) work-
ing dataset selection and annotation, that is, defin-
ing the criteria/guidelines for determining when a
triple is marked as selected in the target text, and
producing a corpus of triples annotated for selec-
tion.
There were initially nine interested participants
(including the two organizing parties). Five of
which participated in the (voluntary) triple anno-
tation rounds.1 In the end, only two participants
submitted their systems:
1We would like to thank Angelos Georgaras and Stasinos
Konstantopoulos from NCSR (Greece) for their participation
in the annotation rounds.
UA: Roman Kutlak, Chris Mellish and Kees van
Deemter. Department of Computing Science
, University of Aberdeen, Scotland (UK).
UIC: Hareen Venigalla and Barbara Di iEugenio.
Department of Computer Science, University
of Illinois at Chicago (USA).
Before the presentation of the baseline evalua-
tion of the submitted systems and the discussion
of the results (Section 4), we outline the two data
preparation subtasks (Sections 2 and 3). In Sec-
tion 5, we then sketch some conclusions with re-
gard to the achievements and future of the con-
tent selection task challenge. More details about
the data, annotation and resources described in this
overview, as well as links for downloading the data
and other materials (e.g., evaluation results, code,
etc.) are available on the challenge?s website.2
2 Data gathering and preparation
We chose Freebase as our triple datastore.3,4 We
obtained the triple set for each person in the Turtle
format (ttl) by grepping the official Freebase RDF
dump released on the 30th of December 2012 for
all triples whose subject is the person?s URI; cer-
tain meta-data and irrelevant triples (i.e., triples
with specific namespaces such as ?base? or ?com-
mon?) have been filtered out.
Each triple set is paired with the person?s sum-
mary biography typically available in Wikipedia,
which consists of the first paragraph(s) preceding
the page?s table of contents5
Our final corpus consists of 60000+ pairs, all of
which follow two restrictions that are supposed to
2http://www.taln.upf.edu/cschallenge2013/
3http://www.freebase.com
4For a comparison between Freebase and DBPedia, see
http://wiki.freebase.com/wiki/DBPedia.
5For example, the first four paragraphs in the follow-
ing page constitute the summary biography of that person:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George Clooney.
98
maximize the chances of having interesting pairs
with sufficient original and selected input triples
for the challenge. Firstly, the number of unique
predicates in the input ttl must be greater than
10. The number 10 is estimated based on the
fact that a person?s nationality, date and place of
birth, profession, type and gender are almost al-
ways available and selected, such that we need a
somewhat large set to select content from in or-
der to make the task minimally challenging. Sec-
ondly, the Wikipedia-extracted summary biogra-
phy must contain more than 5 anchors and at least
20% of the available anchors, where an anchor is
a URI in the text (i.e., external href attribute value
in the html) pointing to another Wikipedia article
which is directly related to that person. Given that
most Freebase topics have a corresponding DBPe-
dia entity with a Wikipedia article, anchors found
in the introductory text are an indicator of potential
relevant facts available in Freebase and are com-
municated in the text. In other words, the anchor
threshold restriction is useful to discard pairs with
very few triples to annotate. We found this crite-
rion more reliable than the absolute length of the
text which is not necessarily proportional with the
number of triples available for that person.
3 Working Dataset selection and
annotation
The manual annotation task consisted in emulat-
ing the content selection task of a Natural Lan-
guage Generation system, by marking in the triple
dataset associated with a person the triples predi-
cated in the summary biography of that person ac-
cording to a set of guidelines. We performed two
rounds of annotations. In the first round, partic-
ipants were asked to select content for the same
three celebrities. The objectives of this annota-
tion, in which five individuals belonging to four
distinct institutions participated, were 1) for par-
ticipants to get acquainted with the content selec-
tion task envisaged, the domain and guidelines,
2) to validate the guidelines, and 3) to formally
evaluate the complexity of the task by calculat-
ing inter-annotator agreement. For the latter we
used free-marginal multi-rater Kappa, as it seemed
suited for the annotation task (i.e. independent rat-
ings, discrete categories, multiple raters, annota-
tors are not restricted in how they distribute cat-
egories across cases) (Justus, 2005). We obtained
an average Kappa of 0.92 across the three pairs for
the 5 annotators and 2 categories (selected, not se-
lected), which indicates a high level of agreement
and therefore validates our annotation guidelines.
Our objective for the second round of annota-
tions was to obtain a dataset for participants to
work with. In the end, we gathered 344 pairs from
5 individuals of 5 distinct institutions. It should be
noted that although both rounds of annotations fol-
low the anchor restriction presented in Section 2,
the idea to set a minimum number of predicates
for the larger corpus of 60000+ pairs came forth
after analysing the results of the second round and
noting the data sparsity in some pairs. In what fol-
lows, we detail how the triples were presented to
human annotators and what were the annotation
criteria set forth in the guidelines.
3.1 Data presentation
A machine-readable triple consists of a subject
which is a Freebase machine id (mid), a predicate
and an object which can either be a Freebase mid
or a literal, as shown in the following two triples:
ns:m.0dvld
ns:people.person.spouse_s
ns:m.02kknf3 .
ns:m.0dvld
ns:people.person.date_of_birth
"1975-10-05"??xsd:datetime .
Triples were transformed into a human-readable
form. In particular, each mid in object position
(e.g., 02kknf3) was automatically mapped onto
an abbreviated description of the Freebase topic
it refers to. Thus, the triples above have been
mapped onto a tabular form consisting of (1) pred-
icate, (2) object description, (3) object id, and (4)
object types (for literals):
(1) /people/person/spouse_s
(2) "1998-11-22 - Jim Threapleton -
2001-12-13 - Marriage -
Freebase Data Team - Marriage"
(3) /m/02kknf3
(1) /people/person/date_of_birth
(2) value
(3) "1975-10-05"
(4) "datetime"
For each triple thus presented, annotators were
asked to mark 1) whether it was selected, 2) in
which sentence(s) of the text did it appear, and
3) which triples, if any, are its coreferents. Two
triples are coreferent if their overlap in meaning is
such that either of them can be selected to repre-
sent the content communicated by the same text
99
fragment and as such should not count as two sep-
arate triples in the evaluation. Thus, the same text
might say He is probably best known for his stint
with heavy metal band Godsmack and He has also
toured and recorded with a number of other bands
including Detroit based metal band Halloween
?The Heavy Metal Horror Show? . . . , thus refer-
ring in two different sentences to near-equivalent
triples /music/artist/genre ??Heavy
metal" and /music/artist/genre
??Hard rock".
3.2 Annotation criteria
Annotators were asked to first read the text care-
fully, trying to identify propositional units (i.e.,
potential triples) and then to associate each iden-
tified propositional unit with zero, one or more
(coreferent) triples according to the following
rules:
Rule 1. One cannot annotate facts that are not
predicated and cannot be inferred from predicates
in the text. In other words, all facts must be
grounded in the text. For example, in the sentence
He starred in Annie Hall, the following is pred-
icated: W.H.has profession actor and
W.H. acted in film Annie Hall. The
former fact can be inferred from the latter. How-
ever, the following is not predicated: (1) Person
has name W.H., (2) W.H. is Male, and (3)
W.H. is Person.
Rule 2. In general, one can annotate more
generic facts if they can be inferred from more
specific propositions in the text, but one cannot
annotate specific facts just because a more gen-
eral proposition is found in the text. In the exam-
ple He was a navigator, we can mark the triples
Person has profession Sailor as well
as Person has profession Navigator
(we would also mark them as coreferent). How-
ever, given the sentence He was a sailor, we can-
not mark the triple Person has profession
Navigator, unless we can infer it from the text
or world knowledge.
Rule 3. One can annotate specific facts from a
text where the predicate is too vague or general if
the facts can be inferred from the textual context,
from the available data, or using world knowledge.
This rule subsumes four sub-cases:
Rule 3.1. The predicate in the proposition is too
vague or general and can be associated with mul-
tiple, more specific triples. In this case, do not
select any triple. In the example Film A was a
great commercial success, we have several triples
associating the celebrity with Film A, as direc-
tor, actor, writer, producer and composer and none
of them with a predicate resembling ?commercial
success?. In this case there are no triples that can
be associated with the text.
Rule 3.2. The predicate in the proposition is
too vague or general, but according to the data
there is just one specific triple it can be associated
with. In this case, select that triple. In the ex-
ample Paris released Confessions of an Heiress,
the term released could be associated with au-
thored, wrote or published. However, there is only
one triple associating that subject with that object,
which matches one of the interpretations (i.e., au-
thoring) of the predicate. Therefore that triple can
be selected.
Rule 3.3. The predicate in the proposition is
too vague or general, but one or more specific
triples can be inferred using world knowl-
edge. In this case, select all. The sentence
He is also a jazz clarinetist who performs
regularly at small venues in Manhattan, can
be associated with the available triples W.H.
profession Clarinetist and W.H.
music/group member/instruments played
Clarinet, even though for this latter triple
the person being in a group is not mentioned
explicitly. However, this can be inferred from
basic world knowledge.
Rule 3.4. The predicate in the proposition is
too vague or general, but one or more specific
triples can be inferred using the textual context.
In this case, select all. In the example By the
mid-1960s Allen was writing and directing films
. . . Allen often stars in his own films . . . Some of
the best-known of his over 40 films are Annie Hall
(1977) . . . , the relations of the person with the
film Annie Hall are that of writer, director and
actor, as supported by the previous text. There-
fore we would annotate facts stating that the per-
son wrote, directed and starred in Annie Hall.
However, we wouldn?t annotate composer or pro-
ducer triples if they existed.
Rule 4. A proposition can be associated
with multiple facts with identical or over-
lapping meanings. In the example, Woody
Allen is a musician, we have the triples
W.H occupation musician and W.H
profession musician, which have near
100
identical meanings. Therefore, we mark both
triples and indicate that they co-refer. The
sentence Woody Allen won prize as best director
for film Manhattan, on the other hand, can be
associated with non-coreferring triples W.H won
prize and W.H. directed Manhattan.
Rule 5. If the text makes reference to a set of
facts but it does not enumerate them explicitly, and
there is no reason to believe it makes reference to
any of them in particular, then do not annotate in-
dividual facts. Thus, sentence Clint Eastwood has
seven children does not warrant marking each of
the seven children triples as selected, given that
they are not enumerated explicitly.
Rule 6. If the text makes a clear and unam-
biguous reference to a fact, do not annotate any
other facts, even though they can be inferred from
it. In other words, as explained in Rule 1, all an-
notated triples must be grounded in the text. In
the sentence For his work in the films Unforgiven
(1992) and Million Dollar Baby (2004), Eastwood
won Academy Awards for Best Director and Pro-
ducer of the Best Picture, we can infer from world
knowledge that the celebrity was nominated prior
to winning the award in those categories. How-
ever, the text makes a clear reference only to the
fact that he won the award and there is no reason
to believe that it is also predicating the fact that the
celebrity was nominated.
4 Baseline evaluation
Briefly speaking, the UA system uses a general
heuristic based on the cognitive notion of com-
munal common ground regarding each celebrity,
which is approximated by scoring each lexicalized
triple (or property) associated with a celebrity ac-
cording to the number of hits of the Google search
API. Only the top-ranked triples are selected (Kut-
lak et al 2013). The UIC system uses a small
set of rules for the conditional inclusion of pred-
icates that was derived offline from the statistical
analysis of the co-occurrence between predicates
that are about the same topic or that share some
shared arguments; only the best performing rules
tested against a subset of the development set are
included (Venigalla and Di Eugenio, 2013).
For the baseline evaluation, we used the devel-
opment set obtained in the second round annota-
tion (see Section 3). However, we only consider
pairs obtained during the second round annotation
that 1) follow both restrictions presented in Sec-
Baseline UIC UA
Precision 49 64 47
Recall 67 50 39
F1 51 51 42
Table 1: Baseline evaluation results (%)
tion 2, and 2) have no coreferring triples. This
last restriction was added to minimize errors be-
cause we observed that annotators were not al-
ways consistent in their annotation of triple coref-
erence.6 We therefore considered 188 annotations
from the 344 annotations of the development set.
Of these, we used 40 randomly selected annota-
tions for evaluating the systems and 144 for es-
timating a baseline that only considers the top 5
predicates (i.e., the predicates most often selected)
and the type-predicate.7.
The evaluation results of the three systems
(baseline, UIC and UA) are presented in Table 1.
The figures in the table were obtained by compar-
ing the triples selected and rejected by each system
against the manual annotation. The performance
of the baseline is quite high. The UA system based
on a general heuristic scores lower than the base-
line, whilst the UIC system has a better precision
than the baseline, albeit a lower recall. This might
be due, as the UA authors observe in their sum-
mary (Venigalla and Di Eugenio, 2013), to ?the
large number of predicates that are present only
in a few files . . . [which] makes it harder to de-
cide whether we have to include these predicates
or not.?
5 Conclusions
We have given an overview of the first content se-
lection challenge from open semantic web data,
focusing on the rather extensive and challenging
technological and methodological work involved
in defining the task and preparing the data. Unfor-
tunately, despite agile participation in these early
6Type-predicate triples were filtered out of the annotated
files in the development set whilst they were included in the
large corpus made available to the candidates. Therefore,
we added type-predicate triples in the development set a
posteriori for this evaluation. These type-predicate triples
might be coreferring with other triples, say ns:m.08rd51
ns:type.object.type ns:film.actor and
ns:m.08rd5 people/person/profession
"Actor" /m/02hrh1q . Nonetheless, this was not
taken into account in the evaluation.
7The top 5 predicates were (in descending order of fre-
quency): music track, film actor, profession, date of birth and
nationality
101
preparatory stages, the number of submitted sys-
tems was limited. Both of the presented systems
were data-intensive in that they usedeither a pool
of textual knowledge or the corpus of triple data
provided by the challenge in order to select the
most relevant data.
Unlike several previous challenges that involve
more traditional NLG tasks (e.g., surface realiza-
tion, referring expression generation), content se-
lection from large input semantic data is a rela-
tively new research endeavour in the NLG com-
munity that coincides with the rising interest in
statistical approaches to NLG and dates back, to
the best of our knowledge, to (Duboue and McK-
eown, 2003). Furthermore, although we had ini-
tially planned to produce a training set for the
task, the cost of manual annotation turned out
to be prohibitive and the resulting corpus was
only fit for development and baseline evaluation.
Despite these setbacks, we believe that open se-
mantic web data is a promising test-bed and ap-
plication field for NLG-oriented content selec-
tion (Bouayad-Agha et al, 2013) and trust that
this first challenge has prepared the ground for
follow up challenges with a larger participation.
We would also like to encourage researchers from
NLG and Semantic Web research fields to exploit
the framework and materials developed during the
course of this challenge to advance research in
content selection.
References
Nadjet Bouayad-Agha, Gerard Casamayor, and Leo
Wanner. 2013. Natural Language Generation in the
Context of the Semantic Web. Submitted to the Se-
mantic Web Journal.
Nadjet Bouayad-Agha, Gerard Casamayor, Chris Mel-
lish, and Leo Wanner. 2012. Content Selection from
Semantic Web Data. INLG ?12 Proceedings of the
Seventh International Natural Language Generation
Conference. Pages 146-149.
Pablo A. Duboue and Kathleen R. McKeown. 2003.
Statistical Acquisition of Content Selection Rules
for Natural Language Generation Proceedings of
the Conference on Empirical Methods for Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP). Pages 121?128.
Randolph, Justus J. 2005. Free-marginal multirater
kappa (multirater Kfree): An alternative to fleiss
fixed-marginal multirater kappa. Presented as the
Joensuu University Learning and Instruction Sym-
posium.
Roman Kutlak, Chris Mellish and Kees van Deemter
2013. Content Selection Challenge University of
Aberdeen entry Proceedings of the 14th European
Natural Language Generation (ENLG) Workshop.
Hareen Venigalla and Barbara Di Eugenio. 2013. UIC-
CSC: The Content Selection Challenge Entry from
the University of Illinois at Chicago Proceedings
of the 14th European Natural Language Generation
(ENLG) Workshop.
102
