The Language of Bioscience:
Facts, Speculations, and Statements in Between
Marc Light
Library and Information Science
Linguistics Department
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242
marc-light@uiowa.edu
Xin Ying Qiu
Management Sciences
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242
xin-qiu@uiowa.edu
Padmini Srinivasan
Library and Information Science
Management Sciences
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242
padmini-srinivasan@uiowa.edu
Abstract
We explore the use of speculative lan-
guage in MEDLINE abstracts. Results
from a manual annotation experiment sug-
gest that the notion of speculative sentence
can be reliably annotated by humans. In
addition, an experiment with automated
methods also suggest that reliable auto-
mated methods might also be developed.
Distributional observations are also pre-
sented as well as a discussion of possible
uses for a system that can recognize spec-
ulative language.
1 Introduction
The scientific process involves making hypotheses,
gathering evidence, using inductive reasoning to
reach a conclusion based on the data, and then mak-
ing new hypotheses. Scientist are often not com-
pletely certain of a conclusion. This lack of definite
belief is often reflected in the way scientists discuss
their work.
In this paper, we focus on expressions of levels of
belief: the expressions of hypotheses, tentative con-
clusions, hedges, and speculations. ?Affect? is used
in linguistics as a label for this topic. This is not a
well-known topic in the field of text processing of
bioscience literature. Thus, we present a large num-
ber of examples to elucidate the variety and nature
of the phenomena. We then return to a discussion
of the goals, importance, and possible uses of this
research.
1.1 Examples
The sentences in the following box contain frag-
ments expressing a relatively high level of specula-
tion. The level of belief expressed by an author is
often difficult to ascertain from an isolated sentence
and often the context of the abstract is needed. All
examples in the paper are from abstracts available at
the Nation Library of Medicine PubMed webpage
(currently http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/PubMed/).
The PubMed identifier is provided following each
sentence.
Pdcd4 may thus constitute a useful molecular
target for cancer prevention. (1131400)
As the GT box has also previously been shown
to play a role in gene regulation of other genes,
these newly isolated Sp2 and Sp3 proteins might
regulate expression not only of the TCR gene but
of other genes as well. (1341900)
On the basis of these complementary results, it
has been concluded that curcumin shows very
high binding to BSA, probably at the hydropho-
bic cavities inside the protein. (12870844)
Curcumin down-regulates Ki67, PCNA and mu-
tant p53 mRNAs in breast cancer cells, these
properties may underlie chemopreventive ac-
tion. (14532610)
The next examples contain fragments that are
speculative but probably less so than those above.
(As we will discuss later, it is difficult to agree on
levels of speculation.) The containing sentence does
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                   Linking Biological Literature, Ontologies and Databases, pp. 17-24.
                                                HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Biolink 2004,
provide some context but the rest of the abstract if
not the full text is often necessary along with enough
knowledge of field to understand text.
Removal of the carboxy terminus enables ERP
to interact with a variety of ets-binding sites
including the E74 site, the IgH enhancer pi
site, and the lck promoter ets site, suggesting
a carboxy-terminal negative regulatory domain.
(7909357)
In addition, we show that a component of the
Ras-dependent mitogen-activated protein kinase
pathway, nerve growth factor-inducible c-Jun,
exerts its effects on receptor gene promoter ac-
tivity most likely through protein-protein inter-
actions with Sp1. (11262397)
Results suggest that one of the mechanisms of
curcumin inhibition of prostate cancer may be
via inhibition of Akt. (12682902)
The previous examples contain phrases such as
most likely and suggesting, which in these cases, ex-
plicitly mark a level of belief less than 100%. The
next examples are not as explicitly marked: to date
and such as can also be used in purely definite state-
ments.
To date, we find that the signaling pathway
triggered by each type of insult is distinct.
(10556169)
However, the inability of IGF-1, insulin and
PMA to stimulate 3beta-HSD type 1 expression
by themselves in the absence of IL-4 indicates
that the multiple pathways downstream of IRS-1
and IRS-2 must act in cooperation with an IL-
4-specific signaling molecule, such as the tran-
scription factor Stat6. (11384880)
These findings highlight the feasibility of mod-
ulating HO-1 expression during hypothermic
storage to confer tissues a better protection to
counteract the damage characteristic of organ
transplantation. (12927811)
The words may and might were both used to ex-
press speculation in the examples above but are am-
biguous between expressing speculation versus pos-
sibility. The examples above are speculative and the
sentence below expresses a definite statement about
two possibilities.
The level of LFB1 binding activity in adenoid-
cystic as well as trabecular tumours shows some
variation and may either be lower or higher
than in the non-tumorous tissue. (7834800)
The sentence below involves the adjective puta-
tive in an apositive noun phrase modifier, a different
syntactic form that in the previous examples. It also
clearly shows that the speculative portion is often
confined to only a part of the information provided
in a sentence.
We report here the isolation of human zinc finger
2 (HZF2), a putative zinc-finger transcription
factor, by motif-directed differential display of
mRNA extracted from histamine-stimulated hu-
man vein endothelial cells. (11121585)
Of course, definite sentences also come in a vari-
ety. The definite sentences below vary in topic and
form.
Affinity chromatography and coimmunoprecipi-
tation assays demonstrated that c-Jun and T-Ag
physically interact with each other. (12692226)
However, NF-kappaB was increased at 3 h while
AP-1 (Jun B and Jun D) and CREB were in-
creased at 15 h. (10755711)
We studied the transcript distribution of c-jun,
junB and junD in the rat brain. (1719462)
An inclusive model for all steps in the targeting
of proteins to subnuclear sites cannot yet be pro-
posed. (11389536)
We have been talking about speculative fragments
and speculative sentences. For the rest of the paper,
we define a speculative sentence to be one that con-
tains at least one speculative fragment. A definite
sentence contains no speculative fragments. In this
study we only considered annotations at the sentence
level. However, in future work, we plan to work on
sub-sentential annotations.
1.2 Goals of our research on speculative speech
and possible uses
Our general goal is to investigate speculative speech
in bioscience literature and explore how it might be
used in HLT applications for bioscientists. A more
specific goal is to investigate the use of speculative
speech in MEDLINE abstracts because of their ac-
cessibility.
There are a number of reasons supporting the im-
portance of understanding speculative speech:
? it makes up a substantial portion of scientific
prose (we estimate that 11% of sentences in
MEDLINE abstracts contain speculative frag-
ments),
? many researchers are interested in current
trends and directions and speculations are
likely to be relevant,
? even if definite statements are of primary im-
portance, knowing that a statement is not defi-
nite, i.e. speculative, is important.
In the following, we expand upon these points in the
contexts of i) information retrieval, ii) information
extraction, and iii) knowledge discovery.
In the context of information retrieval, an exam-
ple information need might be ?I am looking for
speculations about the X gene in liver tissue.? One
of the authors spoke at a research department of a
drug company and the biologists present expressed
this sort of information need. On the other hand,
one of the authors has also encountered the opposite
need: ?I am looking for definite statements about
transcription factors that interact with NF Kappa B.?
Both these information needs would be easier to ful-
fill if automated annotation of speculative passages
was possible.
In the context of information extraction, a simi-
lar situation exists. For example, extracting tables
of protein-protein interactions would benefit from
knowing which interactions were speculative and
which were definite.
In the context of knowledge discovery (KR), spec-
ulation might play a number of roles. One possibil-
ity would be to use current speculative statements
about a topic of interest as a seed for the automated
knowledge discovery process. For example, terms
could be extracted from speculative fragments and
used to guide the initial steps of the knowledge dis-
covery process. A less direct but perhaps even more
important use is in building test/train datasets for
knowledge discovery systems. For example, let us
assume that in a 1985 publication we find a specu-
lation about two topics/concepts A and C being re-
lated and later in a 1995 document there is a definite
statement declaring that A and C are connected via
B. This pair of statements can then form the basis
of a discovery problem. We may use it to test a KR
system?s ability to predict B as the connecting as-
pect between A and C and to do this using data prior
to the 1995 publication. The same example could
also be used differently: KR systems could be as-
sessed on their ability to make a speculation between
A and C using data up to 1985 excluding the partic-
ular publication making the speculation. In this way
such pairs of temporally ordered speculative-definite
statements may be of value in KR research. Dif-
ferentiating between speculative and definite state-
ments is one part of finding such statement pairs.
2 Related work
We know of no work specifically on speculative
speech in the context of text processing of bio-
science literature. However, some work on informa-
tion extraction from bioscience literature has dealt
with speculative speech. For example, (Friedman et
al., 1994) discusses uncertainty and hedging in ra-
diology reports and their system assigns one of five
levels of certainty to extracted findings.
Text processing systems in general have focused
?factual? language. However, a growing number of
researchers have started work on other aspects of
language such as expressing opinions, style of writ-
ing, etc. For example a human language technology
workshop will be held this Spring entitled ?Explor-
ing Attitude and Affect in Text: Theories and Ap-
plications.? (Qu et al, 2004). Previous work along
these lines includes (Wilson and Wiebe, 2003). This
research focuses on newswire texts and other texts
on the topic of politics and current events.
There has been recent work on classifying sen-
tences from MEDLINE abstracts for the categories
such as object, background, conclusions (McKnight
and Srinivasan, 2003). In addition, early work,
(Liddy, 1988) built text grammars for empirical re-
search abstracts categorized and assigned structure
concerning rhetorical roles of the sentences. How-
ever, none of this work addresses the speculative vs.
definite distinction we are interested in.
There has also been some work on construct-
ing test sets for knowledge discovery. Several re-
searchers have used the discoveries by Swanson and
Smalheiser to test their own algorithms. The two
problems most commonly used in replication stud-
ies (e.g., (Weeber et al, 2001)) are their discov-
ery of a link between Raynauds disease and fish
oils (Swanson, 1986) and their discovery of several
links between migraine and magnesium (Swanson,
1988). The most comprehensive replication to date
is (Srinivasan, 2004) which employs eight Swanson
and Smalheiser discoveries as a test bed.
In the remainder of the paper, we describe a man-
ual annotation experiment we performed, give pre-
liminary results on our attempts to automatically
annotate sentences as containing speculative frag-
ments, and conclude with comments on possible fu-
ture work.
3 Manual annotation experiment
In this experiment, four human annotators manually
marked sentences as highly speculative, low specu-
lative, or definite.
Some of the questions we hoped to answer with
this experiment were: can we characterize what a
speculative sentence is (as demonstrated by good
inter-annotator agreement), can a distinction be-
tween high and low speculation be made, how much
speculative speech is there, where are speculative
sentences located in the abstract, is there variation
across topics?
The annotators were instructed to follow written
annotation guidelines which we provide in appendix
of this paper. We wanted to explore how well the an-
notators agreed on relatively abstract classifications
such as ?requires extrapolation from actual findings?
and thus we refrained from writing instructions such
as ?if the sentence contains a form of suggest, then
mark it as speculative? into the guidelines.
We chose three topics to work on and used the
following Pubmed queries to gather abstracts:
? ?gene regulation? AND ?transcription factor?
AND 1900:2001[edat]
? (crohn?s disease OR crohn disease) AND com-
plications[MeSH Subheading] AND hasab-
stract[text] AND English[Lang] AND (ho-
minidae[MeSH Terms] OR Human[MeSH
Terms])
? turmeric OR curcumin OR curcuma
The first topic is gene regulation and is about
molecular biology research on transcription factors,
promoter regions, gene expression, etc. The second
topic is Crohn?s disease which is a chronic relapsing
intestinal inflammation and has a number of genes
(CARD15) or chromosomal loci associated with it.
The third topic is turmeric (aka curcumin), a spice
widely used in Asia and highly regarded for its cu-
rative and analgesic properties. These include the
treatment of burns, stomach ulcers and ailments, and
various skin diseases. There has been a surge of in-
terest in curcumin over the last decade.
Each abstract set was prepared for annotation as
follows: the order of the abstracts was randomized
and the abstracts were broken into sentences us-
ing Mxterminator (Reynar and Ratnaparkhi, 1997).
The following people performed the annotations:
Padmini Srinivasan, who has analyzed crohns and
turmeric documents for a separate knowledge dis-
cover research task, Xin Ying Qiu, who is com-
pletely new to all three topics, Marc Light, who
has some experience with gene regulation texts (e.g.,
(Light et al, 2003)), Vladimir Leontiev, who is a re-
search scientist in an anatomy and cell biology de-
partment. It certainly would have been preferable to
have four experts on the topics do the annotation but
this was not possible.
The following manual annotations were per-
formed:
a. 63 gene regulation abstracts (all sentences) by
both Leontiev and Light,
b. 47 gene regulation additional abstracts (all sen-
tences) by Light,
c. 100 crohns abstracts (last 2 sentences) by both
Srinivasan and Qiu,
d. 400 crohns abstracts additional (last 2 sen-
tences) by Qiu,
e. 100 turmeric abstracts (all sentences) by Srini-
vasan,
f. 400 turmeric additional abstracts (last 2 sen-
tences) by Srinivasan.
The 63 double annotated gene regulation abstracts
(set a) contained 547 sentences. The additional ab-
stracts (set b) marked by Light1 contained 344 sen-
tences summing to 891 sentences of gene regula-
tion abstracts. Thus, there is an average of almost
9 sentences per gene regulation abstract. The 100
turmeric abstracts (set e) contained 738 sentences.
The other sets contain twice as many sentences as
abstracts since only the last two sentences where an-
notated.
The annotation of each sentence was performed in
the context of its abstract. This was true even when
only the last two sentences where annotated. The
annotation guidelines in the appendix were used by
all annotators. In addition, at the start of the exper-
iment general issues were discussed but none of the
specific examples in the sets a-f.
We worked with three categories Low Specula-
tive, High Speculative, and Definite. All sentences
were annotated with one of these. The general idea
behind the low speculative level was that the authors
expressed a statement in such a way that it is clear
that it follows almost directly from results but not
quite. There is a small leap of faith. A high specu-
lative statement would contain a more dramatic leap
from the results mentioned in the abstract.
Our inter-annotator agreement results are ex-
pressed in the following four tables. The first table
contains values for the kappa statistic of agreement
(see (Siegel and Castellan, 1988)) for the gene regu-
lation data (set a) and the crohns data (set c). Three
values were computed: kappa for three-way agree-
ment (High vs. Low vs. Definite), two-way (Spec-
ulative vs. Definite) and two-way (High vs. Low).
Due to the lack of any sentences marked High in
set c, a kappa value for High vs. low (HvsL) is not
possible. Kappa scores between 0.6 and 0.8 are gen-
erally considered encouraging but not outstanding.
HvsLvsD SvsD HvsL
geneReg 0.53 0.68 0.03
crohns 0.63 0.63 na
1Pun intended.
The following two tables are confusion matrices,
the first for gene regulation data (set a) and the sec-
ond for the crohns data (set c).
H L D
H 5 11 5
L 10 26 19
D 3 12 440
H L D
H 0 0 3
L 0 14 3
D 1 7 170
If we consider one of the annotators as defining
truth (gold standard), then we can compute preci-
sion and recall numbers for the other annotator on
finding speculative sentences. If we choose Leon-
tiev and Srinivasan as defining truth, then Light and
Qiu receive the scores below.
precision recall
Light 0.68 0.78
Qiu 0.70 0.64
As is evident from the confusion matrices, the
amount of data that we redundantly annotated is
small and thus the kappa numbers are at best to be
taken as trends. However, it does seem that the spec-
ulative vs. definite distinction can be made with
some reliability. In contrast, the high speculation vs.
low speculation distinction cannot.
The gene regulation annotations marked by Light
(sets a & b using only Light?s annotations) can
be used to answer questions about the position of
speculative fragments in abstracts. Consider the
histogram-like table below. The first row refers to
speculative sentences and the second to definite. The
columns refer to the last sentence of an abstract, the
penultimate, elsewhere, and a row sum. The num-
ber in brackets is the raw count. Remember that the
number of abstracts in sets a & b together is 100.
last 2nd last earlier total
S 57%(57) 23%(23) 6%(45) 14%(125)
D 43%(43) 77%(75) 94%(648) 86%(766)
It is clear that almost all of the speculations come
towards the end of the abstract. In fact the final sen-
tence contains a speculation more often than not.
In addition, consider the data where all sentences
in an abstract were annotated (sets a & b & e, us-
ing Light?s annotation of a), there were 1456 defini-
tive sentences (89%) and 173 speculative sentence
(11%). Finally, if we consider the last two sen-
tences of all the data (sets a-f), we have 1712 defini-
tive sentences (82%) and 381 speculative sentences
(18.20%).
4 Automatic classifier experiment
We decided to explore the ability of an SVM-
based text classifier to select speculative sentences
from the abstracts. For this the abstracts were
first processed using the SMART retrieval system
(Salton, 1971) in order to obtain representation vec-
tors (term-based). Alternative representations were
tried involving stemming and term weighting (no
weights versus TF*IDF weights). Since results ob-
tained were similar we present only results using
stemming and no weights.
The classifier experiments followed a 10-fold
cross-validation design. We used SV Mlight pack-
age2 with all settings at default values. We ran ex-
periments in two modes. First, we considered only
the last 2 sentences. For this we pooled all hand
tagged sentences from the three topic areas (sets a-f).
Second, we explored classification on all sentences
in the document (sets a,b,e).
If we assume a default strategy as a simple base-
line, where the majority decision is always made,
then we get an accuracy of 82% for the classifica-
tion problem on the last two sentences data set and
89% for the all sentences data set. Another baseline
option is to use a set of strings and look for them as
substrings in the sentences. The following 14 strings
were identified by Light while annotating the gene
regulation abstracts (sets a&b): suggest, potential,
likely, may, at least, in part, possibl, potential, fur-
ther investigation, unlikely, putative, insights, point
toward, promise, propose. The automated system
then looks for these substrings in a sentence and if
found, the sentence is marked as speculative and as
definite if not.
In the table below the scores for the three methods
of annotation are listed as rows. We give accuracy
on the categorization task and precision and recall
numbers for finding speculative sentences. The for-
mat is precision/recall(accuracy), all as percentages.
The Majority method, annotating every sentence as
2http://wwwai.cs.unidortmund.de/ SOFT-
WARE/SVM LIGHT/svm light.html.en
definite, does not receive precision and recall values.
The substring method was run on a subset of the
datasets where the gene regulation data (sets a&b)
was removed. (It performs extremely well on the
gene regulation data due to the fact that it was devel-
oped on that data.)
last2 all
SVM 71/39(85) 84/39(92)
Substr 55/80(87) 55/79(95)
Majority (82) (89)
Again the results are preliminary since the amount
of data is small and the feature set we explored was
limited to words. However, it should be noted that
both the substring and the SVM systems performs
well suggesting that speculation in abstracts is lex-
ically marked but in a somewhat ambiguous fash-
ion. This conclusion is also supported by the fact
that neither system used positional features and yet
the precision and recall on the all sentence data set
is similar to the last two sentences data set.
5 Conclusion and future work
The work presented here is preliminary but promis-
ing. It seems that the notion of speculative sen-
tence can be characterized enabling manual anno-
tation. However, we did not manage to characterize
the distinction between high and low speculation. In
addition, it seems likely that automated systems will
be able to achieve useful accuracy. Finally, abstracts
seem to include a fair amount of speculative infor-
mation.
Future work concerning manual annotation would
include revising the guidelines, throwing out the
High vs. Low distinction, annotating more data, an-
notating sub-sentential units, annotating the focus of
the speculation (e.g., a gene), and annotating full
text articles. We are also ignorant of work in lin-
guistics that almost certainly exists and may be in-
formative. We have started this process by consider-
ing (Hyland, 1998) and (Harris et al, 1989).
Future work concerning automatic annotation in-
cludes expanding the substring system with more
substrings and perhaps more complicated regular ex-
pressions, expanding the feature set of the SVM, try-
ing out other classification methods such as decision
trees.
Finally, we plan on building some of the applica-
tions mentioned: a speculation search engine, tran-
scription factor interaction tables with a specula-
tion/definite column, and knowledge discovery test
sets.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Vladimir Leontiev for his
time and effort annotating gene regulation abstracts.
In addition, we would like to thank David Eich-
mann for his assistance with our database queries.
We would also like to thank Lynette Hirschman for
assistance with the title of this paper. Finally, we
would like to thank the anonymous workshop re-
viewers for their comments.
References
C. Friedman, P. Alderson, J. Austin, J.J. Cimino, and S.B.
Johnson. 1994. A general natural-language text pro-
cessor for clinical radiology. Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association, 1(2):161?174.
Z. Harris, M. Gottfried, T. Ryckman, P. Mattick, A. Dal-
adier, T.N. Harris, and S. Harris. 1989. The Form of
Information in Science : analysis of an immunology
sublanguage. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
K. Hyland. 1998. Hedging in Scientific Research Arti-
cles. John Benjamins B.V.
E. D. Liddy. 1988. The Discourse-Level Structure of
Natural Language Texts: An Exploratory Study of Em-
pirical Abstracts. Ph.D. thesis, Syracuse University.
M. Light, R. Arens, V. Leontiev, M. Patterson, X. Y. Qiu,
and H. Wang. 2003. Extracting transcription factor in-
teractions from medline abstracts. In Posters from the
11th International Conference on Intelligent Systems
in Molecular Biology. ISCB.
L. McKnight and P. Srinivasan. 2003. Categorization of
sentence types in medical abstracts. In Proceedings of
the 2003 AMIA conference.
Yan Qu, J. Shanahan, and J. M. Wiebe, editors. 2004.
Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Symposium on Ex-
ploring Attitude and Affect in Text: Theories and Ap-
plications. AAAI. (to appear).
J. Reynar and A. Ratnaparkhi. 1997. A maximum en-
tropy approach to identifying sentence boundaries. In
Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Applied Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 16?19. ACL.
G. Salton, editor. 1971. The SMART Retrieval Sys-
tem: Experiments in Automatic Document Processing.
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
S. Siegel and N.J. Castellan. 1988. Nonparametric
Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences. McGraw-Hill.
P. Srinivasan. 2004. Text mining: Generating hypotheses
from medline. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology. (to appear).
D.R. Swanson. 1986. Fish oil, raynaud?s syndrome, and
undiscovered public knowledge. Perspectives in Biol-
ogy and Medicine, 30:7?18.
D.R. Swanson. 1988. Migraine and magnesium: Eleven
neglected connections. Perspectives in Biology and
Medicine, 31:526?557.
M. Weeber, H. Klein, L. Berg, and R. Vos. 2001. Con-
cepts in literature-based discovery: Simulating swan-
son?s raynaud-fish oil and migraine-magnesium dis-
coveries. Journal of the American Society for Infor-
mation Science, 52(7):548?557.
T. Wilson and J. Wiebe. 2003. Annotating opinions in
the world press. In Proceedings of the 4th SIGdial
Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue (SIGdial-03).
Appendix: Annotation Guidelines
Some target uses for speculative sentence classifi-
cation:
? a speculation search site that enables scientists
and health workers to find speculative state-
ments about a topic of interest,
? a set of starting points for knowledge discovery
systems,
? a test set for knowledge discovery systems.
The purpose of the guidelines below is to instruct
annotators on which sentences should be marked as
speculative.
There are three possible annotations for a sen-
tence: Low Speculative, High Speculative, and Def-
inite. All sentences should annotated with one of
these.
A sentence may be long and contain many sub-
parts:
? if any part of it is High Speculative (HS), it
should be marked as HS,
? if it is not HS but a part of it is Low Speculative
(LS), it should be marked as LS,
? otherwise it should be marked as Definite.
It should also be mentioned that the intent of the
author is what is relevant. The annotator should try
to decide if the author meant the sentence as specu-
lative or definite. E.g., an annotator should not mark
a sentence as speculative, if the author intended the
statement to be definitive.
Below are the definitions for the categories.
? Low Speculative (LS): A sentence fragment is
LS if the author indicates that it receives di-
rect support from the work presented but there
are other possible explanations for the results
(as there always are in science). However,
the proposition (expressed in the sentence frag-
ment) is a plausible if not likely explanation.
? High Speculative (HS): A sentence fragment is
HS if the author indicates that it does not follow
from the work presented but could be extrapo-
lated from it. In other words the work provides
indirect support for the proposition.
? Definite: A sentence fragment is definite if it is
not LS or HS. Observations are generally Def-
inite as are statements about methods, previous
work, etc.
Below are tests that may be helpful for annotating
particular sentences.
? If the sentence fragment implicitly suggests fu-
ture experimentation, then it is likely to be HS.
? Paraphrased the sentence fragment using ?we
conclude?, ?we observe?, or ?we know?. If
a contradiction or cognitive dissonance occurs
then perhaps the fragment is speculative. The
contradiction will be analogous to that in ?we
definitely believe that maybe there is a chance?.
Below are a number of additional considerations.
? Our characterization of speculative speech is
meant to be broad enough to include state-
ments that are not explicitly marked as specula-
tions but are speculations made by the authors
nonetheless. For example, we would consider
a proposal that some statement is true to be a
speculative sentence.
? Mentions of speculations made in previous
work should be considered speculations, e.g.,
?It was recently proposed that ...?.
Mining MEDLINE: Postulating a Beneficial Role for Curcumin Longa in
Retinal Diseases
Padmini Srinivasan
School of Library
& Information Science
The University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242
padmini-srinivasan@uiowa.edu
Bisharah Libbus
National Library of Medicine
Bethesda, MD 20852
libbus@nlm.nih.gov
Aditya Kumar Sehgal
Computer Science
The University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242
sehgal@cs.uiowa.edu
Abstract
Text mining tools are designed to assist users
with the important step of hypothesis genera-
tion. In this research we apply an open discov-
ery process to the problem of identifying novel
disease or problem contexts in which a sub-
stance may have therapeutic potential. We il-
lustrate this discovery process by executing our
open discovery algorithm with turmeric (Cur-
cumin Longa) as the substance being investi-
gated. The top ranking entry suggested by the
algorithm is retinal diseases. Further analysis
of the literature yields evidence supporting the
suggested connection between curcumin and
retinal diseases. In particular, curcumin influ-
ences the activation of genes such as COX-2,
TNF-alpha, JNK, ERK and NF-kappaB. These
genes are in turn involved in retinal diseases
such as diabetic retinopathies, ocular inflam-
mation and glaucoma. Moreover, the evidence
suggests that curcumin may have a beneficial
and therapeutic role in the context of these dis-
eases.
1 Introduction
Consider a bioscientist who is studying a particular dis-
ease. Assume that she is already well familiar with
the pathophysiology and accepted therapeutic options for
treating this condition and wishes to determine if there
are other, yet unrecognized, substances that may have
therapeutic potential. She begins by searching for doc-
uments on the disease mechanism(s) and related disor-
ders. Very soon she finds herself immersed in a morass
of pathways and possible directions that need to be fur-
ther explored. It will come as no surprise if even our most
determined user quickly becomes overwhelmed and dis-
couraged. The challenge of searching for a novel thera-
peutic substance is at best like looking for the proverbial
?needle in a haystack?. However, in reality the challenge
is greater since there is no assurance that there indeed is
a needle in the haystack. Consequently, the goal of text
mining (also known as literature mining) systems and al-
gorithms is to assist users find such needles, if these exist
at all in the literature ?haystacks? (Hearst 1999).
In general, as shown in Figure 1, a user may start with
any type of topic (A), be it a disease, a pharmacological
substance, or a specific gene. As he navigates the lit-
erature and follows connections through appropriate in-
termediate topics (B1, B2 etc.), the user hopes to reach
terminal topics (C1, C2 etc.) that are both relevant and
novel, in the sense of shedding new information on topic
(A). This text mining approach commonly referred to as
?open? discovery was pioneered by Swanson in the mid
80s. A classic example discovery is one where start-
ing with Raynaud?s disease (A) Swanson identified fish
oils (C) as a substance that may have therapeutic po-
tential (Swanson, 1986). Intermediate connections (B)
such as ?blood viscosity?, ?platelet aggregation? were ob-
served. Swanson also proposed a variation called ?closed?
discovery wherein starting with a pair of topics (A and
C) one explores possible connections (B links) between
them that are not yet recognized. In collaboration with
Smalheiser, Swanson used his open and closed discov-
ery methods on MEDLINE and proposed a number of
hypotheses (eg. Swanson, 1990; Smalheiser & Swan-
son1996a; Smalheiser & Swanson1996b; Smalheiser &
Swanson1998). The hypotheses they proposed were sub-
sequently corroborated in clinical studies.
The text mining framework established by Swanson
and Smalheiser has attracted the attention of several re-
searchers (Gordon and Lindsay, 1996; Lindsay and Gor-
don, 1999; Weeber et al, 2001) besides us (Srinivasan,
2004). A key goal in these follow-up efforts has been to
reduce the amount of manual effort and intervention re-
quired during the discovery process. In previous work
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                   Linking Biological Literature, Ontologies and Databases, pp. 33-40.
                                                HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Biolink 2004,
Figure 1: Open Discovery: The General Model
using algorithms for MEDLINE which we developed, we
replicated the eight open and closed discoveries made by
Swanson and Smalheiser. In comparison with other repli-
cation studies these algorithms were the most effective
(Srinivasan, 2004). They also require the least amount of
manual input and analyses. For example, in open discov-
ery, our methods expect the user to specify only the type
of B terms of interest. Following this our algorithm se-
lects B terms automatically. In contrast the other methods
rely more on user input for selecting B terms. Our cur-
rent research demonstrates that our open discovery algo-
rithm can be used to generate new hypotheses for disease
treatment that could be tested. In particular, we apply
our open discovery procedure to explore the therapeutic
potential of curcumin/turmeric (Curcumin Longa) a di-
etary substance commonly used in Asia. We show that
our automatic discovery algorithm identifies retinal dis-
eases as the novel context for research on curcumin. We
review genetic and biochemical evidence to indicate that
curcumin may be beneficial for treating retinal diseases.
We first describe our open discovery algorithm. Next
we show its application with curcumin as the starting
point (topic A). We then present an analysis of the cur-
cumin - retinal diseases connection. The next section is
on related research. The final section presents our con-
clusions and plans for the next phase of this research.
2 Open Discovery
Our open discovery approach is founded on the notion of
topic profiles. A topic is any subject of interest such as
treatment of hypertension or ATM gene. A profile is es-
sentially a representation of a topic that is derived from
the text collection being mined. For MEDLINE our topic
profiles are vectors of weighted Medical Subject Head-
ings (MeSH). These terms belong to a controlled vocab-
ulary and are manually assigned to each MEDLINE doc-
ument by trained indexers. Given a topic of interest, our
algorithm first retrieves relevant MEDLINE documents.
MeSH terms are then extracted from these documents and
their weights are calculated. These weighted terms form
the profile vector for the topic. We discuss the method for
calculating weights shortly.
We also exploit the fact that MeSH terms have been
classified using 134 UMLS (Unified Medical Language
System)1 semantic types as for example Cell Function,
Sign or Symptom. Each MeSH term is assigned one
or more semantic types. For example, interferon type
II falls within both Immunologic Factor and Pharmaco-
logic Substance semantic types. More generally, seman-
tic types represent ?categories? that have been used to
classify the MeSH metadata. Semantic types are useful
because depending on the nature of the discovery goals
we may adopt a particular view, i.e., we may restrict the
discovery process to consider only MeSH terms that be-
long to certain semantic types. In these cases the topic
profiles are restricted to MeSH terms belonging to seman-
tic types specified by the view.
We calculate term weights for the MeSH terms. Term
weights are a slight modification of the commonly used
TF*IDF scores. Since a MeSH term typically occurs once
in a MEDLINE record, here TFi (term frequency) equals
the number of documents in which the MeSH term ti oc-
curs within the retrieved document set. IDFi (inverse
document frequency) is log(N/TFi). N is the number
of documents retrieved for the topic. Weights are normal-
ized as shown below for term ti. This vector of weighted
MeSH terms forms the topic profile.
weight(ti) = vi/
?
v21 + v
2
2 + ... + v2r , (1)
where vi = TFi ? log(N/TFi) and there are r terms in
the profile.
Algorithm: Figure 2 outlines our open discovery
algorithm which follows the framework shown in Fig-
ure 1. We begin by building the A topic profile restricted
to ST-B semantic types. Note that all MEDLINE
searches are conducted automatically via the PubMed
interface2. We then automatically select M MeSH
terms for each ST-B semantic type from this A profile
and call these the B terms. Next profiles are built for
each of these B terms limited to another selected set
of semantic types ST-C. These B profiles are analysed
in combination to select an initial pool of candidate
C terms. These candidate terms are then checked for
novelty in the context of the starting A topic. When the
algorithm terminates the user is provided a final list of
ranked, novel C terms. The higher the rank the greater
1http://umlsks.nlm.nih.gov
2http://www.nlm.nih.gov
the estimated confidence in the potential connection with
the A topic.
At this point the rest of the process depends almost en-
tirely on the user. (This is also the case in other imple-
mentations of the open discovery process (eg. Lindsay &
Gordon 1999; Weeber et al, 2001)). It is up to the user to
select A - C pairs of interest and explore the literature for
supporting evidence.
The role of ST-B and ST-C in the algorithm is to apply
reasonable constraints to the problem and shape the path
of the discovery process. Similarly, parameter M may
be used to focus the discovery process. The higher this
number the bigger the scope through which one looks for
novel C topics. Obviously it takes experience to come
up with reasonable values for these parameters. But
we already see some patterns emerge in the MEDLINE
mining literature. For example when looking for sub-
stances likely to influence a disease several researchers
have used functional semantic types such as Cell Func-
tion and Molecular Dysfunction for selecting intermedi-
ate pathways (eg. Weeber et al, 2001). Experiments
varying these semantic types have been described in our
previous work (Srinivasan, 2004). Unique aspects of our
algorithm in comparison to open discovery methods ex-
plored by others, include for example, the fact that our
weighting scheme identifies interesting and relevant B
terms at high ranks. Also, C terms are assessed by com-
bining the evidence on their connection to the different
intermediate B terms.
3 Open Discovery with Turmeric
Our interest in curcumin was sparked by the fact that this
spice is widely used in Asia and is highly regarded for its
curative and analgesic properties. These include the treat-
ment of burns, stomach ulcers and ailments, and for var-
ious skin diseases. Curcumin is also used as an antisep-
tic, in alleviating symptoms of the common cold as well
as a depilatory. A number of MEDLINE records have
reported on the anti-cancer and anti-inflammatory prop-
erties of curcumin (12680238, 12678737, 126760443).
Our open discovery goal is aimed at determining whether
there are novel disease contexts in which curcumin could
prove beneficial, and to propose evidence-based hypothe-
ses that can be experimentally verified.
We executed our open discovery algorithm with cur-
cumin as the starting topic (A). The specific PubMed
search conducted was turmeric OR curcumin OR cur-
cuma (done on November 15, 2003). A total of 1,175
PubMed documents were retrieved. As Figure 3 shows
the majority of these publications (1,043, 89%) are rela-
3Numbers within parantheses such as these refer to PubMed
record ids. The reader may enter these directly into the PubMed
interface to retrieve the corresponding records.
Input from user: (1) an A topic of interest, (2) a
set of UMLS semantic types (ST-B) for selecting
B terms and a set (ST-C) for selecting C terms.
Parameter: M
? Step 1: Conduct an appropriate PubMed
search for topic A, and build its MeSH pro-
file limited to the semantic types in ST-B.
Call this profile AP.
? Step 2: For each semantic type in ST-B, se-
lect theM top ranking MeSH terms from AP.
Remove duplicate terms if any. These are
designated the B terms (B1, B2, B3, etc.).
? Step 3: Conduct an independent PubMed
search for each B term and build its pro-
file limited to the semantic types ST-C. Call
these profiles BP1, BP2, BP3, etc.
? Step 4: Compute a final combined profile
where the combined weight of a MeSH term
is the sum of its weights in BP1, BP2, BP3,
etc. Call this initial profile CP.
? Step 5: For each term t in CP if a MEDLINE
search on topic A AND t returns non zero
results, eliminate t from CP.
Output: For each semantic type in ST-C, output the
MeSH terms in CP ranked by combined weight.
These are the C terms organized by semantic type
and ranked by estimated potential.
Figure 2: Open Discovery Algorithm: Outline of Steps.
Figure 3: Temporal Distribution of Curcumin Documents
tively recent, being published in 1990 or later. This in-
dicates a surge in scientific interest in the health effects
of this spice, which has long been valued in Asia for its
medicinal properties.
We limited ST-B to the three semantic types Gene or
Genome; Enzyme; and Amino Acid, Peptide or Protein.
We restricted ST-C to Disease or Syndrome and Neo-
plastic Process4 and set M (the parameter specifying the
number of B terms to select) to 10. These semantic types
are appropriate since we are looking for biochemical and
genetic connections between turmeric and novel diseases.
Table 1 shows the top 10 selected MeSH terms from
each ST-B type (step 2). We can observe from the table
that some of the terms appear in more than one semantic
type. (This is possible since a term may be assigned to
more than 1 semantic type in the UMLS). However, we
remove duplicates in step 2. Also, some terms are very
specific such as Protein Kinase C while others are broad
representing families such as DNA-Binding Proteins and
Isoenzymes. At present we do not distinguish between B
terms using specificity. Our plan is to examine this aspect
in future research.
The B terms listed in Table 1 are the top ten terms that
were retrieved from a search of the literature for the se-
mantic types Genes or Genomes, Enzymes, and Amino
Acid, Peptide or Proteins. The biochemical effects of cur-
cumin become apparent upon conducting a search of the
literature for curcumin and any of these terms. Curcumin,
for example, has a strong down-regulatory effect on c-
Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) (14627502, 12859962,
11370761, 12097302) resulting in the arrest of cell pro-
liferation (14627502) in prostate tumor cells (12853969)
and induction of apoptosis (12859962). Curcumin in-
hibits NF-kappaB (12714587) leading to the suppres-
sion of cell proliferation and the induction of apoptosis
4Neoplastic Process includes MeSH terms referring to can-
cers.
Semantic Type
Intermediate B MeSH Terms G E A
Genes, jun 1
Genes, fos 2
Genes, APC 3
Genes, Reporter 4
Genes, Dominant 5
Genes, ras 6
Genes, rel 7
Genes, bcl-2 8
Nucleolus Organizer Region 9
Genes, myc 10
MAPK 1 3
Glutathione Transferase 2 5
Protein Kinase C 3 9
Prostaglandin-Endoperoxide
Synthase 4 10
Isoenzymes 5
Protein-Tyrosine Kinase 6
Caspases 7
Nitric-Oxide Synthase 8
Ornithine Decarboxylase 9
MAP Kinase Signaling System 10
NF-kappa B 1
Transcription Factor AP-1 2
Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-jun 4
Tumor Necrosis Factor 6
Glutathione 7
DNA-Binding Proteins 8
Table 1: Intermediate B Terms. G: Gene or Genome, E:
Enzyme, AAPP: Amino Acid, Peptide or Protein. Num-
bers indicate ranks.
Terminal C MeSH Terms Rank
Retina 1
Spinal cord 2
Testes 3
Thyroid Neoplasms 4
Ischemic Attack Transient 5
Table 2: Top Five Novel C Terms.
in multiple myeloma (12393461) and ovary cancer cells
(12520734). TGF-beta1 induced IL-6 which has been im-
plicated in the malignant progression of prostate cancers
was severely impeded by curcumin through inhibition of
c-Jun (matches with Genes, jun in the table) JNK (an in-
stance of MAPK in the table) or AP-1 (12853969).
The curcumin open discovery process terminated with
a ranked list of diseases. Table 2 shows the top 5 entries5.
One observation made at this point was that the type of
automated search conducted in step 5 of the algorithm to
check for novelty is insufficient. At present, the search
involves only the particular MeSH term intersected with
the A topic. We do not yet automatically consider syn-
onyms of the MeSH term. For example for the last entry
in the table, although Ischemic Attack Transient AND
(turmeric OR curcumin OR curcuma) retrieved 0 docu-
ments, the search Ischemia AND (turmeric OR curcumin
OR curcuma) retrieves 17 documents. Hence this entry is
unlikely to be immediately interesting to the user. How-
ever, the top two entries did not retrieve any document
even after searching with different synonyms. Testes is
also unlikely to be interesting since a curcumin search in-
tersected with sperm retrieved many documents. Consid-
ering retrieval set size alone is insufficient. For instance,
curcumin intersected with thyroid retrieved 5 documents.
However, these appear to be peripheral to curcumin?s ef-
fect on thyroid neoplasms focusing more on aspects such
as hypothyroidism and toxicity. Automating query ex-
pansion using synonyms will be the subject of further re-
search.
At this point the user may select entries and peruse the
appropriate literature further to (a) determine the nature
of the relationship between curcumin and the diseases (as
the substance under study could be beneficial or harmful)
and (b) assess the quality of the background knowledge
that may be used to guide further study of curcumin and
the disease. This manual phase may be guided by the
specific B term-based pathways connecting the selected
5Although the main semantic type for a term such as Spinal
Cord is Body Part, Organ, or Organ Component, in the UMLS
Spinal Cord is listed for at least one vocabulary as a synonym
for Spinal Cord Diseases. It is thus also assigned the semantic
type of Disease or Syndrome. Similar observations hold for
terms Retina and Testes
MeSH Term
Genes, fos
Genes, Reporter
Genes, Dominant
MAPK
Glutathione Transferase
Protein Kinase C
Isoenzymes
Protein-Tyrosine Kinase
Caspases
Nitric-Oxide Synthase
Ornithine Decarboxylase
Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-jun
Tumor Necrosis Factor
Glutathione
DNA-Binding Proteins
Table 3: B Terms Connecting Turmeric and Retina.
disease with curcumin. Table 3 lists the B terms that
were automatically identified as connecting curcumin and
?Retina?.
In the next section we present such an analysis for
?Retina?. That is, we (the second author) examine the
literature to determine if retinal diseases may be a good
context in which a bioscientist may study curcumin. Our
analysis indicates that indeed there is good evidence sup-
porting the hypothesis of a beneficial role for turmeric in
the context of diabetic retinopathies, ocular inflammation
and glaucoma. Analysis of the other highly-ranked dis-
eases is left for future work.
4 Turmeric - Retinal Diseases Connection
The procedure followed up to this point is ?term-centric?.
That is, we automatically identify statistically interesting
B terms and then generate a ranked list of C terms. We
now present further analysis on the connection between
retinal diseases and curcumin. In some cases reading the
title and abstracts of select records provided sufficient in-
formation. In addition the full text of the document was
available. Our strategy was to examine publications for
biochemical or molecular biology mechanisms. In par-
ticular, we were interested in ascertaining whether any of
the genes noted earlier were also involved in the patho-
physiology of these retinal disorders. We focused on the
genes as the critical links that connect the agent curcumin
to the disorders.
Analysis: The user?s goal is to identify biochemical
pathways potentially connecting retinal diseases and cur-
cumin. Retinal diseases could result from complications
due to diabetes, or of infection and inflammation of the
retina.
Diabetic retinopathy is a leading cause of blindness.
An early sign of the disease is the adhesion of leukocytes
to the vessels of the retina, endothelial cell injury, and the
breakdown of the blood-retina barrier (12000720). Even
acute intensive insulin therapy constitutes an additional
risk factor for diabetic retinopathy, due to insulin-induced
hypoxia and an associated acceleration in the blood-retina
barrier breakdown (11901189). Glaucoma is the second
most common cause of blindness in the world (8695555)
and is caused by mutations in a number of genes on chro-
mosomes 1 and 10 as well as in other loci on chromo-
somes 2, 3, 8, and 7. While several diseases have one
or a few genetic loci that control disease progression and
familial transmission, it is often the case that a variety of
genes may be involved in their pathophysiology. Follow-
ing is a brief survey of some of the genes that may be
involved in the process of tissue injury or inflammation
and regulation of cell division. Control of the immune
process and of the inflammatory response is important in
combating infection and autoimmune diseases. Regula-
tion of cell division, particularly programmed cell death,
is critical in diverse diseases such as cancer and tissue re-
generation, e.g. retinal injury and diseases. Regulation
of the activity of such genes could provide strategies for
therapeutic intervention using curcumin.
In diabetes and during inflammation, periods of hy-
poxia, i.e. low oxygen concentration, occur in various
tissues and organs. At such times an early cellular re-
sponse results in the elevated expression of interleukin-
1beta (IL-1 beta) and cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) genes
(11527948, 14507857, 11821258) which in turn stim-
ulate new blood vessel growth leading to retinopathy
(12821538, 12601017). Similarly, the expression of
COX-2 was associated with the development of glau-
coma (9441697). Treatment with COX-2 inhibitors sup-
pressed blood-retinal barrier breakdown and had an an-
tiangiogenic effect, i.e. they prevented the growth of new
blood vessels and thus had a protective effect on the retina
(12821538, 11980873).
Another gene, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-
alpha), was elevated during the early stages of diabetic
retinopathy and inflammation (11821258, 12706995,
11161842). Anti-TNF-alpha treatment reduced leukocyte
adhesion to blood vessels of the eye and vascular leakage
(12714660) indicating a potential therapeutic effect for
such a treatment to reduce ocular inflammation. Activa-
tion of TNF-alpha and other genes may also lead to the
pathophysiology of glaucoma (10975909, 10815159).
The family of mitogen-activated protein kinases
(MAPK) is another group of genes that has an important
role in retinal disease. These include extracellular signal-
regulated kinases (ERK), c-Jun amino(N)-terminal ki-
nase (JNK), and p38. One of these, ERK, was induced
in glaucoma (12824248). Often inflammatory responses
include the induction of apoptosis, or programmed cell
death. The involvement of JNK in inducing apop-
tosis was demonstrated in prostate cancer (12859962,
12663665) and retinal cells (12270637). There is also a
link to TNF-alpha (discussed above) which was shown to
activate phosphorylation of ERKs, p38, and JNK MAPK
in human chondrocytes (12878172).
IL-1beta activation, induced by the presence of reti-
nal holes, a key feature of diabetic retinopathy, is also
reported to result in the activation of a number of the
MAPK genes ERK, JNK, and p38 (12824248). These
conditions in turn exacerbate the disease process in that
they result in proliferative and migratory cells accumu-
lating in the wounded retina (12500176). Inhibitors of
MAPK and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3) inhibited
retinal pigment epithelial cell proliferation (12782163).
The breakdown in the blood-retina barrier is also sup-
pressed by inhibitors of p38 MAPK and PI3 (11901189).
Changes in the levels of the gene NF-kappaB is an
early cellular response to inflammation. Activation of
TNF-alpha (discussed above) is followed by increased
transcription of NF-kappaB which in turn stimulates
ERK, p38, and JNK MAPK (12878172). Also activa-
tion of NF-kappaB subsequently stimulated COX-2 and
matrix metalloproteinase-9 expression (12807725).
Curcumin was shown to be effective in inhibiting
cell proliferation of tumorigenic and non-tumorigenic
breast cancer cells (12527329) and other tumor cells
(12680238). As described previously the gene COX-
2 is involved in early inflammatory diabetic retinopathy
(11821258). Curcumin was able to suppress COX-2 in
a dose-related manner (12844482) and neutralized the
effect of IL-1 beta, possibly through its effect on p38
and COX-2 and JNK (12957788). Curcumin is also a
known inhibitor of JNK (12957788,12854631,12582006,
12130649, 12105223, 9674701) and a suppresser of
NF-kappaB activation (11753638, 11506818, 12878172,
12825130). For example, it suppressed the induction of
NF-kappaB and its dependent genes by cigarette smoke
(12807725), in alcoholic liver disease (12388178) and in
cultured endothelial cells (12368225).
Having shown that these genes, in particular, IL-1beta,
COX-2, TNF-alpha, JNK, ERK, NF-kappaB, etc., are
involved in retinopathy and in regulating cell prolifer-
ation and leukocyte attachment and the breakdown of
the blood-retina barrier, and having established that cur-
cumin is capable of inhibiting the activity of these genes
we hypothesize that curcumin may have therapeutic value
in preventing or ameliorating a number of retinal patholo-
gies.
Our approach has focused on specific genes, in partic-
ular to provide clues regarding the relevant biochemical
pathways. In some cases the evidence is gathered in the
context of other diseases such as alcoholic liver disease
with the idea that similar evidence may be found for reti-
nal diseases. In summary it seems likely that curcumin,
taken in the diet or applied topically, could prove benefi-
cial in cases of diabetic retinopathies, retinal injury, ocu-
lar inflammation and glaucoma.
5 Related Research
Text mining, i.e., uncovering information that may lead
to hypotheses, has attracted the attention of many re-
searchers (eg. Andrade & Valencia, 1998; Gordon
& Lindsay, 1996; Masys et al, 2001; Smalheiser &
Swanson, 1996a; Smalheiser & Swanson, 1996b; Srini-
vasan & Wedemeyer 2003; Srinivasan, 2004; Swanson,
1986; Swanson, 1988; Swanson et al, 2001; Weeber,
2000). Examples of recent text mining applications in-
clude automatically identifying viruses that may be used
as bioweapons (Swanson et al, 2001), proposing ther-
apeutic uses for thalidomide (Weeber, 2003) and find-
ing functional connections between genes (Chaussabel &
Sher, 2002; Shatkay et al, 2000).
A major emphasis in text mining research has been
to directly exploit co-occurrence relationships in MED-
LINE. For example, Jenssen et al, (2001) generate a
co-occurrence based gene network called PubGene from
MEDLINE for 13, 712 named human genes. Each of
PubGene?s 139,756 links is weighted by the number
of times the genes co-occur. Wilkinson and Huber-
man6 identify communities of genes. Starting with a
co-occurrence based gene network for a particular dis-
ease domain, communities are identified by repeatedly re-
moving edges of highest betweeness (number of shortest
paths traversing the edge). Applying this to the domain
of colorectal cancer, they are able to identify interesting
hypotheses linking genes that were for example, in the
same community but had no edge between them.
Our research is based on the open discovery framework
proposed by Swanson. As indicated before, Swanson
and Smalheiser made several discoveries using their open
and closed discovery methods (Swanson, 1986; Swan-
son, 1988; Swanson et al, 2001; Smalheiser & Swan-
son, 1996a; Smalheiser & Swanson, 1996b), that were
later validated by bioscientists. These discoveries to-
gether offer a testbed of examples that are being used
by other researchers to develop their own discovery al-
gorithms (Gordon & Lindsay, 1996; Lindsay & Gordon,
1999; Srinivasan, 2004; Weeber et al, 2001).
One characteristic that may be useful in distinguish-
ing between text mining efforts is the extent to which
they are problem or sub domain specific. For example,
PubGene is directly targeted towards bioinformatics re-
6Wilkinson, D., & Huberman, B. A. A
method for finding communities of related genes.
http://citeseer.nj.nec.com/546592.html.
searchers. In contrast, implementations such as ours that
derive from the open discovery framework are not prob-
lem specific. These may be used for a variety of goals, as
for example by geneticists involved in understanding the
results of microarray experiments and by epidemiologists
searching for links between viruses and specific popula-
tions. We believe that the next generation of text mining
systems will be judged not only by their effectiveness but
also by their flexibility in application.
6 Conclusions
We applied our implementation of Swanson?s open dis-
covery algorithm to the problem of identifying novel dis-
ease or problem contexts in which substances might have
a therapeutic role. We used our methods to investigate the
potential of turmeric or Curcumin Longa. Our analysis
identifies a ranked list of problems for which treatment
with curcumin may be beneficial with the top ranked en-
try pointing to retinal diseases. Guided by our algorithm,
further analysis of the literature by our expert user (a ge-
neticist) yielded good evidence in support of the hypoth-
esis that curcumin, taken in the diet or applied topically,
could prove beneficial in cases of diabetic retinopathies,
ocular inflammation and glaucoma.
In future work we will analyze the other suggestions
made by our open discovery methods. For example, the
second suggestion is problems related to the spinal cord.
The analysis will again focus on genetic mechanisms that
could potentially connect curcumin with the problems.
We will also explore methods to automate query expan-
sion for the search in step 5 of the algorithm. One lim-
itation of the discovery process concerns the evidence
gathering phase when analyzing individual C terms. This
process is manual and involves significant investment of
time and intellect toward sifting through the literature and
collecting evidence relevant to the hypothesized connec-
tions. In the next phase of our work we plan to study
methods to assist in this phase.
Acknowledgments
This research was partly accomplished while the first au-
thor was a visiting faculty scholar at the National Library
of Medicine, Bethesda, Maryland. She thanks the Univer-
sity of Iowa for the Faculty Scholar Award and NLM for
their hospitality. This work was also funded in part by
NSF grant no. IIS-0312356 awarded to the first author.
The authors thank the anonymous reviewers for their in-
sightful comments.
References
Andrade A, & Valencia A. 1998. Automatic extraction
of keywords from scientific text: application to the
knowledge domain of protein families. Bioinformatics,
14(7):600-607.
Chaussabel D. & Sher A. (2002). Mining microarray ex-
pression data by literature profiling. Genome Biology,
3(10):research0055.1-0055.16.
Gordon M.D & Lindsay R.K. 1996. Toward discovery
support systems: A replication, re-examination, and
extension of Swanson?s work on literature-based dis-
covery of a connection between Raynaud?s and fish oil.
Journal of the American Society for Information Sci-
ence, 47:116-128.
Hearst M. Untangling text data mining. (1999). In: Pro-
ceedings of ACL, Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (invited talk), Univer-
sity of Maryland, Maryland, June 20-26, 1999.
Jenssen, T-K., Laegreid, A., Komorowski, J., & Hovig,
E. 2001. A literature network of human genes for high-
throughput analysis of gene expression. Nature Genet-
ics, 28:21-28.
Lindsay, R.K, & Gordon, M.D. (1999). Literature-based
discovery by lexical statistics. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science, 50(7):574-587.
Masys, D.R., Welsh, J.B,, Fink, J.L., Gribskov, M., Kla-
cansky, I., & Corbeil, J. 2001. Use of keyword hier-
archies to interpret gene expression patterns. Bioinfor-
matics, 17(4):319-326.
Shatkay, H., Edwards, S., Wilbur, W.J., & Boguski, M.
2000. Genes, Themes and Microarrays. Using infor-
mation retrieval for large-scale gene analysis. In: Pro-
ceedings of Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology,
La Jolla, California, 317-328.
Smalheiser, N.R., & Swanson, D.R. 1996a. Indomethacin
and Alzheimer?s disease. Neurology, 46:583.
Smalheiser, N.R., & Swanson, D.R. 1996b. Linking es-
trogen to Alzheimer?s disease: An informatics ap-
proach. Neurology, 47, 809-810.
Smalheiser, N.R, & Swanson, D.R. 1998. Calcium-
independent phospholipase A2 and Schizophrenia.
Archives of General Psychiatry. 55(8), 752-753.
Srinivasan, P. To appear 2004. Text Mining: Generating
Hypotheses from MEDLINE. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science.
Srinivasan, P., & Wedemeyer, M. (2003). Mining Con-
cept Profiles with the Vector Model or Where on Earth
are Diseases being Studied? In: Proceedings of Text
Mining Workshop. Third SIAM International Confer-
ence on Data Mining. San Francisco, CA.
Swanson, DR. 1986. Fish oil, Raynaud?s syndrome, and
undiscovered public knowledge. Perspectives in Biol-
ogy and Medicine, 30: 7-18.
Swanson, D.R. 1988. Migraine and Magnesium: Eleven
neglected connections. Perspectives in Biology and
Medicine, 31:526-557.
Swanson, D.R. (1990). Somatomedin C and Arginine:
Implicit connections between mutually isolated lit-
eratures. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 33
(2):157-179.
Swanson, D.R., Smalheiser, N.R., & Bookstein, A.
(2001). Information discovery from complementary
literatures: categorizing viruses as potential weapons.
Journal of the American Society for Information Sci-
ence, 52(10): 797-812.
Weeber, M., Klein, H., Aronson, A.R., Mork, J.G., Jong-
van den Berg, L., & Vos, R. (2000). Text-based dis-
covery in biomedicine: the architecture of the DAD-
system. In: Proceedings of AMIA, the Annual Con-
ference of the American Medical Informatics Associa-
tion, November 4-8, 2000, 903-907.
Weeber, M., Klein, H., Berg, L., & Vos, R. 2001.
Using concepts in literature-based discovery: Sim-
ulating Swanson?s Raynaud-Fish Oil and Migraine-
Magnesium discoveries. Journal of the American So-
ciety for Information Science, 52(7):548-557.
Weeber, M., Vos, R., Klein, H., de Jong-Van den Berg,
L.T.W., Aronson, A & Molema, G. 2003. Generating
hypotheses by discovering implicit associations in the
literature: A case report for new potential therapeutic
uses for Thalidomide. Journal of the American Medi-
cal Informatics Association, 10(3): 252-259.
