Proceedings of the Workshop on Linguistic Distances, pages 8?15,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Similarity judgments: philosophical, psychological and mathematical 
investigations 
 
Claude St-Jacques 
Institute for Information Technology 
National Research Council of Canada 
Gatineau, QC, Canada 
Claude.St-Jacques@nrc.gc.ca 
Caroline Barri?re 
Institute for Information Technology 
National Research Council of Canada 
Gatineau, QC, Canada 
Caroline.Barriere@nrc.gc.ca 
 
  
 
Abstract 
This study investigates similarity judg-
ments from two angles.  First, we look at 
models suggested in the psychology and 
philosophy literature which capture the 
essence of concept similarity evaluation 
for humans.  Second, we analyze the 
properties of many metrics which simu-
late such evaluation capabilities. The first 
angle reveals that non-experts can judge 
similarity and that their judgments need 
not be based on predefined traits.  We use 
such conclusions to inform us on how 
gold standards for word sense disam-
biguation tasks could be established.  
From the second angle, we conclude that 
more attention should be paid to metric 
properties before assigning them to per-
form a particular task. 
1 Introduction 
The task of word sense disambiguation has 
been at the heart of Natural Language Processing 
(NLP) for many years.  Recent Senseval compe-
titions (Mihalcea and Edmonds, 2004; Preiss and 
Yarowsky, 2001) have stimulated the develop-
ment of algorithms to tackle different lexical dis-
ambiguation tasks. Such tasks require at their 
core a judgment of similarity as a word?s multi-
ple definitions and its contexts of occurrences are 
compared.  Similarity judgment algorithms come 
in many different forms.  One angle of this arti-
cle is to analyze the assumptions behind such 
similarity metrics by looking at different shared 
or non-shared properties. Among the interesting 
properties we note symmetry and transitivity, 
which are fundamental to the understanding of 
similarity. This angle is investigated in Section 4 
and 5, looking respectively at two broad classes 
of mathematical models of similarity and then 
more closely at different similarity metrics. 
As Senseval and other similar competitions 
need a gold standard for evaluating the compet-
ing systems, the second angle of our research 
looks into literature in philosophy and psychol-
ogy to gain insight on the human capability in 
performing a similarity judgment. From the first 
discipline explored in Section 2, we discover that 
philosophers have divergent views on concept 
identification, ranging from scientific definitions 
to human perception of concepts.  From the sec-
ond discipline, explored in Section 3, we dis-
cover different psychological models for concept 
identification and implicitly concept comparison, 
this time ranging from continuous concepts being 
positioned in multi-dimensional spaces to con-
crete concepts being grasped as entities. 
The two angles (metrics and humans) con-
verge in the conclusion of Section 6 with general 
observations and future work. 
2 Philosophical evidence 
Children have a natural eagerness to recognize 
regularities in the world and to mimic the behav-
ior of competent members of their linguistic 
community. It is in these words that Wittgenstein 
(1980) simply expresses how infants acquire the 
community?s language. What underlies the ac-
tivities surrounding a common use of language is 
similar to our usage of words to express some-
thing: ?Consider for example the proceedings 
that we call games. I mean board-games, card-
games, ball-games, Olympic games, and so on. 
What is common to them all?? (Wittgenstein, 
1968: 66). Wittgenstein answers that these ex-
pressions are characterized by similarities he 
calls family resemblances. 
8
Given that a dictionary?s purpose is to define 
concepts, we could hope to see such family re-
semblances among its definitions.  Contrarily to 
this intuition, Table 1 shows definitions and ex-
amples for a few senses of game in Wordnet1, 
from which resemblance cannot be found in 
terms of common words in the definitions or ex-
amples.  Nevertheless, humans are able to give 
different judgments of similarity between differ-
ent senses of the word game.  For example, simi-
larity between sense 1 and sense 3 is intuitively 
larger than between sense 1 and sense 4.   
 
Table 1: Some senses of game in Wordnet 
 Definition + Example 
1 A single play of a sport or other contest. The 
game lasted two hours. 
2 A contest with rules to determine a winner. You 
need four people to play this game. 
3 The game equipment needed in order to play a 
particular game. The child received several 
games for his birthday. 
4 Your occupation or line of work He's in the 
plumbing game. 
5 A secret scheme to do something (especially 
something underhand or illegal). [?] I saw 
through his little game from the start. 
 
Before being tempted to call up gigabytes of 
corpus evidence data and computational strength 
to help us identify the family of resemblance 
emerging here, let us further look at the nature of 
that notion from a philosophical point of view. 
Possible senses of individual things could be 
traced back to Aristotle?s work and identified 
?without qualification? as the primary substance 
of a thing (Cassam, 1986). What accounts for the 
substance of an object, for Aristotle, was the 
thing itself, namely its essence. Taking a slightly 
different view on the notion of family of objects, 
Putnam (1977) instead pursues a quest for natu-
ral kinds and according to him, the distinguish-
ing characteristics that ?hold together? natural 
kinds are the ?core facts [?] conveying the use 
of words of that kind? (Putnam, 1977: 118). Put-
nam disagrees with any analytical approaches 
sustaining that the meaning of a word X is given 
by a conjunction of properties P = {P1, P2,? Pn} 
in such a way that P is the essence of X. The 
problem is that a ?natural kind may have abnor-
mal members? (Putnam, 1977: 103). For instance, 
normal lemons have a yellow peel but let?s sup-
pose in accordance with Putnam, that a new en-
vironmental condition makes lemon peel become 
                                                
1
 See http://wordnet.princeton.edu/ 
blue. An analytical view will be unable to state 
which one amongst the yellow or the blue ones is 
now the normal member of the natural class of 
lemons. Putnam rather relies on a ?scientific the-
ory construction? to define what an object of 
natural kind is, and therefore, does not see that 
dictionaries ?are cluttered up [?] with pieces of 
empirical information? (Putnam, 1977: 118) as a 
defect to convey core facts about a natural class.  
In contrast to Putnam, Fodor (1998) is a viru-
lent opponent to a mind-independent similarity 
semantics subject to scientific discoveries. With 
his ostentatious doorknob example, Fodor shows 
that there is not any natural kind, hidden essence 
or peculiar structure that makes a doorknob a 
doorknob. ?No doubt, some engineer might con-
struct a counter-example?a mindless doorknob 
detector; and we might even come to rely on 
such a thing when groping for a doorknob in the 
dark? (Fodor, 1998: 147). However, the con-
struct will have to be done on what strikes us as  
doorknobhood or satisfying the doorknob stereo-
type, i.e. ?the gadget would have to be calibrated 
to us since there is nothing else in nature that 
responds selectively to doorknobs? (Fodor, 1998: 
147). According to Fodor, our capacity to ac-
quire the concept of doorknob involves a similar-
ity metric, and it is the human innate capacity to 
determine the concepts similar to doorknob that 
allow the characterization of doorknobhood. 
Therefore, Fodor states that the meaning of con-
cepts is mind-dependent and that individuation is 
not intractable since members of a language 
community, although experiencing diverse forms 
of a concept will tend to acquire similar stereo-
types of such a concept.  
This brief exploration into philosophical ap-
proaches for concept representation and delimita-
tion can inform us on the establishment of a gold 
standard by humans for the word sense disam-
biguation (WSD) task.  In fact, the adherence to 
one model rather than another has an impact on 
who should be performing the evaluation2.  Sen-
seval-2 was in line with Putnam?s view of ?divi-
sion of linguistic labour? by relying on lexicog-
raphers? judgments to build a gold standard (Kil-
garrif, 1998). On the other hand, Senseval-3 col-
lected data via Open-Mind Initiative3, which was 
much more in line with Fodor?s view that any 
common people can use their own similarity 
                                                
2
 The evaluation consists in performing sense tagging of 
word occurrences in context.  
3
 See http://www.openmind.org/, a web site where anyone 
can perform the sense tagging ?games?. 
9
metric to disambiguate polysemous terms. Inter-
estingly, a recent empirical study (Murray and 
Green 2004) showed how judgments by ordinary 
people were consistent among themselves but 
different from the one of lexicographers. It is 
important to decide who the best judges are; a 
decision which can certainly be based on the 
foreseen application, but also, as we suggest here, 
on some theoretical grounds. 
3 Psychological Evidence 
We pursue our quest for insights in the 
establishment of gold standards by humans for 
the WSD task, now trying to answer the ?how? 
question rather then the ?who? question. Indeed, 
Fodor?s view might influence us in deciding that 
non-experts can perform similarity judgments, 
but this does not tell us how these judgments 
should be performed.  Different psychological 
models will give possible answers.  In fact, 
similarity judgments have been largely studied 
by experimental psychologists and distinctive 
theories give some evidence about the existence 
of a human internal cognitive mechanism for 
such judgments. In this section, we present three 
approaches: subjective scaling and objective 
scaling (Voinov, 2002), and semantic differential 
(Osgood et al 1957).  
3.1 Subjective Scaling 
In subjective scaling (Voinov, 2002), the 
subjective human judgment is considered as a 
convenient raw material to make comparison 
between empirical studies of similarity. Subjects 
are asked to point out the ?similarities among n 
objects of interest ? whether concepts, persons, 
traits, symptoms, cultures or species? (Shepard, 
1974: 373). Then the similarity judgments are 
represented in an n ? n matrix of objects by a 
multidimensional scaling (MDS) of the distance 
between each object.  Equation 1 shows the 
evaluation of similarity, where ),( jkik xxd stands 
for the distance between objects ix and jx   on 
stimulus (dimension) k and kw  is the 
psychological salience of that stimulus k: 
( ) )),((,
1
 
=
=
m
k
jkikkji xxdwxxD .                      (1) 
Shepard?s MDS theory assumes that a 
monotonic transformation should be done from a 
nonmetric psychological salience of a stimulus to 
a metric space model. By definition, the resulting 
metric function over a set X should fullfill the 
following conditions: 
Xzyx ?? ,, : 
1. 0),(),( =? xxdyxd  (minimality), 
2. ),(),( xydyxd =  (symmetry), 
3. ),(),(),( yzdzxdyxd +?  (triangle ineq.). 
Accordingly to Shepard (1974), the distance in 
equation (1) can be computed with different 
metrics. Some of these metrics are given in 
Lebart and Rajman (2000). The Euclidean metric 
is the best known: 
2
1
1
2)(),( 


?= 
=
m
k
jkikkjiE xxwxxd .          (2)      
The city block metric is another one: 

=
?=
m
k
jkikkjiC xxwxxd
1
),( .                     (3) 
Another yet is the Minkowski metric: 
( )nm
k
n
jkikkjiN xxwxxd
1
1
)(),( 	
=
?= .            (4)             
There is a main concern with the MDS model. 
Tversky (1977) criticized the adequacy of the 
metric distance functions as he showed that the 
three conditions of minimality, symmetry and 
triangle inequality are sometimes empirically 
violated. For instance, Tversky and Gati showed 
empirically that assessment of the similarity 
between pairs of countries was asymetric when 
they asked  for ?the degree to which Red China 
is similar to North Korea? (1978: 87) and in the 
reverse order, i.e. similarity between North 
Korea and Red China. 
3.2 Objective Scaling 
The second approach is called objective scaling 
by Voinov ?though this term is not widely ac-
cepted? (Voinov, 2002). According to him, the 
objectivity of the method comes from the fact 
that similarity measures are calculated from the 
ratio of objective features that describe objects 
under analysis. So, subjects are asked to make 
qualitative judgments on common or distinctive 
features of objects and the comparison is then 
made by any distance axioms. Tversky?s (1977) 
contrast model (CM) is the best known formal-
ization of this approach. In his model, the meas-
ure of similarity is computed by: 
 
)()(),( BAfBAfBAS ??= ?? 
  
)( ABf ?? ?                     (5) 
10
where )( BAf   represents a function of the 
common features of both entities A and B,  
)( BAf ? is the function of the features belong-
ing to A but not B, )( ABf ? is the function of 
the features belonging to B but not A and 
??? ,, are their respective weighting parame-
ters. Equation (5) is the matching axiom of the 
CM. A second fundamental property of that 
model is given by the axiom of monotonicity: 
 
),(),( CASBAS ?                      (6) 
If BACA  ? , ,CABA ???  and 
ACAB ??? ,  then (6) is satisfied. With these 
two axioms (5-6), Tversky (1977) defined the 
basis of what he called the matching function 
using the theoretical notion of feature sets rather 
then the geometric concept of similarity distance. 
Interesting empirical studies followed this re-
search on CM and aimed at finding the correla-
tion between human judgments of similarity and 
difference. Although some results show a corre-
lation between these judgments, there is limita-
tion to their complementarity: ?the relative 
weights of the common and distinctive features 
vary with the nature of the task and support the 
focusing hypothesis that people attend more to 
the common features in judgments of similarity 
than in judgments of the difference? (Tverski and 
Gati, 1978: 84). Later on, Medin et al (1990) 
also reported cases when judgments of similarity 
and difference are not inverses: first, when enti-
ties differ in their number of features, and second 
when similarity/difference judgments involve 
distinction of both attributes and relations. ?Al-
though sameness judgments are typically de-
scribed as more global or non-analytic than dif-
ference judgments, an alternative possibility is 
that they focus on relations rather than attributes? 
(Medin et al, 1990: 68). 
3.3 Semantic Differential 
One standard psycholinguistic method to 
measure the similarity of meaning combines the 
use of subjective scaling transposed in a 
semantic space. One well-known method is 
Semantic Differential (SD) developed by Osgood 
et al (1957). 
The SD methodology measures the meanings 
that individual subjects grant to words and 
concepts according to a series of factor analyses. 
These factor analyses are bipolar adjectives put 
at each end of a Likert scale (Likert, 1932) 
devised to rate the individual reaction to the 
contrasted stimulus. For instance, the SD of a 
concept can be rated with two stimuli of 
goodness and temperature: 
BadGood
3
:
2
:
1
:
0
:
1
:
2
:
3
?
 
HotCold
3
:
2
:
1
:
0
:
1
:
2
:
3
?
 
If the subject feels that the observed concept is 
neutral with regards to the polar terms, his 
check-mark should be at the position 0. In our 
example, the mark on the good-bad scale being 
at the 1 on the left side of the neutral point 0, the 
judgment means slighthy good. Positions 2 and 3 
on that same side would be respectively quite 
good and extremely good. A similar analysis 
applies for the cold-hot scale shown. 
The theoretical background of that 
methodology, which tries to standardize across 
subjects the meaning of the same linguistic 
stimulus, relies on psychological research on 
synestesia. Simply explained, synestesia is 
similar to a double reaction to a stimulus. For 
example, when presented with images of 
concepts, subjects do not only have a 
spontaneous reaction to the images, but they are 
also able to characterize the associated concept 
in terms of almost any bipolar adjective pairs 
(hot-cold, pleasant-unpleasant, simple-complex, 
vague-precise, dull-sharp, static-dynamic, sweet-
bitter, emotional-rational, etc.). According to 
Osgood et al ?the imagery found in synesthesia 
is intimately tied up with language metaphor, and 
both represent semantic relations? (1957: 23). 
In SD, bipolar adjectives used in succession 
can mediate a generalization to the meaning of a 
sign, as uncertainty on each scale is reduced with 
the successive process of elicitation. By 
postulating representation in a semantic space, 
each orthogonal axis of selection produces a 
semantic differentiation when the subjects rate 
the semantic alternatives on a bipolar scale. 
Although that space could be multidimensional, 
empirical studies (Osgood et al, 1957) on factor 
analysis showed stability and relative importance 
of three particular dimensions labeled as 
Evaluation, Potency, and Activity (EPA). We 
refer the reader to Osgood et al (1957) for 
further explanation on these EPA dimensions. 
3.4 WSD and human judgments 
Table 2 emphasizes commonalities and differ-
ences between the three psychological models 
explored.   
11
Table 2 ? Psychological Models 
 Continuous Prede-
fined traits 
Similarity/ 
Difference 
MDS Yes Yes No 
CM No Yes Yes 
SD No No Possible 
 
In Table 2, we show that both MDS (Shepard, 
1974) and CM (Tversky, 1977) rely on a set of 
predefined traits.  This is a major problem, as it 
leads to the necessity of defining in advance such 
a set of traits on which to judge similarity be-
tween objects.  On the other hand, SD (Osgood 
et al 1957), although using a few bipolar scales 
for positioning concepts, argues that these scales 
are not concept-dependent, but rather they can be 
used for grasping the meaning of all concepts.  A 
second major difference highlighted in Table 2 is 
that MDS is the only approach looking at con-
tinuous perceptual dimensions of stimulus, con-
trarily to CM in which the scaling procedes with 
discrete conceptual traits, and even more in op-
position to SD which considers entities as primi-
tives. Finally, Table 2 shows the interesting ob-
servation brought forth by Tversky and later em-
pirical studies of Medin et al (1980) of the non-
equivalence between the notion of similarity and 
difference. 
Coming back to the question of ?how? human 
evaluation could be performed to provide a gold 
standard for the WSD task, considering the pros 
and cons of the different models lead us to sug-
gest a particular strategy of sense attribution.  
Combining the similarity/difference of Tversky 
with the successive elucidation of Osgood et al, 
two bipolar Likert scales could be used to delimit 
a similarity concept: a resembling axis and a con-
trasting axis. In this approach, the similarity con-
cept still stays general, avoiding the problems of 
finding specific traits for each instance on which 
to have a judgment. 
Already in the empirical studies of Murray and 
Green (2004), a Likert scale is used, but on an 
?applying? axis.  Subjects are asked for each 
definition of a word to decide whether it ?applies 
perfectly? or rather ?barely applies? to a context 
containing the word.  The choice of such an axis 
has limitations in its applicability for mapping 
senses on examples.  More general resembling 
and contrasting axis would allow for similarity 
judgments on any statements whether they are 
two sense definitions, two examples or a sense 
definition with an example. 
4 Mathematical Models of Similarity 
Logic and mathematics are extremely prolific 
in similarity measurement models. According to 
Dubois et al(1997), they are used for cognitive 
tasks like classification, case-based reasoning 
and interpolation. In the present study, we re-
strict our investigation to the classification task 
as representative on the unsupervised WSD task.  
The other approaches are inferential strategies, 
using already solved problems to extrapolate or 
interpolate solutions to new problems. Those 
would be appropriate for WSD in a supervised 
context (provided training data), but due to space 
constraints, we postpone discussion of those 
models to a later study. Our present analysis di-
vides classification models into two criteria: the 
cardinality of sets and the proximity-based simi-
larity measures. 
4.1 Cardinality of sets 
In line with De Baets et al (2001), similarity 
measures can be investigated under a rational 
cardinality-based criterion of sets. In an exten-
sive study of 28 similarity measures for ordinary 
sets, this research showed that measures can be 
classified on the basis of only a few properties. 
They proposed at first to build the class of cardi-
nality-based similarity measures from one ge-
neric formula: 
 
YXYXYXYX
YXYXYXYX
zyxw
zyxw
YXS
,,,,
,,,,
''''
),( ????
????
+++
+++
= ,  
                                        (8) 
 where { })(#),(#min
,
XYYXYX ??=? , 
{ })(#),(#max
,
XYYXYX ??=? , 
)(#
,
YXYX  =?  and cYX YX )(#, =? , and 
all w , x , y , z , 'w , 'x , 'y , 'z  { }1,0? . It 
follows that )(# YX   is the number of couples 
(1,1) and YX ?  denotes the sets difference 
)()( cYXYX =? . 
The classification of these 28 similarity meas-
ures (which can all be linked to the general for-
mula) becomes possible by borrowing from the 
framework of fuzzy sets the concepts of T for t-
norm (fuzzy intersection) operators and T-
equivalence for the property of T-
indistinguishability (De Baets et al, 2001). So, a 
typical measure M of T-equivalence under the 
universe U  must satisfy the following condi-
tions for any (x, y, z) U? : (i) 1),( =xxM  (re-
flexivity); (ii) ),(),( xyMyxM =  (Symmetry); 
12
(iii) ),()),(),,(( zxMzyMyxMT ?  (T-
transitivity). 
All 28 measures show reflexivity and symme-
try but they vary on the type of transitivity they 
achieve. In fact, studying boundary and 
monotonicity behavior of the different measures, 
De Baets et al (2001) group them under four 
types corresponding to four different formulas of 
fuzzy intersections (t-norms): the standard inter-
section ),min(),( babaZ = ,  the Lukasiewicz t-
norm )1,0max(),( ?+= babaL , the algebraic 
product abbaP =),(  and the drastic intersec-
tion abaD (),( =  when 1=b , b  when 1=a  
and 0  otherwise). We refer the reader to De 
Baets et al (2001) to get the full scope of their 
results. Accordingly, Jaccard?s coefficient J 
(equation 9) and Russel-Rao?s coefficient R 
(equation 10) are both, for example, L-transivive 
(Lukasiewicz? type): 
( )
( )YX
YXYXSJ  

#
#),( =                      (9) 
( )
n
YXYXSR

#),( =     .              (10) 
On the other hand, the overlapping coefficient O 
(equation 11) is not even D-transitive, knowing 
that D is the lower transitive condition 
)( ZPLD ??? in the framework: 
( )
( )YX
YXYXSO #,#min
#),(

=  .          (11) 
4.2 Proximity-based 
Following our second criterion of classifica-
tion, mathematics also uses diverse proximity-
based similarity measures. We subdivide these 
mathematical measures into three groups: the 
distance model, the probabilistic model, and the 
angular coefficients. The first one, the distance 
model, overlaps in part with the subjective scal-
ing of similarity as presented in the psychologi-
cal approaches (section 3.1). The mathematical 
model is the same with a metric of distance 
),( yxd computed between the objects in a space. 
Algorithms like formulae (2), (3) and (4) of sec-
tion 3.1 are amongst the proximity-based similar-
ity measures. 
Second, the probabilistic model is based on 
the statistical analysis of objects and their attrib-
utes in a data space. Lebart & Rajman (2000) 
gave many examples of that kind of proximity 
measures, such as the Kullback-Leiber distance 
KD  between two documents A and B, given the 
probability distribution { }npppP ,...,, 21= : 

??
??=
0
)log)(log(),(
bkak pp
bkakbkakK ppppBAD
 (12) 
The third mathematical model is also a metric 
space model but it uses angular measures be-
tween vectors of features to determine the simi-
larity between objects. A well-known measure 
from that group is the cosine-correlation: 


	


	

= 

==
=
n
k
k
n
k
k
n
k
kk
C
yx
yx
yxS
1
2
1
2
1),( .             (13) 
 
Although conditions applying on proximity-
based measures are shortly described in Cross 
and Sudkamp (2002) and Miyamoto (1990) for 
fuzzy sets, we are not aware of an extensive re-
search such as the one by De Baets et al (2001), 
presented in section 4.1, for classifying cardinal-
ity of sets types. We make such an attempt in the 
following section. 
5 Analysis of similarity metrics 
In this section, we perform a classification and 
analysis exercise for similarity measure4, possi-
bly used for WSD, but more generally used in 
any task where similarity between words is re-
quired. Table 3 shows the measures classified in 
the four categories of the mathematical model 
presented in section 4: measures of cardinality 
(Card), of distance (Dist), of probability (Prob) 
and of angle (Ang).   
We sustain that these groupings can be further 
justified based on two criteria: the psychological 
model of meaning (Table 2) and the typical 
properties of the classes (Table 4). The first crite-
rion refers to the representation of concepts dis-
tinguishing between the dense-state and the dis-
crete-state5 of concept (meaning) attributes. That 
psychological distinction is helpful to categorize 
some metrics, like Gotoh, which seems hybrid 
(Card and Dist). In such a metric, the penalty for 
the gap between two concepts applies on the de-
fect of the dense-state, such as for a blurred im-
                                                
4
 We use  the list of the following web page: http:// 
www.dcs.shef.ac.uk/~sam/stringmetrics.html#sellers  
5
 This differentiation is based on Tenenbaum?s (1996) idea 
that MDS better suits continuous perceptual domains and 
set-theoretic accommodate discrete features like in the CM. 
13
age rather then the absence of the discrete-state, 
i.e. of a feature; it is therefore classified in the 
Dist category. 
 
Table 3: Classification of Similarity Metrics 
Metric Card Dist Prob Ang 
Hamming distance  X   
Levenshtein distance  X   
Needleman-Wunch  X   
Smith-Waterman  X   
Gotoh distance  X   
Block distance  X   
Monge Elkan dist.  X   
Jaro distance   X  
Jaro Winkler   X  
SoundEx distance   X  
Matching coefficient X    
Dice?s coefficient X    
Jaccard similarity X    
Overlap coefficient X    
Euclidean distance  X   
Cosine similarity    X 
Variational distance   X  
Hellinger distance   X  
Information radius   X  
Harmonic mean   X  
Skew divergence   X  
Confusion probability   X  
Tau   X  
Fellegi & Sunters   X  
TFIDF     X 
FastA   X  
BlastP   X  
Maximal matches   X  
q-gram   X  
Ukkonen algorithms   X  
 
The second criterion is a study on shared 
properties for each category of the mathematical 
model. Table 4 summarizes the properties using 
the following schema: (m) minimality, (r) reflex-
ivity, (s) symmetry, (ti) triangle inequality, (tr) 
transitivity. 
 
Table 4 ? Typical Properties of Metrics 
 (m) (r) (s) (ti) (tr) 
Card  Yes Yes  Yes 
Dist Yes  Yes Yes Possible 
Prob  No Possible  Yes 
Ang Yes  Yes  Yes 
 
From Table 4, we see for instance that reflex-
ivity is a basic property for cardinality measures 
because we wish to regularly count discrete ob-
jects in a set. On the opposite side, the minimal-
ity property is a characteristic of a distance 
measure, since it is noticeable by the displace-
ment or the change, for example, in distinctive 
images. According to Fodor (1998), we say that 
statistical or probabilistic approaches exhibit 
several necessary and sufficient conditions for 
the inclusion of elements in the extension of a 
concept, but the dominant element, such as the 
pattern of comparison (in Maximal matches for 
instance) is anti-reflexive and asymmetric with 
the resulting elements. However, there is symme-
try in the resultant, but there is still anti-
reflexivity. 
We also single out the angular metrics from 
distance measures even though they use a similar 
analysis of the qualitative variation of entities. 
According to Ekman & Sj?berg (1965), a method 
using similarity converted into cosine representa-
tion has the advantage to reveal two components 
of percepts, i.e. the two-dimensional vector is a 
modeling in magnitude and direction. Thus, an-
gular metrics can be a means used to contrast 
two semantic features of entities. 
5.1 A closer look at properties 
Finding out that different sets of properties can 
serve as dividing lines between groups of metrics 
is interesting in itself, but does not answer the 
question as to which set is more appropriate than 
others.  We do not wish to answer this question 
here as we believe it is application-dependent, 
but we do wish to emphasize that a questioning 
should take place before choosing a particular 
measure. In fact, for each property, there is an 
appropriate question that can be asked, as is 
summarized in Table 5. 
 
Table 5 ? Questioning for Measure Selection 
Property Question 
Minimality Is the minimal distance between objects the 
distance of an object with itself? 
Symmetry Is it true that the distance between x and y is 
always the same as the distance between y 
and x? 
Triangle 
Inequality 
Is it appropriate that a direct distance be-
tween x and z is always smaller than a com-
posed distance from x to y and y to z? 
Reflexivity  Is it true that the relation that it holds be-
tween an object and itself is always the 
same? 
Transitivity Is it necessarily the case that when x is 
similar to y and y is similar to z, that x be 
similar to z? 
 
For the task of WSD investigated in this paper, 
we hope to open the debate as to which proper-
ties are to be taken into consideration. 
6 Conclusion and future work 
This paper presented some ideas from two angles 
of study (human and metrics) into the intricate 
problem of similarity judgments.  A larger study 
14
is under way on both angles.  First, we suggested, 
based on some psychological and philosophical 
model analysis, a two-axis Osgood-like bench-
marking approach for ?ordinary human? word-
sense judgments.  We intend to perform an em-
pirical experiment to validate this idea by look-
ing at inter-judge agreement.  
On the algorithm side, although the ap-
proaches based on the cardinality of sets are not 
central to WSD, we presented them first as we 
find it inspiring to see an effort of classification 
on those measures.  We then attempted a some-
what more broad classification by emphasizing 
properties of different groups of similarity meas-
ures: cardinality of sets, distance, probabilistic 
measures and angular metrics.  Although each 
group has a particular subset of properties, we 
noted that all of them share a property of transi-
tivity.  This is interestingly different from the 
psychological contrast model of Tversky where 
differences and similarities are measured differ-
ently on different criteria.  We think investiga-
tions into similarity measures which reproduce 
such a non-transitive differentiation approach 
should be performed.  We are on that path in our 
larger study.  We also suggest that any proposal 
of a measure for a task should be preceded by a 
study of which properties seem adequate for such 
a task.  We conclude by opening up the debate 
for the WSD task. 
References 
Bernard De Baets, Hans De Meyer and Helga Naes-
sens. 2001. A class of rational cardinality-based 
similarity measures. Journal of Computational and 
Applied Mathematics, 132:51-69. 
Quassim Cassam. 1986. Science and Essence. Phi-
losophy, 61:95-107. 
Valerie V. Cross and Thomas A. Sudkamp. 2002. 
Similarity and Compatibility in Fuzzy Set Theory. 
Heidelberg, Germany: Physica-Verlag.. 
Didier Dubois, Henri Prade, Francesc Esteva, Pere 
Garcia and Lluis Godo. 1997. A Logical Approach 
to Interpolation Based on Similarity Relations. In-
ternational Journal of Approximate Reasoning, 
17:1-36. 
C?sta Ekman and Lennart Sj?berg. 1965. Scaling. 
Annual Review of Psychology, 16, 451-474. 
Jerry A. Fodor. 1998. Concepts. Where Cognitive 
Science Went Wrong. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Adam Kilgarriff. 1998. Gold standard datasets for 
evaluating word sense disambiguation programs. 
Computer Speech and Language, 12:453-472. 
Ludovic Lebart and Martin Rajman. 2000. Computing 
Similarity in R. Dale, H. Moisl & H. Somers eds. 
Handbook of Natural Language Processing. New 
York: Marcel Dekker, Inc., 477-505. 
Rensis Likert. 1932. A technique for the measurement 
of attitudes.  Archives of Psychology 140, 5-53. 
Douglas L. Medin, Robert L. Goldstone and Dedre 
Gentner. 1990. Similarity Involving Attributes and 
Relations: Judgments of Similarity and Difference 
are not Inverses. Psychological Science, 1(1):64-69 
Rada Mihalcea and Phil Edmonds. 2004. Proceedings 
of SENSEVAL-3, Association for Computational 
Linguistics Workshop, Barcelona, Spain. 
Sadaaki Miyamoto. 1990. Fuzzy Sets in Information 
Retrieval and Cluster Analysis. Dordrecht: Kluwer 
Academic Publisher. 
G. Craig Murray and Rebecca Green. 2004. Lexical 
knowledge and human disagreement on a WSD 
task, Computer Speech and Language 18, 209-222. 
Charles E. Osgood, George J. Suci and Percy H. Tan-
nenbaum. 1957. The measurement of meaning. Ur-
bana: University of Illinois Press 
Judita Preiss and David Yarowsky (eds). 2001. Pro-
ceedings of SENSEVAL-2, Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics Workshop, Toulouse, France. 
Hilary Putnam. 1977. Is Semantics Possible? in 
Stephen P. Schwartz ed. Naming, Necessity, and 
Natural Kinds. Ithaca and London: Cornell Univer-
sity Press, 102-118. 
Roger N. Shepard. 1974. Representation of structure 
in similarity data: Problems and prospects. Psy-
chometrika, 39(4):373-421. 
Joshua B. Tenenbaum. 1996. Learning the structure of 
similarity. In D. S. Touretzky, M. C. Mozer and M. 
E. Hasselmo (Eds), Advances in neural information 
processing systems, (Vol. 8, pp. 3-9), Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. 
Amos Tversky. 1977. Features of Similarity. Psycho-
logical Review, 84, 79-98. 
Amos Tversky and Itamar Gati. 1978. Studies of 
Similarity in E. Rosch & B. B. Lloyd eds. Cogni-
tion and Categorization. New York: John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc., 79-98. 
Alexander V. Voinov. 2002. The Role of Similarity 
Judgment in Intuitive Problem Solving and its 
Modeling in a Sheaf-Theoretic Framework. Pro-
ceedings of the 1st Int. Conf. on FSKD?02, 1:753-
757. 
Ludwig Wittgenstein. 1968. Philosophical Investiga-
tions. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
Ludwig Wittgenstein. 1980. Remarks on the Philoso-
phy of Psychology. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press; Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
15
