Unsupervised Monolingual and Bilingual Word-Sense
Disambiguation of Medical Documents using UMLS
Dominic Widdows, Stanley Peters, Scott Cederberg, Chiu-Ki Chan
Stanford University, California
{dwiddows,peters,cederber,ckchan}@csli.stanford.edu
Diana Steffen
Consultants for Language Technology,
Saarbru?cken, Germany
steffen@clt-st.de
Paul Buitelaar
DFKI, Saarbru?cken, Germany
paulb@dfki.de
Abstract
This paper describes techniques for unsu-
pervised word sense disambiguation of En-
glish and German medical documents us-
ing UMLS. We present both monolingual
techniques which rely only on the structure
of UMLS, and bilingual techniques which
also rely on the availability of parallel cor-
pora. The best results are obtained using
relations between terms given by UMLS,
a method which achieves 74% precision,
66% coverage for English and 79% preci-
sion, 73% coverage for German on evalua-
tion corpora and over 83% coverage over the
whole corpus. The success of this technique
for German shows that a lexical resource
giving relations between concepts used to
index an English document collection can
be used for high quality disambiguation in
another language.
1 Introduction
This paper reports on experiments in monolingual
and multilingual word sense disambiguation (WSD)
in the medical domain using the Unified Medical
Language System (UMLS). The work described was
carried out as part of the MUCHMORE project 1 for
multilingual organisation and retrieval of medical in-
formation, for which WSD is particularly important.
The importance of WSD to multilingual applica-
tions stems from the simple fact that meanings repre-
sented by a single word in one language may be rep-
resented by multiple words in other languages. The
English word drug when referring to medically ther-
apeutic drugs would be translated as medikamente,
1http://muchmore.dfki.de
while it would be rendered as drogen when referring
to a recreationally taken narcotic substance of the
kind that many governments prohibit by law.
The ability to disambiguate is therefore essential
to the task of machine translation ? when translat-
ing from English to Spanish or from English to Ger-
man we would need to make the distinctions men-
tioned above and other similar ones. Even short of
the task of full translation, WSD is crucial to ap-
plications such as cross-lingual information retrieval
(CLIR), since search terms entered in the language
used for querying must be appropriately rendered in
the language used for retrieval. WSD has become a
well-established subfield of natural language process-
ing with its own evaluation standards and SENSE-
VAL competitions (Kilgarriff and Rosenzweig, 2000).
Methods for WSD can effectively be divided into
those that require manually annotated training data
(supervised methods) and those that do not (unsu-
pervised methods) (Ide and Ve?ronis, 1998). In gen-
eral, supervised methods are less scalable than unsu-
pervised methods because they rely on training data
which may be costly and unrealistic to produce, and
even then might be available for only a few ambigu-
ous terms. The goal of our work on disambiguation
in the MUCHMORE project is to enable the correct
semantic annotation of entire document collections
with all terms which are potentially relevant for or-
ganisation, retrieval and summarisation of informa-
tion. Therefore a decision was taken early on in the
project that we should focus on unsupervised meth-
ods, which have the potential to be scaled up enough
to meet our needs.
This paper is arranged as follows. In Section 2 we
describe the lexical resource (UMLS) and the cor-
pora we used for our experiments. We then describe
and evaluate three different methods for disambigua-
tion. The bilingual method (Section 3) takes ad-
vantage of our having a translated corpus, because
knowing the translation of an ambiguous word can
be enough to determine its sense. The collocational
method (Section 4) uses the occurence of a term in a
recognised fixed expression to determine its meaning.
UMLS relation based methods (Section 5) use rela-
tions between terms in UMLS to determine which
sense is being used in a particular instance. Other
techniques used in the MUCHMORE project in-
clude domain-specific sense selection (Buitelaar and
Sacaleanu, 2001), used to select senses appropri-
ate to the medical domain from a general lexical
resource, and instance-based learning, a machine-
learning technique that has been adapted for word-
sense disambiguation (Widdows et al, 2003).
2 Language resources used in these
experiments
2.1 Lexical Resource ? UMLS
The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) is
a resource that contains linguistic, terminological
and semantic information in the medical domain.2
It is organised in three parts: Specialist Lexi-
con, MetaThesaurus and Semantic Network. The
MetaThesaurus contains concepts from more than
60 standardised medical thesauri, of which for our
purposes we only use the concepts from MeSH (the
Medical Subject Headings thesaurus). This decision
is based on the fact that MeSH is also available in
German. The semantic information that we use in
annotation is the so-called Concept Unique Identifier
(CUI), a code that represents a concept in the UMLS
MetaThesaurus. We consider the possible ?senses? of
a term to be the set of CUI?s which list this term
as a possible realisation. For example, UMLS con-
tains the term trauma as a possible realisation of the
following two concepts:
C0043251 Injuries and Wounds: Wounds
and Injuries: trauma: traumatic disorders:
Traumatic injury:
C0021501 Physical Trauma: Trauma
(Physical): trauma:
Each of these CUI?s is a possible sense of the term
trauma. The term trauma is therefore noted as am-
biguous, since it can be used to express more than
one UMLS concept. The purpose of disambiguation
is to find out which of these possible senses is ac-
tually being used in each particular context where
there term trauma is used.
2UMLS is freely available under license from
the United States National Library of Medicine,
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/
CUI?s in UMLS are also interlinked to each other
by a number of relations. These include:
? ?Broader term? which is similar to the hyper-
nymy relation in WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998). In
general, x is a ?broader term? for y if every y is
also a (kind of) x.
? More generally, ?related terms? are listed, where
possible relationships include ?is like?, ?is clini-
cally associated with?.
? Cooccurring concepts, which are pairs of con-
cepts which are linked in some information
source. In particular, two concepts are regarded
as cooccurring if they have both been used to
manually index the same document in MED-
LINE. We will refer to such pairs of concepts
as coindexing concepts.
? Collocations and multiword expressions. For ex-
ample, the term liver transplant is included sep-
arately in UMLS, as well as both the terms liver
and transplant. This information can sometimes
be used for disambiguation.
2.2 The Springer Corpus of Medical
Abstracts
The experiments and implementations of WSD de-
scribed in this paper were all carried out on a par-
allel corpus of English-German medical scientific ab-
stracts obtained from the Springer Link web site.3
The corpus consists approximately of 1 million to-
kens for each language. Abstracts are from 41 medi-
cal journals, each of which constitutes a relatively ho-
mogeneous medical sub-domain (e.g. Neurology, Ra-
diology, etc.). The corpus was automatically marked
up with morphosyntactic and semantic information,
as described by S?pela Vintar et al (2002). In brief,
whenever a token is encountered in the corpus that is
listed as a term in UMLS, the document is annotated
with the CUI under which that term is listed. Ambi-
guity is introduced by this markup process because
the lexical resources often list a particular term as a
possible realisation of more than one concept or CUI,
as with the trauma example above, in which case
the document is annotated with all of these possible
CUI?s.
The number of tokens of UMLS terms included by
this annotation process is given in Table 1. The table
shows how many tokens were found by the annota-
tion process, listed according to how many possible
senses each of these tokens was assigned in UMLS (so
that the number of ambiguous tokens is the number
3http://link.springer.de/
Number of Senses 1 2 3 4
Before Disambiguation
English 223441 31940 3079 56
German 124369 7996 0 0
After Disambiguation
English 252668 5299 568 5
German 131302 1065 0 0
Table 1: The number of tokens of terms that have 1,
2, 3 and 4 possible senses in the Springer corpus
of tokens with more than one possible sense). The
greater number of concepts found in the English cor-
pus reflects the fact that UMLS has greater cover-
age for English than for German, and secondly that
there are many small terms in English which are ex-
pressed by single words which would be expressed
by larger compound terms in German (for exam-
ple knee + joint = kniegelenk). Table 1 also shows
how many tokens of UMLS concepts were in the an-
notated corpus after we applied the disambiguation
process described in Section 5, which proved to be
our most successful method. As can be seen, our
disambiguation methods resolved some 83% of the
ambiguities in the English corpus and 87% of the
ambiguities in the German corpus (we refer to this
proportion as the ?Coverage? of the method). How-
ever, this only measures the number of disambigua-
tion decisions that were made: in order to determine
how many of these decisions were correct, evaluation
corpora were needed.
2.3 Evaluation Corpora
An important aspect of word sense disambiguation is
the evaluation of different methods and parameters.
Unfortunately, there is a lack of test sets for evalu-
ation, specifically for languages other than English
and even more so for specific domains like medicine.
Given that our work focuses on German as well as
English text in the medical domain, we had to de-
velop our own evaluation corpora in order to test our
disambiguation methods.
Because in the MUCHMORE project we devel-
oped an extensive format for linguistic and semantic
annotation (S?pela Vintar et al, 2002) that includes
annotation with UMLS concepts, we could automat-
ically generate lists of all ambiguous UMLS types
(English and German) along with their token fre-
quencies in the corpus. Using these lists we selected a
set of 70 frequent types for English (token frequencies
at least 28, 41 types having token frequencies over
100). For German, we only selected 24 ambiguous
types (token frequencies at least 11, 7 types having
token frequencies over 100) because there are fewer
ambiguous terms in the German annotation (see Ta-
ble 1). We automatically selected instances to be
annotated using a random selection of occurrences if
the token frequency was higher than 100, and using
all occurrences if the token frequency was lower than
100. The level of ambiguity for these UMLS terms is
mostly limited to only 2 senses; only 7 English terms
have 3 senses.
Correct senses of the English tokens in context
were chosen by three medical experts, two native
speakers of German and one of English. The Ger-
man evaluation corpus was annotated by the two
German speakers. Interannotator agreement for in-
dividual terms ranged from very low to very high,
with an average of 65% for German and 51% for En-
glish (where all three annotators agreed). The rea-
sons for this low score are still under investigation.
In some cases, the UMLS definitions were insufficient
to give a clear distinction between concepts, espe-
cially when the concepts came from different origi-
nal thesauri. This allowed the decision of whether
a particular definition gave a meaningful ?sense? to
be more or less subjective. Approximately half of
the disagreements between annotators occured with
terms where interannotator agreement was less than
10%, which is evidence that a significant amount of
the disagreement between annotators was on the type
level rather than the token level. In other cases, it
is possible that there was insufficient contextual in-
formation provided for annotators to agree. If one of
the annotators was unable to choose any of the senses
and declared an instance to be ?unspecified?, this also
counted against interannotator agreement. What-
ever is responsible, our interannotator agreement fell
far short of the 88%-100% achieved in SENSEVAL
(Kilgarriff and Rosenzweig, 2000, ?7), and until this
problem is solved or better datasets are found, this
poor agreement casts doubt on the generality of the
results obtained in this paper.
A ?gold standard? was produced for the German
UMLS evaluation corpus and used to evaluate the
disambiguation of German UMLS concepts. The En-
glish experiments were evaluated on those tokens for
which the annotators agreed. More details and dis-
cussion of the annotation process is available in the
project report (Widdows et al, 2003).
In the rest of this paper we describe the techniques
that used these resources to build systems for word
sense disambiguation, and evaluate their level of suc-
cess.
3 Bilingual Disambiguation
The mapping between word-forms and senses differs
across languages, and for this reason the importance
of word-sense disambiguation has long been recog-
nised for machine translation. By the same token,
pairs of translated documents naturally contain in-
formation for disambiguation. For example, if in a
particular context the English word drugs is trans-
lated into French as drogues rather than medica-
ments, then the English word drug is being used
to mean narcotics rather than medicines. This ob-
servation has been used for some years on varying
scales. Brown et al (1991) pioneered the use of sta-
tistical WSD for translation, building a translation
model from one million sentences in English and
French. Using this model to help with translation
decisions (such as whether prendre should be trans-
lated as take or make), the number of acceptable
translations produced by their system increased by
8%. Gale et al (1992) use parallel translations to
obtain training and testing data for word-sense dis-
ambiguation. Ide (1999) investigates the information
made available by a translation of George Orwell?s
Nineteen Eighty-four into six languages, using this
to analyse the related senses of nine ambiguous En-
glish words into hierarchical clusters.
These applications have all been case studies of a
handful of particularly interesting words. The large
scale of the semantic annotation carried out by the
MUCHMORE project has made it possible to extend
the bilingual disambiguation technique to entire dic-
tionaries and corpora.
To disambiguate an instance of an ambiguous
term, we consulted the translation of the abstract
in which it appeared. We regarded the translated
abstract as disambiguating the ambiguous term if it
met the following two criteria:
? Only one of the CUI?s was assigned to any term
in the translated abstract.
? At least one of the terms to which this CUI
was assigned in the translated abstract was un-
ambiguous (i.e. was not also assigned another
CUI).
3.1 Results for Bilingual Disambiguation
We attempted both to disambiguate terms in the
German abstracts using the corresponding English
abstracts, and to disambiguate terms in the English
abstracts using the corresponding German ones. In
this collection of documents, we were able to disam-
biguate 1802 occurrences of 63 English terms and
1500 occurrences of 43 German terms. Comparing
this with the evaluation corpora gave the results in
Table 2.4
4In all of the results presented in this paper, Precision
is the proportion of decisions made which were correct
Precision Recall Coverage
English 81% 18% 22%
German 66% 22% 33%
Table 2: Results for bilingual disambiguation
As can be seen, the recall and coverage of this
method is not especially good but the precision (at
least for English) is very high. The German results
contain roughly the same proportion of correct deci-
sions as the English, but many more incorrect ones
as well.
Our disambiguation results break down into three
cases:
1. Terms ambiguous in one language that translate
as multiple unambiguous terms in the other lan-
guage; one of the meanings is medical and the
other is not.
2. Terms ambiguous in one language that trans-
late as multiple unambiguous terms in the other
language; both of the terms are medical.
3. Terms that are ambiguous between two mean-
ings that are difficult to distinguish.
One striking aspect of the results was that rel-
atively few terms were disambiguated to different
senses in different occurrences. This phenomenon
was particularly extreme in disambiguating the Ger-
man terms; of the 43 German terms disambiguated,
42 were assigned the same sense every time we were
able to disambiguate them. Only one term, Metas-
tase, was assigned difference senses; 88 times it was
assigned CUI C0027627 (?The spread of cancer from
one part of the body to another ...?, associated with
the English term Metastasis and 6 times it was as-
signed CUI C0036525 ?Used with neoplasms to in-
dicate the secondary location to which the neoplas-
tic process has metastasized?, corresponding to the
English terms metastastic and secondary). Metas-
tase therefore falls into category 2 from above, al-
though the distinction between the two meanings is
relatively subtle.
The first and third categories above account for
the vast majority of cases, in which only one mean-
ing is ever selected. It is easy to see why this would
according to the evaluation corpora, Recall is the pro-
portion of instances in the evaluation corpora for which
a correct decision was made, and Coverage is the propor-
tion of instances in the evaluation corpora for which any
decision was made. It follows that
Recall = Precision ? Coverage.
happen in the first category, and it is what we want
to happen. For instance, the German term Krebse
can refer either to crabs (Crustaceans) or to cancer-
ous growths; it is not surprising that only the latter
meaning turns up in the corpus under consideration
and that we can determine this from the unambigu-
ous English translation cancers.
In English somewhat more terms were disam-
biguated multiple ways: eight terms were assigned
two different senses across their occurrences. All
three types of ambiguity were apparent. For in-
stance, the second type (medical/medical ambiguity)
appeared for the term Aging, which can refer either
to aging people (Alte Menschen) or to the process of
aging itself (Altern); both meanings appeared in our
corpus.
In general, the bilingual method correctly find the
meanings of approximately one fifth of the ambigu-
ous terms, and makes only a few mistakes for English
but many more for German.
4 Collocational disambiguation
By a ?collocation? we mean a fixed expression formed
by a group of words occuring together, such as
blood vessel or New York. (For the purposes of
this paper we only consider contiguous multiword
expressions which are listed in UMLS.) There is a
strong and well-known tendency for words to ex-
press only one sense in a given collocation. This
property of words was first described and quantified
by Yarowsky (1993), and has become known gen-
erally as the ?One Sense Per Collocation? property.
Yarowsky (1995) used the one sense per collocation
property as an essential ingredient for an unsuper-
vised Word-Sense Disambiguation algorithm. For ex-
ample, the collocations plant life and manufacturing
plant are used as ?seed-examples? for the living thing
and building senses of plant, and these examples can
then be used as high-precision training data to per-
form more general high-recall disambiguation.
While Yarowsky?s algorithm is unsupervised (the
algorithm does not need a large collection of anno-
tated training examples), it still needs direct human
intervention to recognise which ambiguous terms are
amenable to this technique, and to choose appropri-
ate ?seed-collocations? for each sense. Thus the algo-
rithm still requires expert human judgments, which
leads to a bottleneck when trying to scale such meth-
ods to provide Word-Sense Disambiguation for a
whole document collection.
A possible method for widening this bottleneck is
to use existing lexical resources to provide seed collo-
cations. The texts of dictionary definitions have been
used as a traditional source of information for disam-
biguation (Lesk, 1986). The richly detailed structure
of UMLS provides a special opportunity to combine
both of these approaches, because many multiword
expressions and collocations are included in UMLS
as separate concepts.
For example, the term pressure has the following
three senses in UMLS, each of which is assigned to a
different semantic type (TUI):
Sense of pressure Semantic Type
Physical pressure Quantitative Concept
(C0033095)
Pressure - action Therapeutic or
(C0460139) Preventive Procedure
Baresthesia, sensation
of pressure (C0234222)
Organ or Tissue Func-
tion
Many other collocations and compounds which in-
clude the word pressure are also of these semantic
types, as summarised in the following table:
Quantitative
Concept
mean pressure, bar pressure,
population pressure
Therapeutic
Procedure
orthostatic pressure, acupres-
sure
Organ or Tissue
Function
arterial pressure, lung pres-
sure, intraocular pressure
This leads to the hypothesis that the term pres-
sure, when used in any of these collocations, is used
with the meaning corresponding to the same seman-
tic type. This allows deductions of the following
form:
Collocation bar pressure, mean pressure
Semantic type Quantitative Concept
Sense of pressure C0033095, physical pressure
Since nearly all English and German multiword
technical medical terms are head-final, it follows that
the a multiword term is usually of the same seman-
tic type as its head, the final word. (So for example,
lung cancer is a kind of cancer, not a kind of lung.)
For English, UMLS 2001 contains over 800,000 multi-
word expressions the last word in which is also a term
in UMLS. Over 350,000 of these expressions have a
last word which on its own, with no other context,
would be regarded as ambiguous (has more that one
CUI in UMLS). Over 50,000 of these multiword ex-
pressions are unambiguous, with a unique semantic
type which is shared by only one of the meanings of
the potentially ambiguous final word. The ambigu-
ity of the final word in such multiword expressions
is thus resolved, providing over 50,000 ?seed colloca-
tions? for use in semantically annotating documents
with disambiguated word senses.
4.1 Results for collocational disambiguation
Unfortunately, results for collocational disambigua-
tion (Table 3) were disappointing compared with the
promising number of seed collocations we expected
to find. Precision was high, but comparatively few
of the collocations suggested by UMLS were found
in the Springer corpus.
Precision Recall Coverage
English 79% 3% 4%
German 82% 1% 1.2%
Table 3: Results for collocational disambiguation
In retrospect, this may not be surprising given that
many of the ?collocations? in UMLS are rather col-
lections of words such as
C0374270 intracoronary percutaneous
placement s single stent transcatheter vessel
which would almost never occur in natural text.
Thus very few of the potential collocations we ex-
tracted from UMLS actually occurred in the Springer
corpus. This scarcity was especially pronounced for
German, because so many terms which are several
words in English are compounded into a single word
in German. For example, the term
C0035330 retinal vessel
does occur in the (English) Springer corpus and con-
tains the ambiguous word vessel, whose ambiguity is
successfully resolved using the collocational method.
However, in German this concept is represented by
the single word
C0035330 Retinagefaesse
and so this ambiguity never arises in the first place.
It should still be remarked that the few decisions
that were made by the collocational method were
very accurate, demonstrating that we can get some
high precision results using this method. It is pos-
sible that recall could be improved by relaxing the
conditions which a multiword expression in UMLS
must satisfy to be used as a seed-collocation.
5 Disambiguation using related
UMLS terms found in the same
context
While the collocational method turned out to give
disappointing recall, it showed that accurate infor-
mation could be extracted directly from the existing
UMLS and used for disambiguation, without extra
human intervention or supervision. What we needed
was advice on how to get more of this high-quality
information out of UMLS, which we still believed to
be a very rich source of information which we were
not yet exploiting fully. Fortunately, no less than 3
additional sources of information for disambiguation
using related terms from UMLS were suggested by a
medical expert.5 The suggestion was that we should
consider terms that were linked by conceptual rela-
tions (as given by the MRREL and MRCXT files
in the UMLS source) and which were noted as coin-
dexing concepts in the same MEDLINE abstract (as
given by the MRCOC file in the UMLS source). For
each separate sense of an ambiguous word, this would
give a set of related concepts, and if examples of any
of these related concepts were found in the corpus
near to one of the ambiguous words, it might indi-
cate that the correct sense of the ambiguous word
was the one related to this particular concept.
This method is effectively one of the many variants
of Lesk?s (1986) original dictionary-based method for
disambiguation, where the words appearing in the
definitions of different senses of ambiguous words are
used to indicate that those senses are being used if
they are observed near the ambiguous word. How-
ever, we gain over purely dictionary-based methods
because the words that occur in dictionary defini-
tions rarely correspond well with those that occur
in text. The information we collected from UMLS
did not suffer from this drawback: the pairs of coin-
dexing concepts from MRCOC were derived precisely
from human judgements that these two concepts
both occured in the same text in MEDLINE.
The disambiguation method proceeds as follows.
For each ambiguous word w, we find its possible
senses {sj(w)}. For each sense sj , find all CUI?s
in MRREL, MRCXT or MRCOC files that are re-
lated to this sense, and call this set {crel(sj)}. Then
for each occurrence of the ambiguous word w in the
corpus we examine the local context to see if a term
t occurs whose sense6 (CUI) is one of the concepts
in {crel(sj)}, and if so take this as positive evidence
that the sense sj is the appropriate one for this con-
text, by increasing the score of sj by 1. In this way,
each sense sj in context gets assigned a score which
measures the number of terms in this context which
are related to this sense. Finally, choose the sense
5Personal communication from Stuart Nelson (instru-
mental in the design of UMLS), at the MUCHMORE
workshop in Croatia, September 2002.
6This fails to take into account that the term t might
itself be ambiguous ? it is possible that results could be
improved still further by allowing for mutual disambigua-
tion of more than one term at once.
with the highest score.
One open question for this algorithm is what re-
gion of text to use as a context-window. We experi-
mented with using sentences, documents and whole
subdomains, where a ?subdomain? was considered to
be all of the abstracts appearing in one of the jour-
nals in the Springer corpus, such as Arthroskopie
or Der Chirurg. Thus our results (for each lan-
guage) vary according to which knowledge sources
were used (Conceptually Related Terms from MR-
REL and MRCXT or coindexing terms from MR-
COC, or a combination), and according to whether
the context-window for recording cooccurence was a
sentence, a document or a subdomain.
5.1 Results for disambiguation based on
related UMLS concepts
The results obtained using this method (Tables 5.1
and 5.1) were excellent, preserving (and in some
cases improving) the high precision of the bilingual
and collocational methods while greatly extending
coverage and recall. The results obtained by using
the coindexing terms for disambiguation were partic-
ularly impressive, which coincides with a long-held
view in the field that terms which are topically re-
lated to a target word can be much richer clues for
disambiguation that terms which are (say) hierarchi-
cally related. We are very fortunate to have such
a wealth of information about the cooccurence of
pairs of concepts through UMLS, which appears to
have provided the benefits of cooccurence data from
a manually annotated training sample without hav-
ing to perform the costly manual annotation.
In particular, for English (Table 5.1), results were
actually better using only coindexing terms rather
than combining this information with hierarchically
related terms: both precision and recall are best
when using only the MRCOC knowledge source. As
we had expected, recall and coverage increased but
precision decreased slightly when using larger con-
texts.
The German results (Table 5.1) were slightly dif-
ferent, and even more successful, with nearly 60% of
the evaluation corpus being correctly disambiguated,
nearly 80% of the decisions being correct. Here, there
was some small gain when combining the knowledge
sources, though the results using only coindexing
terms were almost as good. For the German experi-
ments, using larger contexts resulted in greater recall
and greater precision. This was unexpected ? one
hypothesis is that the sparser coverage of the German
UMLS contributed to less predictable results on the
sentence level.
These results are comparable with some of the bet-
ter SENSEVAL results (Kilgarriff and Rosenzweig,
2000) which used fully supervised methods, though
the comparison may not be accurate because we are
choosing between fewer senses than on avarage in
SENSEVAL, and because of the doubts over our in-
terannotator agreement.
Comparing these results with the number of words
disambiguated in the whole corpus (Table 1), it is
apparent that the average coverage of this method is
actually higher for the whole corpus (over 80%) than
for the words in the evaluation corpus. It is possible
that this reflects the fact the the evaluation corpus
was specifically chosen to include words with ?inter-
esting? ambiguities, which might include words which
are more difficult than average to disambiguate. It is
possible that over the whole corpus, the method ac-
tually works even better than on just the evaluation
corpus.
This technique is quite groundbreaking, because it
shows that a lexical resource derived almost entirely
from English data (MEDLINE indexing terms) could
successfully be used for automatic disambiguation in
a German corpus. (The alignment of documents and
their translations was not even considered for these
experiments so the results do not depend at all on
our having access to a parallel corpus.) This is be-
cause the UMLS relations are defined between con-
cepts rather than between words. Thus if we know
that there is a relationship between two concepts, we
can use that relationship for disambiguation, even if
the original evidence for this relationship was derived
from information in a different language from the
language of the document we are seeking to disam-
biguate. We are assigning the correct senses based
not upon how terms are related in language, but how
medical concepts are related to one another.
It follows that this technique for disambiguation
should be applicable to any language which UMLS
covers, and applicable at very little cost. This pro-
posal should stimulate further research, and not too
far behind, successful practical implementation.
6 Summary and Conclusion
We have described three implementations of unsu-
pervised word-sense disambiguation techniques for
medical documents. The bilingual method relies on
the availability of a translated parallel corpus: the
collocational and relational methods rely solely on
the structure of UMLS, and could therefore be ap-
plied to new collections of medical documents with-
out requiring any new resources. The method of
disambiguation using relations between terms given
by UMLS was by far the most successful method,
achieving 74% precision, 66% coverage for English
ENGLISH Related terms Related terms Coindexing terms Combined
RESULTS (MRREL) (MRCXT) (MRCOC) (majority voting)
Prec. Rec. Cov. Prec. Rec. Cov. Prec. Rec. Cov. Prec. Rec. Cov.
Sentence 50 14 28 60 9 15 78 32 41 74 32 43
Document 48 24 50 63 22 35 74 46 62 72 45 63
Subdomain 51 33 65 64 38 59 74 49 66 71 49 69
Table 4: Results for disambiguation based on UMLS relations (English)
GERMAN Related terms Related terms Coindexing terms Combined
RESULTS (MRREL) (MRCXT) (MRCOC) (majority voting)
Prec. Rec. Cov. Prec. Rec. Cov. Prec. Rec. Cov. Prec. Rec. Cov.
Sentence 64 24 38 75 11 15 76 29 38 77 31 40
Document 68 43 63 75 27 36 79 52 66 79 53 67
Subdomain 70 51 73 74 52 70 79 58 73 79 58 73
Table 5: Results for disambiguation based on UMLS relations (German)
and 79% precision, 73% coverage for German on the
evaluation corpora, and achieving over 80% coverage
overall. This result for German is particularly en-
couraging, because is shows that a lexical resource
giving relations between concepts in one language
can be used for high quality disambiguation in an-
other language.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by the Re-
search Collaboration between the NTT Communi-
cation Science Laboratories, Nippon Telegraph and
Telephone Corporation and CSLI, Stanford Univer-
sity, and by EC/NSF grant IST-1999-11438 for the
MUCHMORE project.
We would like to thank the National Library of
Medicine for providing the UMLS, and in particular
Stuart Nelson for his advice and guidance.
References
P. Brown, S. de la Pietra, V. de la Pietra, and R Mer-
cer. 1991. Word sense disambiguation using sta-
tistical methods. In ACL 29, pages 264?270.
Paul Buitelaar and Bogdan Sacaleanu. 2001. Rank-
ing and selecting synsets by domain relevance. In
Proceedings of WordNet and Other Lexical Re-
sources, NAACL 2001 Workshop, Pittsburgh, PA,
June.
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An
Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge MA.
W. Gale, K. Church, and D. Yarowsky. 1992. A
method for disambiguating word senses in a large
corpus. Computers and the Humanities, 26:415?
439.
Nancy Ide and Jean Ve?ronis. 1998. Introduction
to the special issue on word sense disambiguation:
The state of the art. Computational Linguistics,
24(1):1?40, March.
Nancy Ide. 1999. Parallel translations and
sense discriminators. In Proceedings of the ACL
SIGLEX workshop on Standardizing Lexical Re-
sources, pages 52?61.
A. Kilgarriff and J. Rosenzweig. 2000. Framework
and results for english senseval. Computers and
the Humanities, 34(1-2):15?48, April.
M. E. Lesk. 1986. Automated sense disambiguation
using machine-readable dictionaries: How to tell a
pine cone from an ice cream cone. In Proceedings
of the SIGDOC conference. ACM.
S?pela Vintar, Paul Buitelaar, Ba?rbel Ripplinger,
Bogdan Sacaleanu, Diana Raileanu, and Detlef
Prescher. 2002. An efficient and flexible format
for linguistic and semantic annotation. In Third
International Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference, Las Palmas, Spain.
Dominic Widdows, Diana Steffen, Scott Ceder-
berg, Chiu-Ki Chan, Paul Buitelaar, and Bog-
dan Sacaleanu. 2003. Methods for word-sense
disambiguation. Technical report, MUCHMORE
project report.
David Yarowsky. 1993. One sense per collocation.
In ARPA Human Language Technology Workshop,
pages 266?271, Princeton, NJ.
David Yarowsky. 1995. Unsupervised word sense
disambiguation rivaling supervised methods. In
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
189?196.
