BioNLP 2007: Biological, translational, and clinical language processing, pages 113?120,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Automatically Restructuring Practice Guidelines using the GEM DTD  
Amanda Bouffier                       Thierry Poibeau 
Laboratoire d?Informatique de Paris-Nord 
Universit? Paris 13 and CNRS UMR 7030 
99, av. J.-B. Cl?ment ? F-93430 Villetaneuse 
firstname.lastname@lipn.univ-paris13.fr 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes a system capable of 
semi-automatically filling an XML template 
from free texts in the clinical domain (prac-
tice guidelines). The XML template includes 
semantic information not explicitly encoded 
in the text (pairs of conditions and ac-
tions/recommendations). Therefore, there is 
a need to compute the exact scope of condi-
tions over text sequences expressing the re-
quired actions. We present a system devel-
oped for this task. We show that it yields 
good performance when applied to the 
analysis of French practice guidelines.  
1 Introduction  
During the past years, clinical practices have con-
siderably evolved towards standardization and ef-
fectiveness. A major improvement is the develop-
ment of practice guidelines (Brownson et al, 2003). 
However, even if widely distributed to hospitals, 
doctors and other medical staff, clinical practice 
guidelines are not routinely fully exploited1. There 
is now a general tendency to transfer these guide-
lines to electronic devices (via an appropriate XML 
format). This transfer is justified by the assumption 
that electronic documents are easier to browse than 
paper documents.  
However, migrating a collection of texts to XML 
requires a lot of re-engineering. More precisely, it 
means analyzing the full set of textual documents 
so that they can fit with strict templates, as required 
either by XML schemas or DTD (document type 
definition). Unfortunately, most of the time, the 
                                                 
1 See (Kolata, 2004). This newspaper article is a good example 
of the huge social impact of this research area. 
semantic blocks of information required by the 
XML model are not explicitly marked in the origi-
nal text. These blocks of information correspond to 
discourse structures. 
This problem has thus renewed the interest for 
the recognition and management of discourse struc-
tures, especially for technical domains. In this 
study, we show how technical documents belong-
ing to a certain domain (namely, clinical practice 
guidelines) can be semi-automatically structured 
using NLP techniques. Practice guidelines describe 
best practices with the aim of guiding decisions and 
criteria in specific areas of healthcare, as defined 
by an authoritative examination of current evidence 
(evidence-based medicine, see Wikipedia or 
Brownson et al, 2003).  
The Guideline Elements Model (GEM) is an 
XML-based guideline document model that can 
store and organize the heterogeneous information 
contained in practice guidelines (Schiffman, 2000). 
It is intended to facilitate translation of natural lan-
guage guideline documents into a format that can 
be processed by computers. The main element of 
GEM, knowledge component, contains the most 
useful information, especially sequences of condi-
tions and recommendations. Our aim is thus to 
format these documents which have been written 
manually without any precise model, according to 
the GEM DTD (see annex A).  
The organization of the paper is as follows: first, 
we present the task and some previous approaches 
(section 2). We then describe the different process-
ing steps (section 3) and the implementation (sec-
tion 4). We finish with the presentation of some 
results (section 5), before the conclusion (section 6). 
113
2 Document Restructuring: the Case of 
Practice Guidelines 
As we have previously seen, practice guidelines are 
not routinely fully exploited. One reason is that 
they are not easily accessible to doctors during 
consultation. Moreover, it can be difficult for the 
doctor to find relevant pieces of information from 
these guides, even if they are not very long. To 
overcome these problems, national health agencies 
try to promote the electronic distribution of these 
guidelines (so that a doctor could check recom-
mendations directly from his computer).  
2.1 Previous Work 
Several attempts have already been made to im-
prove the use of practice guidelines: for example 
knowledge-based diagnostic aids can be derived 
from them (e.g. S?roussi et al, 2001).  
GEM is an intermediate document model, be-
tween pure text (paper practice guidelines) and 
knowledge-based models like GLIF (Peleg et al, 
2000) or EON (Tu and Musen, 2001). GEM is thus 
an elegant solution, independent from any theory or 
formalisms, but compliant with other frameworks. 
GEM Cutter (http://gem.med.yale.edu/) is a 
tool aimed at aiding experts to fill the GEM DTD 
from texts. However, this software is only an inter-
face allowing the end-user to perform the task 
through a time-consuming cut-and-paste process. 
The overall process described in Shiffman et al 
(2004) is also largely manual, even if it is an at-
tempt to automate and regularize the translation 
process.  
The main problem in the automation of the 
translation process is to identify that a list of rec-
ommendations expressed over several sentences is 
under the scope of a specific condition (conditions 
may refer to a specific pathology, a specific kind of 
patients, temporal restrictions, etc.). However, pre-
vious approaches have been based on the analysis 
of isolated sentences. They do not compute the ex-
act scope of conditional sequences (Georg and 
Jaulent, 2005): this part of the work still has to be 
done by hand.  
Our automatic approach relies on work done in 
the field of discourse processing. As we have seen 
in the introduction, the most important sequences 
of text to be tagged correspond to discourse struc-
tures (conditions, actions ?). Although most re-
searchers agree that a better understanding of text 
structure and text coherence could help extract 
knowledge, descriptive frameworks like the one 
developed by Halliday and Hasan2 are poorly for-
malized and difficult to apply in practice.  
Some recent works have proposed more opera-
tional descriptions of discourse structures (P?ry-
Woodley, 1998). Several authors (Halliday and 
Matthiessen, 2004; Charolles, 2005) have investi-
gated the use of non-lexical cues for discourse 
processing (e.g temporal adverbials like ?in 1999?). 
These adverbials introduce situation frames in a 
narrative discourse, that is to say a ?period? in the 
text which is dependent from the adverbial.  
We show in this study that condition sequences 
play the same role in practice guidelines: their 
scope may run over several dependent clauses 
(more precisely, over a set of several recommenda-
tions). Our plan is to automatically recognize these 
using surface cues and processing rules.  
2.2 Our Approach 
Our aim is to semi-automatically fill a GEM tem-
plate from existing guidelines: the algorithm is 
fully automatic but the result needs to be validated 
by experts to yield adequate accuracy. Our system 
tries to compute the exact scope of conditional se-
quences. In this paper we apply it to the analysis of 
several French practice guidelines.  
The main aim of the approach is to go from a 
textual document to a GEM based document, as 
shown on Figure 1 (see also annex A). We focus on 
conditions (including temporal restrictions) and 
recommendations since these elements are of 
paramount importance for the task. They are espe-
cially difficult to deal with since they require to 
accurately compute the scope of conditions.  
The example on figure 1 is complex since it con-
tains several levels of overlapping conditions. We 
observe a first opposition (Chez le sujet non immu-
nod?prim? / chez le sujet immunod?prim?? Con-
cerning the non-immuno-depressed patient / Con-
cerning the immuno-depressed patient?) but a sec-
ond condition interferes in the scope of this first 
level (En cas d?aspect normal de la muqueuse il?-
ale? If the ileal mucus seems normal?). The task 
involves recognizing these various levels of condi-
tions in the text and explicitly representing them 
through the GEM DTD.   
                                                 
2 See ?the text-forming component in the linguistic system? in 
Halliday and Hasan (1976:23). 
114
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. From the text to GEM  
 
What is obtained in the end is a tree where the 
leaves are recommendations and the branching 
nodes correspond to the constraints on conditions. 
2.3 Data  
We analyzed 18 French practice guidelines pub-
lished by French national health agency (ANAES, 
Agence Nationale d?Accr?ditation et d?Evaluation 
en Sant? and AFSSAPS, Agence Francaise de S?-
curit? Sanitaire des Produits de Sant?) between 
2000 and 2005. These practice guidelines focus on 
different pathologies (e.g. diabetes, high blood 
pressure, asthma etc.) as well as with clinical 
examination processes (e.g. digestive endoscopy). 
amination processes (e.g. digestive endoscopy). 
The data are thus homogeneous, and is about 250 
pages long (150,000+ words). Most of these prac-
tice guidelines are publicly available at: 
http://www.anaes.fr or http://affsaps.sante 
.fr. Similar documents have been published in 
English and other languages; the GEM DTD is 
language independent.  
3 Processing Steps 
Segmenting a guideline to fill an XML template is 
a complex process involving several steps. We de-
scribe here in detail the most important steps 
(mainly the way the scope of conditional sequences 
is computed), and will only give a brief overview 
of the pre-processing stages.  
3.1 Overview 
A manual study of several French practice guide-
lines revealed a number of trends in the data. We 
observed that there is a default structure in these 
guidelines that may help segmenting the text accu-
rately. This default segmentation corresponds to a 
highly conventionalized writing style used in the 
document (a norm). For example, the location of 
conditions is especially important: if a condition 
occurs at the opening of a sequence (a paragraph, a 
section?), its scope is by default the entire follow-
ing text sequence. If the condition is included in the 
sequence (inside a sentence), its default scope is 
restricted to the current sentence (Charolles, 2005 
for similar observations on different text types).  
This default segmentation can be revised if some 
linguistic cues suggest another more accurate seg-
mentation (violation of the norm). We make use of 
Halliday?s theory of text cohesion (Halliday and 
Hasan, 1976). According to this theory, some ?co-
hesion cues? suggest extending the default segmen-
tation while some others suggest limiting the scope 
of the conditional sequence (see section 3.4).  
3.2 Pre-processing (Cue Identification) 
The pre-processing stage concerns the analysis of 
relevant linguistic cues. These cues vary in nature: 
they can be based either on the material structure or 
the content of texts. We chose to mainly focus on 
task-independent knowledge so that the method is 
portable, as far as possible (we took inspiration 
from Halliday and Matthiessen?s introduction to 
functional grammar, 2004). Some of these cues 
 
<recommandation> 
<decision.variable>Chez le sujet non immunod?prim? 
</decsion.variable> 
<decision.variable>en cas d'aspect macroscopique nor-
mal de la muqueuse colique </decison.variable> 
<action> des biopsies coliques nombreuses et ?tag?es 
sont recommand?es (?) </action> 
<action>Les biopsies isol?es sont insuffisantes(..)      
</action> 
<action>L?exploration de l?il?on terminal est ?gale-
ment recommand?e</action> 
</recommandation> 
 
<recommandation> 
<decision.variable>Chez le sujet non immunod?prim? 
</decsion.variable> 
<decision.variable>en cas d'aspect macroscopique nor-
mal de la muqueuse colique </decison.variable> 
<decision.variable>En cas d'aspect normal de la mu-
queuse il?ale</decision.variable> 
<action>la r?alisation de biospsies n'est pas syst?ma-
tique</action> 
</recommandation> 
 
<recommandation 
<decision.variable>Chez le sujet immunod?pri-
m?</decision.variable> 
<action> il est n?cessaire de r?aliser des biopsies 
syst?matiques(?)</action> 
</recommandation> 
 
Chez le sujet non immunod?prim?, en cas d'as-
pect macroscopique normal de la muqueuse co-
lique, des biopsies coliques nombreuses et ?tag?es 
sont recommand?es (?). Les biopsies isol?es sont 
insuffisantes (?). 
L'exploration de l'il?on terminal est ?galement re-
command?e (grade C). En cas d'aspect normal de 
la muqueuse il?ale (?), la r?alisation de biospsies 
n'est pas syst?matique (accord professionnel). 
 
Chez le sujet immunod?prim?, il est n?cessaire de 
r?aliser des biopsies syst?matiques (?) 
 
115
(especially connectors and lexical cues) can be 
automatically captured by machine learning meth-
ods.  
Material structure cues. These features include the 
recognition of titles, section, enumerations and 
paragraphs. 
Morpho-syntactic cues. Recommendations are not 
expressed in the same way as conditions from a 
morpho-syntactic point of view. We take the fol-
lowing features into account: 
? Part of speech tags. For example recommand? 
should be a verb and not a noun, even if the 
form is ambiguous in French; 
? Tense and mood of the verb. Present and future 
tenses are relevant, as well as imperative and 
conditional moods. Imperative and future al-
ways have an injunctive value in the texts. In-
junctive verbs (see lexical cues) lose their in-
junctive property when used in a past tense. 
Anaphoric cues. A basic and local analysis of ana-
phoric elements is performed. We especially fo-
cused on expressions such as dans ce cas, dans les 
N cas pr?c?dents (in this case, in the n preceding 
cases?) which are very frequent in clinical docu-
ments. The recognition of such expressions is 
based on a limited set of possible nouns that oc-
curred in context, together with specific constraints 
(use of demonstrative pronouns, etc).   
Conjunctive cues (discourse connectors). Condi-
tions are mainly expressed through conjunctive 
cues. The following forms are especially interest-
ing: forms prototypically expressing conditions (si, 
en cas de, dans le cas o?? if, in case of?); Forms 
expressing the locations of some elements (chez, en 
pr?sence de... in presence of?); Forms expressing 
a temporal frame (lorsque, au moment o?, avant 
de? when, before?) 
Lexical cues. Recommendations are mainly ex-
pressed through lexical cues. We have observed 
forms prototypically expressing recommendations 
(recommander, prescrire, ? recommend, pre-
scribe), obligations (devoir, ? shall) or options 
(pouvoir, ?  can). Most of these forms are highly 
ambiguous but can be automatically acquired from 
an annotated corpus. Some expressions from the 
medical domains can be automatically extracted 
using a terminology extractor (we use Yatea, see 
section 4, ?Implementation?).  
3.3 Basic Segmentation 
A basic segment corresponds to a text sequence 
expressing either a condition or a recommendation. 
It is most of the time a sentence, or a proposition 
inside a sentence.  
Some of the features described in the previous 
section may be highly ambiguous. For this reason 
basic segmentation is rarely done according to a 
single feature, but most of the time according to a 
bundle of features acquired from a representative 
corpus. For example, if a text sequence contains an 
injunctive verb with an infinitive form at the begin-
ning of a sentence, the whole sequence is typed as 
action. The relevant sets of co-occurring features 
are automatically derived from a set of annotated 
practice guidelines, using the chi-square test to cal-
culate the dissimilarity of distributions.  
After this step, the text is segmented into typed 
basic sequences expressing either a recommenda-
tion or a condition (the rest of the text is left 
untagged).  
3.4 Computing Frames and Scopes 
As for quantifiers, a conditional element may have 
a scope (a frame) that extends over several basic 
segments. It has been shown by several authors 
(Halliday and Matthiessen, 2004; Charolles, 2005) 
working on different types of texts that conditions 
detached from the sentence have most of the time a 
scope beyond the current sentence whereas condi-
tions included in a sentence (but not in the begin-
ning of a sentence) have a scope which is limited to 
the current sentence. Accordingly we propose a 
two-step strategy: 1) the default segmentation is 
done, and 2) a revision process is used to correct 
the main errors caused by the default segmentation 
(corresponding to the norm). 
Default Segmentation  
We propose a strategy which makes use of the no-
tion of default. By default: 
1. Scope of a heading goes up to the next head-
ing; 
2. Scope of an enumeration?s header covers all 
the items of the enumeration ; 
3. If a conditional sequence is detached (in the 
beginning of a paragraph or a sentence), its 
scope is the whole paragraph; 
4. If the conditional sequence is included in a 
sentence, its scope is equal to the current 
sentence.  
116
Cases 3 and 4 cover 50-80% of all the cases, de-
pending on the practice guidelines used. However, 
this default segmentation is revised and modified 
when a linguistic cue is a continuation mark within 
the text or when the default segmentation seems to 
contradict some cohesion cue.  
Revising the Default Segmentation 
There are two cases which require revising the de-
fault segmentation: 1) when a cohesion mark indi-
cates that the scope is larger than the default unit; 
2) when a rupture mark indicates that the scope is 
smaller. We only have room for two examples, 
which, we hope, give a broad idea of this process. 
1) Anaphoric relations are strong cues of text 
coherence: they usually indicate the continuation of 
a frame after the end of its default boundaries.   
Figure 2. The last sentence introduced by dans les 
deux cas is under the scope of the conditions intro-
duced by lorsque3. 
In Figure 2, the expression dans les deux cas (in 
the two cases?) is an anaphoric mark referring to 
the two previous utterances. The scope of the con-
ditional segment introduced by lorsque (that would 
normally be limited to the sentence it appears in) is 
thus extended accordingly.  
2) Other discourse cues are strong indicators 
that a frame must be closed before its default 
boundaries. These cues may indicate some contras-
tive, corrective or adversative information (cepen-
dant, en revanche? however). Justifications cues 
(en effet, en fait ? in effect) also pertain to this 
class since a justification is not part of the action 
element of the GEM DTD.  
Figure 3 is a typical example. The linguistic cue 
en effet (in effect) closes the frame introduced by  
 
                                                 
3 In figures 2 and 3, bold and grey background are used only 
for sake of clarity; actual documents are made of text without 
any formatting. 
Figure 3. The last sentence contains a justification cue 
(en effet) which limits the scope of the condition in the 
preceding sentence.  
Chez les patients ayant initialement...(<1g/l) since 
this sequence should fill the explanation element 
of the GEM DTD and is not an action element. 
4 Implementation 
Accurate discourse processing requires a lot of in-
formation ranging from lexical cues to complex co- 
occurrence of different features. We chose to im-
plement these in a classic blackboard architecture 
(Englemore and Morgan, 1988). The advantages of 
this architecture for our problem are easy to grasp: 
each linguistic phenomenon can be treated as an 
independent agent; inference rules can also be 
coded as specific agents, and a facilitator controls 
the overall process. 
Basic linguistic information is collected by a set 
of modules called ?linguistic experts?.  Each mod-
ule is specialized in a specific phenomenon (text 
structure recognition, part-of-speech tagging, term 
spotting, etc.). The text structure and text format-
ting elements are recognized using Perl scripts. 
Linguistic elements are encoded in local grammars, 
mainly implemented as finite-state transducers 
(Unitex 4 ). Other linguistic features are obtained 
using publicly available software packages, e.g. a 
part-of-speech tagger (Tree Tagger5) and a term 
extractor (Yatea6), etc. Each linguist expert is en-
capsulated and produces annotations that are stored 
in the database of facts, expressed in Prolog (we 
thus avoid the problem of overlapping XML tags, 
which are frequent at this stage). These annotations 
are indexed according to the textual clause they 
appear in, but linear ordering of the text is not cru-
                                                 
4 http://www-igm.univ-mlv.fr/~unitex/ 
5 http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/projekte/cor 
plex/TreeTagger/DecisionTreeTagger.html 
6 http://www-lipn.univ-paris13.fr/~hamon/YaTeA 
Chez les patients ayant initialement une concentra-
tion tr?s ?lev?e de LDL-cholest?rol, et notamment 
chez les patients ? haut risque dont la cible th?ra-
peutique est basse (<1g/l), le prescripteur doit garder 
? l?esprit que la prescription de statine ? fortes doses ou 
en association n?cessite une prise en compte au cas par 
cas du rapport b?n?fice/risque et ne doit jamais ?tre sys-
t?matique. En effet, les fortes doses de statines et les 
bith?rapies n?ont pas fait l?objet ? ce jour d?une ?valuation 
suffisante dans ces situations. 
 
(Prise en charge th?rapeutique du patient dyslipid?mique, 2005, 
p4) 
L?indication d?une insulinoth?rapie est recommand?e 
lorsque l?HbA1c est > 8%, sur deux contr?les suc-
cessifs sous l?association de sulfamides/metformine 
? posologie optimale. Elle est laiss?e ? l?appr?ciation par 
le clinicien du rapport b?n?fices/inconv?nients de 
l?insulinoth?rapie lorsque l?HbA1c est comprise entre 
6,6% et 8% sous la m?me association. Dans les deux 
cas, la di?t?tique aura au pr?alable ?t? r??valu?e et un 
facteur intercurrent de d?compensation aura ?t? recher-
ch?e (accord professionnel). 
 
Strat?gie de prise en charge du patient diab?tique de type 2 ? 
l?exclusion de la prise en charge des complications (2000) 
117
cial for further processing steps since the system 
mainly looks for co-occurrences of different cues. 
The resulting set of annotations constitutes the 
?working memory? of the system.  
Another set of experts then combine the initial 
disseminated knowledge to recognize basic seg-
ments (section 3.3) and to compute scopes and 
frames (section 3.4). These experts form the ?infer-
ence engine? which analyzes information stored in 
the working memory and adds new knowledge to 
the database. Even when linear order is irrelevant 
for the inference process new information is in-
dexed with textual clauses, to enable the system to 
produce the original text along with annotation.  
 A facilitator helps to determine which expert 
has the most information needed to solve the prob-
lem. It is the facilitator that controls, for example, 
the application of default rules and the revision of 
the default segmentation. It controls the chalk, me-
diating among experts competing to write on the 
blackboard. Finally, an XML output is produced 
for the document, corresponding to a candidate 
GEM version of the document (no XML tags over-
lap in the output since we produce an instance of 
the GEM DTD; all potential remaining conflicts 
must have been solved by the supervisor). To 
achieve optimal accuracy this output is validated 
and possibly modified by domain experts.  
5 Evaluation 
The study is based on a corpus of 18 practice 
guidelines in French (several hundreds of frames), 
with the aid of domain experts. We evaluated the 
approach on a subset of the corpus that has not 
been used for training.  
5.1 Evaluation Criteria 
In our evaluation, a sequence is considered correct 
if the semantics of the sequence is preserved. For 
example Chez l?ob?se non diab?tique (accord 
professionnel) (In the case of an obese person 
without any diabetes (professional approval)), 
recognition is correct even if professional approval 
is not stricto sensu part of the condition. On the 
other hand, Chez l?ob?se (In the case of an obese 
person) is incorrect. The same criteria are applied 
for recommendations. 
We evaluate the scope of condition sequences by 
measuring whether each recommendation is linked 
with the appropriate condition sequence or not.  
5.2 Manual Annotation and Inter-annotator 
Agreement 
The data is evaluated against practice guidelines 
manually annotated by two annotators: a domain 
expert (a doctor) and a linguist. In order to evaluate 
inter-annotator agreement, conditions and actions 
are first extracted from the text. The task of the 
human annotators is then to (manually) build a tree, 
where each action has to be linked with a condi-
tion. The output can be represented as a set of cou-
ples (condition ? actions). In the end, we calculate 
accuracy by comparing the outputs of the two an-
notators (# of common couples). 
Inter-annotator agreement is high (157 nodes out 
of 162, i.e. above .96 agreement). This degree of 
agreement is encouraging. It differs from previous 
experiments, usually done using more heterogene-
ous data, for example, narrative texts. Temporals 
(like ?in 1999?) are known to open a frame but 
most of the time this frame has no clear boundary. 
Practice guidelines should lead to actions by the 
doctor and the scope of conditions needs to be clear 
in the text. 
In our experiment, inter-annotator agreement is 
high, especially considering that we required an 
agreement between an expert and non-expert. We 
thus make the simplified assumption that the scope 
of conditions is expressed through linguistic cues 
which do not require, most of the time, domain-
specific or expert knowledge. Yet the very few 
cases where the annotations were in disagreement 
were clearly due to a lack of domain knowledge by 
the non-expert.  
5.3 Evaluation of the Automatic Recognition 
of Basic Sequences 
The evaluation of basic segmentation gives the fol-
lowing results for the condition and the recommen-
dation sequences. In the table, P is precision; R is 
recall; P&R is the harmonic mean of precision and 
recall  (P&R = (2*P*R) / (P+R), corresponding to a 
F-measure with a ? factor equal to 1). 
 
Conditions: 
 
 Without domain 
knowledge 
With domain 
knowledge 
P 1 1 
R .83 .86 
P&R .91 .92 
118
Recommendations: 
 
 Without domain 
knowledge 
With domain 
knowledge 
P 1 1 
R .94 .95 
P&R .97 .97 
 
Results are high for both conditions and recom-
mendations.  
The benefit of domain knowledge is not evident 
from overall results. However, this information is 
useful for the tagging of titles corresponding to 
pathologies. For example, the title Hypertension 
art?rielle (high arterial blood pressure) is equiva-
lent to a condition introduced by in case of? It is 
thus important to recognize and tag it accurately, 
since further recommendations are under the scope 
of this condition. This cannot be done without do-
main-specific knowledge. 
The number of titles differs significantly from 
one practice guideline to another. When the num-
ber is high, the impact on the performance can be 
strong. Also, when several recommendations are 
dependent on the same condition, the system may 
fail to recognize the whole set of recommendations.  
Finally, we observed that not all conditions and 
recommendations have the same importance from a 
medical point of view ? however, it is difficult to 
quantify this in the evaluation.  
5.4 Evaluation of the Automatic Recognition 
of the Scope of Conditions 
The scope of conditions is recognized with accu-
racy above .7 (we calculated this score using the 
same method as for inter-annotator agreement, see 
section 5.2).  
This result is encouraging, especially consider-
ing the large number of parameters involved in dis-
course processing. In most of successful cases the 
scope of a condition is recognized by the default 
rule (default segmentation, see section 3.4). How-
ever, some important cases are solved due to the 
detection of cohesion or boundary cue (especially 
titles).  
The system fails to recognize extended scopes 
(beyond the default boundary) when the cohesion 
marks correspond to lexical items which are related 
(synonyms, hyponyms or hypernyms) or to com-
plex anaphora structures (nominal anaphora; hypo-
nyms and hypernyms can be considered as a spe-
cial case of nominal anaphora). Resolving these 
rarer complex cases would require ?deep? domain 
knowledge which is difficult to implement using 
state-of-art techniques.  
6 Conclusion 
We have presented in this paper a system capable 
of performing automatic segmentation of clinical 
practice guidelines. Our aim was to automatically 
fill an XML DTD from textual input. The system is 
able to process complex discourse structures and to 
compute the scope of conditional segments span-
ning several propositions or sentences. We show 
that inter-annotator agreement is high for this task 
and that the system performs well compared to 
previous systems. Moreover, our system is the first 
one capable of resolving the scope of conditions 
over several recommendations.  
As we have seen, discourse processing is diffi-
cult but fundamental for intelligent information 
access. We plan to apply our model to other lan-
guages and other kinds of texts in the future. The 
task requires at least adapting the linguistic com-
ponents of our system (mainly the pre-processing 
stage). More generally, the portability of discourse-
based systems across languages is a challenging 
area for the future. 
References 
R.C. Brownson, E.A. Baker, T.L. Leet, K.N. Gillespie. 
2003. Evidence-based public health. Oxford Univer-
sity Press. Oxford, UK. 
M. Charolles. 2005. ?Framing adverbials and their role 
in discourse cohesion: from connexion to forward 
labeling?. Papers of the Symposium on the 
Exploration and Modelling of Meaning (Sem?05), 
Biarritz. France.  
R. Englemore and T. Morgan. 1988. Blackboard Sys-
tems. Addison-Wesley, USA.  
G. Georg and M.-C. Jaulent. 2005. ?An Environment for 
Document Engineering of Clinical Guidelines?. Pro-
ceedings of the American Medical Informatics Asso-
ciation. Washington DC. USA. pp. 276?280. 
M.A.K. Halliday and R. Hasan. 1976. Cohesion in Eng-
lish. Longman. Harlow, UK.  
M.A.K. Halliday and C. Matthiessen. 2004. Introduction 
to functional grammar (3rd ed.). Arnold. London, UK.  
G. Kolata. 2004. ?Program Coaxes Hospitals to See 
Treatments Under Their Noses?. The New York 
Times. December 25, 2004. 
119
M. Peleg, A. Boxwala, O. Ogunyemi, Q. Zeng, S. Tu, R. 
Lacson, E. Bernstam, N. Ash, P. Mork, L. Ohno-
Machado, E. Shortliffe and R. Greenes. 2000. 
?GLIF3: The Evolution of a Guideline Representa-
tion Format?. In Proceedings of the American Medi-
cal Informatics Association. pp. 645?649. 
M-P. P?ry-Woodley. 1998. ?Signalling in written text: a 
corpus-based approach?. In M. Stede, L. Wanner & 
E. Hovy (Eds.), Proceeding of te Coling ?98 Work-
shop on Discourse Relations and Discourse Markers, 
pp. 79?85 
B. S?roussi, J.  Bouaud, H. Dr?au., H. Falcoff., C. Riou., 
M. Joubert., G. Simon, A. Venot. 2001. ?ASTI :  A 
Guideline-based drug-ordering system for primary 
care?. In Proceedings MedInfo. pp.  528?532. 
R.N. Shiffman, B.T. Karras, A. Agrawal, R. Chen, L. 
Marenco, S. Nath. 2000. ?GEM: A proposal for a 
more comprehensive guideline document model us-
ing XML?. Journal of the American Medical Infor-
matics Assoc.  n?7(5). pp. 488?498. 
R.N. Shiffman, M. George, M.G. Essaihi and E. Thorn-
quist. 2004. ?Bridging the guideline implementation 
gap: a systematic, document-centered approach to 
guideline implementation?. In Journal of the Ameri-
can Medical Informatics Assoc. n?11(5). pp. 418?
426. 
S. Tu and M. Musen. 2001. ?Modeling data and knowl-
edge in the EON Guideline Architecture?. In 
Medinfo. n?10(1). pp. 280?284. 
 
Annex A. Screenshots of the system 
 
 
Figure A1. A practice guideline once analyzed by the system (Traitement m?dicamenteux du diab?te de 
type 2, AFSSAPS-HAS, nov. 2006) 
 
            
Figures A2 and A3. The original text, an the XML GEM template instanciated from the text 
120
