A Three-Tiered Evaluation Approach for
Interactive Spoken Dialogue Systems
Kathleen Stibler and James Denny
Lockheed Martin Advanced Technology Laboratories
1 Federal Street, A&E 3W
Camden NJ 08102
{kcomegno, jdenny}@atl.lmco.com
ABSTRACT
We describe a three-tiered approach for evaluation of spoken
dialogue systems. The three tiers measure user satisfaction,
system support of mission success and component performance.
We describe our use of this approach in numerous fielded user
studies conducted with the U.S. military.
Keywords
Evaluation, spoken language system, spoken dialogue system
1. INTRODUCTION
Evaluation of spoken language systems is complicated by the
need to balance distinct goals. For collaboration with others
in the speech technology community, metrics must be generic
enough for comparison to analogous systems. For project man-
agement and business purposes, metrics must be specific
enough to demonstrate end-user utility and improvement over
other approaches to a problem.
Since 1998, we have developed a spoken language dialogue
technology called Listen-Communicate-Show (LCS) and
applied it to demonstration systems for U.S. Marines logistics,
U.S. Army test data collection, and commercial travel reserva-
tions. Our focus is the transition of spoken dialogue technol-
ogy to military operations. We support military users in a wide
range of tasks under diverse conditions. Therefore, our defini-
tion of success for LCS is operational success. It must reflect
the real world success of our military users in performing their
tasks. In addition, for our systems to be considered successful,
they must be widely usable and easy for all users to operate
with minimal training. Our evaluation methodology must
model these objectives.
With these goals in mind, we have developed a three-tier
metric system for evaluating spoken language system effective-
ness. The three tiers measure (1) user satisfaction, (2) system
support of mission success and (3) component performance.
2. THE THREE-TIERED APPROACH
Our three-tier metric scheme evaluates multiple aspects of LCS
system effectiveness. User satisfaction is a set of subjective
measures that introduces user perceptions into the assessment
of the system. System support of mission success measures
overall system performance with respect to our definition of
success. Component performance scores the individual sys-
tem component?s role in overall system success.
Collection of user input is essential in evaluation for two rea-
sons. First, it is necessary to consider user perspective during
evaluation to achieve a better understanding of user needs.
Second, user preference can influence interpretation of success
measurements of mission success and component performance.
Mission success and component performance are often tradeoffs,
with inefficient systems producing higher scores of success.
Since some users are willing to overlook efficiency for guaran-
teed performance while others opt for efficiency, our collection
of user input helps determine the relative importance of these
aspects.
Mission success is difficult to quantify because it is defined
differently by users with different needs. Therefore, it is essen-
tial to establish a definition of mission success early in the
evaluation process. For our applications, we derive this defini-
tion from domain knowledge acquisition with potential users.
It is important to evaluate components individually since com-
ponent evaluations reveal distinctive component flaws. These
flaws can negatively impact mission success because catas-
trophic failure of a component can prevent the completion of
tasks. For example, in the Marine logistics domain, if the
system fails to recognize the user signing onto the radio net-
work, it will ignore all subsequent utterances until the user
successfully logs on. If the recognition of sign-on completely
fails, then no tasks can be completed. In addition, periodic
evaluation of component performance focuses attention on
difficult problems and possible solutions to these problems
[1].
3. EVALUATION METRICS
At the top level of our approach, measurements of overall user
satisfaction are derived from a collection of user reactions on a
Likert-scaled questionnaire. The questions are associated with
eight user satisfaction metrics: ease of use, system response,
system understanding, user expertise, task ease, response time,
expected behavior and future use. We have categorized our user
satisfaction questions in terms of specific metrics as per the
PARADISE methodology [5, 2]. These metrics are detailed in
Table 1.
Table 1.  User Satisfaction metrics
Metric Description Example Likert Survey Questions
Ease of Use User perception of ease of interaction with
overall system
The system was easy to use
System
Response
Clarity of system response System responses were clear and easy to understand
System
Understanding
System comprehension of the user The system understood what you said
User Expertise Shows us how prepared the user felt due to our
training
You knew how to interact with the system based on
previous experience or training
Task Ease User ease in performing a given task It was easy to make a request
Response Time User?s impression of the speed of system?s
reply
The system responded to you in a timely manner
Expected
Behavior
Connection between the user?s experience and
preconceived notions
The system worked the way that you expected it to
Future Use Determination of overall acceptance of this type
of system in the future
You would use a mature system of this type in the future
The middle tier metrics measure the ability of users to
successfully complete their domain tasks in a timely manner.
Success, in this case, is defined as completion of a task and
segments of the task utilizing the information supplied by the
user. A task is considered successful if the system was able to
comprehend and process the user?s request correctly. It i s
important to determine if success was achieved and at what
cost. The user?s ability to make a request in a reasonable
amount of time with little repetition is also significant. The
mission success metrics fall under nine categories: task com-
pletion, task complexity, dialogue complexity, task efficiency,
dialogue efficiency, task pace, dialogue pace, user frustration
and intervention rate.
For these metrics, we consider the tasks the user is trying to
accomplish and the dialogue in which the user has with the
system to accomplish those tasks. A session is a continuous
period of user interaction with the spoken dialogue system. A
session can be examined from two perspectives, task and dia-
logue, as shown in Figure 1. Segments are atomic operations
performed within a task. The success rate of each segment is an
important part of the analysis of the system, while the success
rate of each task is essential for the comprehensive evaluation
of the system. For example, a task of ordering supplies in the
Marine logistics domain includes segments of signing onto the
radio network, starting the request form, filling in items a
through h, submitting the form and signing off the network.
Each segment receives an individual score of successfully
completion. The Task Completion metric consists of success
scores for the overall task and the segments of the task.
Dialogue is the collection of utterances spoken to accomplish
the given task. It is necessary to evaluate Dialogue Efficiency
to achieve an understanding of how complex the user?s dia-
logue is for the associated task. A turn is one user utterance, a
step in accomplishing the task through dialogue. Concepts are
atomic bits of information conveyed in a dialogue. For example,
if the user?s utterance consists of delivery time and delivery
location for a particular Marine logistic request, the time and
location are the concepts of that turn. These metrics are
described in greater detail in Table 2.
Session
Dialogue
Turn
Concept Word
Segment
Task
Figure 1.  Structural Hierarchy of a Spoken Dialogue
System Session
The lowest level tier measures the effectiveness of individual
system components along specific dimensions, including com-
ponent error rates. Overall system level success is determined
by how well each component accomplishes its responsibility.
This concerns measurements such as word accuracy, utterance
accuracy, concept accuracy, component speed, processing
errors, and language errors. These measurements aid system
developers by emphasizing component weakness. Component
Performance metrics also offer explanations for others metrics.
For example, bottlenecks within a component may be respon-
sible for slow system response time. Another example i s
concerned with recognition accuracy. Poor word accuracy may
account for low scores of task completion and user satisfaction
with the system.
Table 2.  Mission metrics
Metric Description Measurement
Task Completion Success rate of a given task
 ? correct segments?
? items
Task Complexity
Ideal minimal information required to
accomplish a task
 ? ideal concepts?
task
Dialogue
Complexity
Ideal amount of interaction with the system
necessary to complete a task
 ? ideal turns?
task
Task Efficiency
Amount of extraneous information in
dialogue
  ? ideal concepts??
? actual concepts
Dialogue
Efficiency
Number of extraneous turns in dialogue   ? ideal turns??
? actual turns
Task Pace
Real world time spent entering information
into the system to accomplish the task
   ? elapsed time??
task complexity
Dialogue Pace
Actual amount of system interaction spent
entering segments of a task
          ? turns??????????
task complexity
User Frustration
Ratio of repairs and repeats to useful turns   ? (rephrases + repeats)??
? relevant turns
Intervention Rate
How often the user needs help to use the
system ? (user questions + moderator corrections + system crashes)
Some component performance metrics rely upon measurements
from multiple components. For example, Processing Errors
combines data transfer errors, logic errors, and agent errors.
Those measurements map to the Turn Manager which controls
the system's dialogue logic, the Mobile Agents which interface
with data sources, and the Hub which coordinates component
communication. The metrics are discussed in Table 3.
4. EVALUATION PROCESS
Our LCS systems are built upon MIT?s Galaxy II architecture
[3]. Galaxy II is a distributed, plug and play component-based
architecture in which specialized servers handle specific tasks,
such as translating audio data to text, that communicate
through a central server (Hub). The LCS system shown in
Figure 2 includes servers for speech recording and playback
(Audio I/O), speech synthesis (Synthesis), speech recognition
(Recognizer), natural language processing (NL), discourse/
response logic (Turn Manager), and an agent server (Mobile
Agents) for application/database interaction.
We implement a number of diverse applications and serve a
user population that has varying expertise. The combination of
these two factors result in a wide range of expectations of
system performance by users. We have found that the three-tier
system and related evaluation process not only capture those
expectations, but also aid in furthering our development.
Our evaluation process begins with conducting a user study,
typically in the field. We refer to these studies as Integrated
Feasibility Experiments (IFE). Participants involved in the
IFEs are trained to use their particular LCS application by a
member of our development team. The training usually takes 15
to 30 minutes. The training specifies the purpose of the LCS
application in aiding their work, includes a brief description of
the  LCS  architecture,  and  details  the  speech  commands  and
Table 3.  Component metrics
Metric Description Measurement
Word Accuracy System recognition per word NIST String Alignment and Scoring Program
Utterance
Accuracy
System recognition per user utterance  ? recognized turns?
? turns
Concept
Accuracy*
Semantic understanding of the system  ? recognized concepts?
? concepts
Component Speed Speed of various components time per turn
Processing Errors Percent of turns with low level system error
measurements
 ? (agent errors + frame construction errors + logic errors)?
? system turns
Language Errors Percent of turns with errors in sentence
construction, word parsing and spoken output
of the system
? (parse errors + synthesis errors)
? system turns
*Our use of concept accuracy was inspired by the concept accuracy metric of the PARADISE methodology [5].
Recognizer
NL
Turn
Manager
Mobile
Agents
Synthesis
Audio
I/O
HUB
Distributed
Heterogeneous
Data Sources
Figure 2.  LCS architecture
expected responses through demonstration. After the intro-
ductory instruction and demonstration, participants practice
interacting with the system.
For each study, we develop a set of scenarios based upon our
knowledge of the domain and ask each participant to complete
the scenarios as quickly as they can with maximal accuracy and
minimal moderator assistance. The study usually consists of
approximately five task scenarios of varying difficulty. The
scenarios are carried out in fixed order and are given a time
limit, generally no longer than 30 minutes. The system logs
key events at the Hub, including times and values for the
user?s speech recording, recognition hypotheses, grammatical
parse, resultant query, component speeds, any internal errors,
and the system?s response. In addition, the moderator notes
any assistance or intervention, such as reminding the user of
proper usage or fixing an application error. Once the tasks are
completed, the user fills out a web-based survey and partici-
pates in a brief interview. These determine user satisfaction
with the system.
Upon conclusion of a user study, we extract the log files and
code the users? recordings through manual transcription. We
add diagnostic tags to the log files, noting such events as
rephrased utterances and causes of errors and then audit all of
the logs for accuracy and consistency. Some of the diagnostic
tags that we annotate are number of items and concepts within
an utterance, frame construction errors, repeated or rephrased
utterances and deficiencies of the training sentence corpus.
This is a very time consuming process. Therefore, it is nec-
essary to involve multiple people in this phase of the
evaluation. However, one individual is tasked with the final
responsibility of examining the annotations for consistency.
A series of scripts and spreadsheets calculate our metrics from
the log files. These scripts take the log files as parameters and
produce various metric values. While interpreting the metrics
values, we may re-examine the log files for an exploration of
detail related to particular tasks or events in order to
understand any significant and surprising results or trends.
Finally, through a mixture of automated formatting and manual
commentary, we create a summary presentation of the user study
results. Web pages are generated that contain some of the
metrics collected throughout the study.
5. APPROACH VERIFICATION
We have applied our approach in four separate IFEs to date. In
each case, our metrics revealed areas for improvement. As these
improvements were made, the problems discovered in the next
IFE were more subtle and deeply ingrained within the system.
Mission success and component metrics aided in the interpre-
tation of user perception and drove future system development.
A top-level summary of IFEs, metrics and system improvements
is described.
The first IFE was our pilot study, which took place in-house in
September 1999. Five subjects with varying military experi-
ence were asked to complete three tasks, which were scripted
for them. The tier one metrics revealed the users? dissatisfaction
with the system responses and the time required in receiving
them. These perceptions led to system changes within our
Agent and Turn Manager structures that improved the speed of
our database agents and more appropriate responses from the
LCS system.
The second IFE took place during the Desert Knight 1999
Marine exercise at Twentynine Palms, CA in December 1999.
Ten subjects, each an active duty Marine with varying radio
operator experience, were given five tasks. This user study
offered the subjects the option of following scripts in their
tasks. The metrics of tier one showed an increase in overall user
satisfaction and revealed the users? difficulty using the system
and anticipating its behavior. These concerns influenced future
user training and the development of more explicit system
responses.
The third IFE occurred during the Marine CAX 6 (Combined
Arms Exercise) at Twentynine Palms, CA in April 2000. The
seven subjects were active duty Marines, some with minimal
radio training. They were required to complete five tasks that
had scenario-based, non-scripted dialogues. A combination of
tier one, tier two and tier three metrics exposed a deficiency in
the speech recognition server, prompting us to increase
recognizer training for subsequent IFEs. A recognizer training
corpus builder was developed to boost recognition scores.
The most recent IFE was conducted in Gulfport, MS during the
August 2000 Millennium Dragon Marine exercise. Six active
duty Marines with varied radio experience completed five
scenario-based tasks. This time the users expressed concern
with system understanding and ease of use through the tier one
metrics. The tier three metrics revealed an error in our natural
language module, which sometimes had been selecting the
incorrect user utterance from recognizer output. This error has
since been removed from the system.
The three-tiered approach organizes analysis of the inter-
dependence among metrics. It is useful to study the impact of a
metric in one tier against metrics in another tier through
principal component analysis. These statistics do not neces-
sarily evidence causality, of course, but they do suggest
insightful correlation. This insight exposes the relative signifi-
cance of various factors' contribution to particular assessments
of mission success or user satisfaction.
6. FUTURE ENHANCEMENTS
Although this three-tier evaluation process provides useful
metrics, we have identified three improvements that we plan to
incorporate into our process: (1) an annotation aide, (2) com-
munity standardization, and (3) increased automation. The
annotation aide would allow multiple annotators to review
and edit logs independently. With this tool, we could autom-
atically measure and control cross-annotator consistency,
currently a labor-intensive chore. Community standardization
entails a logging format, an annotation standard, and calcula-
tion tools common to the DARPA Communicator project [4],
several of which have been developed, but we are still working
to incorporate them. The advantage of community standardiza-
tion is the benefit from tools developed by peer organizations
and the ability to compare results. Accomplishing the first two
improvements largely leads to the third improvement, increased
automation, because most (if not all) aspects from measurement
through annotation to calculation then have a controlled
format and assistive tools. These planned improvements will
make our evaluation process more reliable and less time-
consuming while simultaneously making it more controlled
and more comparable.
7. CONCLUSION
We have found that structuring evaluation according to the
three tiers described above improves the selection of metrics
and interpretation of results. While the essence of our approach
is domain independent, it does guide the adaptation of metrics
to specific applications. First, the three tiers impose a structure
that selects certain metrics to constitute a broad pragmatic
assessment with minimal data, refining the subject of evalua-
tion. Second, the three tiers organize metrics so that user
satisfaction and mission metrics have clear normative semantics
(results interpreted as good/bad) and they reveal the impact of
low-level metrics (results tied to particular components which
may be faulted/lauded). Finally, improvements in selection and
interpretation balance satisfaction, effectiveness, and perform-
ance, thus imbuing the evaluation process with focus toward
utility for practical applications of spoken language dialogue.
8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Thanks to members of the LCS team: Ben Bell, Jody Daniels,
Jerry Franke, Ray Hill, Bob Jones, Steve Knott, Dan Miksch,
Mike Orr, and Mike Thomas. This research was supported by
DARPA contract N66001-98-D-8507 and Naval contract
N47406-99-C-7033.
9. REFERENCES
[1] Hirschman, L. and Thompson, H. Survey of the State of the
Art in Human Language Technology. Edited by J.
Mariani. Chapter 13.1, Overview of Evaluation in Speech
and Natural Language Processing. Cambridge University
Press ISBN 0-521-592777-1, 1996.
[2] Kamm, C., Walker, M. and Litman, D. Evaluating Spoken
Language Systems, American Voice Input/Output Society,
AVIOS, 1999.
[3] Seneff, S., Lau, R., and Polifroni, J. Organization, Com-
munication, and Control in the Galaxy-ii Conversational
System. Proc. Eurospeech, 1999.
[4] Walker, M. Hirschman, L. and Aberdeen, J. Evaluation for
DARPA Communicator Spoken Dialogue Systems.
Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, LREC,
2000.
[5] Walker, M. Litman, Kamm, D.C. and Abella, A. PARA-
DISE: A Framework for Evaluating Spoken Dialogue
Agents. 35th Annual Meeting of the Association of
Computational Linguistics, ACL 97, 1997.
