Reading Comprehension Programs in a 
Statistical-Language-Processing Class* 
Eugene Charniak, Yasemin Altun, Rodrigo de Salvo Braz, 
Benjamin Garrett, Margaret Kosmala, Tomer Moscovich, Lixin Pang, 
Changhee Pyo, Ye Sun, Wei Wy, Zhongfa Yang, Shawn Zeller, and Lisa Zorn 
Brown University 
Abstract 
We present-some n w results for the reading 
comprehension task described in \[3\] that im- 
prove on the best published results - from 
36% in \[3\] to 41% (the best of the systems 
described herein). We discuss a variety of 
techniques that tend to give small improve- 
ments, ranging from the fairly simple (give 
verbs more weight in answer selection) to 
the fairly complex (use specific techniques 
for answering specific kinds of questions). 
1 Introduction 
CS241, the graduate course in statistical lan- 
guage processing at Brown University, had 
as its class project the creation of programs 
to answer reading-comprehension tests. In 
particular, we used the Remedia TM reading 
comprehension test data as annotated by a 
group at MITRE Corporation, henceforth 
called the Deep Read group \[3\]. The class di- 
vided itself into four groups with sizes rang- 
ing from two to four students. In the first 
half of the semester the goal was to repro- 
duce the results of Deep Read and of one 
aother. After this learning and debugging 
period the groups were encouraged to think 
of and implement new ideas. 
The Deep Read group provided us with 
an on-line version of the Remedia material 
along with several marked up versions of 
* This research was supported inpart by NSF grant 
LIS SBR 9720368. Thanks to Marc Light and the 
group at MITRE Corporation for providing the on- 
line versions of the reading comprehension material 
and the Brown Laboratory for Linguistic Informa- 
tion Processing (BLLIP) for providing the parsed 
and pronoun referenced versions. 
same. The material encompasses four grade 
levels - -  third through sixth. Each grade 
levels consists of thirty stories plus five ques- 
tions for each story. Each story has the form 
of a newspaper article, including a title and 
dateline. Following \[3\], we used grades three 
and six as our development corpus and four 
and five for testing. 
The questions on each story are typically 
one each of the "who, what, where, why, and 
when" varieties. The Deep Read group an- 
swered these questions by finding the sen- 
tence in the story that best answers the 
question. One of the marked up versions 
they provide indicates those sentences Titles 
and datelines are also considered possible an- 
swers to the questions. In about 10% of the 
cases Deep Read judged no sentence stand- 
ing on its own to be a good answer. In these 
cases no answer to the question is considered 
correct. In a few cases more than one answer 
is acceptable and all of them are so marked. 
Deep Read also provided a version with 
person/place/time arkings inserted auto- 
matically by the Alembic named-entity s s- 
tem \[4\]. Henceforth we refer to this as NE 
(named entity) material. As discussed be- 
low, these markings are quite useful. In addi- 
tion to the mark-ups provided by Deep Read, 
the groups were also g~ven a machine anno- 
tated version with full parse trees and pro- 
noun coreference. 
The Deep Read group suggests everal 
different metrics for judging the perfor- 
mance of reading-comprehension-question- 
answering programs. However, their data 
show that the performance of theii: programs 
goes up and down on all of the metrics in 
Methods  Resu l ts  
1 Best of Deep Read 36 
2 BOW Stem Coref Class 37 
3 BOV Stem NE Coref Tfidf Subj Why MainV 38 
4 BOV Stem NE Defaults Coref 38 
5 BOV Stem NE Defaults Qspecific 41 
BOW 
BOV 
Coref 
Class 
Defaults 
MainV 
NE 
Qspecific 
Subj 
Tfidf 
Why 
bag-of-words 
bag-of-verbs 
pronoun coreference 
Word-Net class membership 
Defaults from Figure 3 
Extra credit for main verb match 
named entity 
Specific techniques for all question types 
Prefer sentences with same subject 
term frequency times inverse document frequency 
Specific good words for "why" questions 
Figure 1: Some notable results 
tandem. We implemented several of those 
metrics ourselves, but to keep things sim- 
ple we only report results on one of them - 
how often (in percent) the program answers 
a question by choosing a correct sentence (as 
judged in the answer mark-ups). Following 
\[3\] we refer to this as the "humsent" (hu- 
man annotated sentence) metric. Note that 
if more than one sentence is marked as ac- 
ceptable, a program response of any of those 
sentences i considered correct. If no sen- 
tence is marked, the program cannot get the 
answer correct, so there is an upper bound of 
approximately 90% accuracy for this metric. 
The results were both en- and dis- 
couraging. On the encouraging side, three 
of the four groups were able to improve, at 
least somewhat, on the previous best results. 
On the other hand, the extra annotation 
we provided (machine-generated parses of all 
the sentences \[1\] and machine-generated pro- 
noun coreference information \[2\]) proved of 
limited utility. 
2 Resu l ts  
Figure 1 shows four of the results that bet- 
tered those of Deep Read. In the next sec- 
tion we discuss the techniques used in these 
programs. 
The performance of all the programs var- 
ied widely depending on the type of ques- 
tion to be answered. In particular, "why" 
questions proved the most difficult. (Deep 
Read observed the same phenomenon.) In 
Figure 2 we break down the results for sys- 
tem 3 in Figure 1 according to question type. 
This system was able to answer only 22% 
of the "why" questions correctly. Program 
5, which had the most complicated scheme 
for handling "why" questions, answered 26% 
correctly. 
3 D iscuss ion  
As noted above, the early phase of the 
project was concerned with replicating the 
Deep Read results. This we were able to 
do, although generally only to about 1.5 sig- 
nificant digits. It seems that one can get 
swings of several percentage points in per- 
formance just depending on, say, how one 
2 
Question Type Percent Correct 
When 32 
Where 50 
Who 57 
What 32 
Why 22 
Figure 2: Results by question type 
resolves ties in the bag-of-words cores, or 
whether one. considers capitalized and un- 
capitalized words the same. However, the 
numbers our groups got were in the same 
ballpark and, more importantly, the trends 
we found in the numbers were the same. For 
example, stemming helped a little, stop-lists 
actually hurt a very small amount, and the 
use of named-entity data gave the biggest 
single improvement of the various Deep Read 
techniques. 
We found two variations on bag-of-words 
that improved results both individually and 
when combined. The first of these is the 
"bag of verbs" (BOV) technique. In this 
scheme one first measures imilarity by do- 
ing bag-of-words, but looking only at verbs 
(obtained from the machine-generated parse 
trees we provided). If two sentences tied 
on BOV, then bag-of-words is used as a tie- 
breaker. As the usefulness of this technique 
was shown early in the project, all of the 
groups tried it. It seems to provide two or 
three percentage-point mprovement in a va- 
riety of circumstances. Most of our best re- 
sults were obtained when using this tech- 
nique. A further refinement of this tech- 
nique is to weight matching main verbs more 
highly. This is used in system 3. 
One group explored the idea of replacing 
bag-of-words with a scheme based upon the 
standard ocument-retrieval "tfidf" method. 
Document retrieval has long used a bag- 
of-words technique, in which the words are 
given different weights. So if our query has 
words wl...wn, the frequency of the word i in 
document in question is fi, and the number 
of documents that have word i is n, then the 
score for this document is 
L ~i (1) 
i=l  n i  
That is, we take the term frequency (tf = fi) 
times the inverse document frequency (idf = 
1/ni) and sum over the words in the query. 
Of course, our application is sentence re- 
trieval, not document retrieval, so we define 
term frequency as the number of times the 
word appears in the candidate sentence, and 
document frequency as the number of sen- 
tences in which this word appears. (If we 
use stemming, then this applies to stemmed 
words.) Replacing BOW (OR BOV) by 
tfidf gives a three to six percentage-point 
improvement, depending on the other tech- 
niques with which it is combined. This is 
somewhat surprising because, as stated ear- 
lier, stop-lists were observed both by Deep 
Read and ourselves to have a slight negative 
impact on performance. One might think 
that the tfidf scheme should have something 
like the same impact, as the words on the 
stop-list are exactly those that occur in many 
sentences on average, and thus ones whoes 
impact will be attenuated in tfidL That tfidf 
is nevertheless uccessful suggests (perhaps) 
that the words on the stop-lists are useful 
for settling ties, a situation where even the 
attenuated value provided in tfidf will work 
just fine. It may also be the case that it 
is useful to distinguish between those words 
that are more common and those that are 
less common, even though neither appear on 
the stop-list. 
The best results, however, were obtained 
by creating question-answering strategies for 
specific question types (who, what, where, 
why, when). For example, one simple strat- 
egy assigns a default answer to each ques- 
tion type (in case all of the other strategies 
produce a tie) and zero or more sentence lo- 
cations that should be eliminated from con- 
sideration (before any of the other strategies 
are used). The particulars of this "Defaults" 
strategy are shown in Figure 3. 
There were more complicated question- 
type strategies as well. As already noted, 
3 
Question Type Default Eliminate 
Who title dateline 
What 1st story line (none) 
When dateline (none) 
Where dateline title 
Why 1st story line title, 
dateline 
Figure 3: Default and eliminable sentences 
in the "Default" strategy 
"why" questions are the most difficult for 
bag-of-words. The reason is fairly intuitive. 
"Why" questions are of the form "Why did 
such-and-such happen?" Bag-of-words typ- 
ically finds a sentence of the form "Such 
and such happened." The following strategy 
makes use of the fact that the answer to the 
"why" question is often either the sentence 
preceding or following the sentence that de- 
scribes the event. 
If the first NP (noun-phrase) in the sen- 
tence following the match is a pronoun, 
choose that sentence: 
Q: Why did Chris write two books 
of his own? 
match: He has written two books 
of his own. 
A: They tell what it is like to be 
famous. 
If that rule does not apply, then if the first 
word of the matching sentence is "this", 
"that," "these" or "those", select the pre- 
vious sentence: 
Q: Why did Wang once get upset? 
A: When she was a little girl, her 
art teacher didn't like her paint- 
ings. 
match: This upset Wang. 
Finally, if neither of the above two rules ap- 
plies, look for sentences that have the follow- 
ing words and phrases (and morphological 
variants) which tend to answer why ques- 
tions: "show", "explain", "because", "no 
one knows", and "if so". If there is more 
than one such sentence, use bag-of-~words to 
decide between them: 
4 
Q: Why does Greenland have 
strange seasons? 
A: Because it is far north, it has 
four months of sunlight each year. 
A lot of the question-type-specific rules 
use the parse of the sentence to select key 
words that are more important matches than 
other words of the sentence. For example, 
"where" questions tended to come in two va- 
rieties: "Where AUX NP VP" (e.g., "Where 
did Fred find the dog?") and "Where AUX 
NP." (e.g:, "Where is the dog?"). In both 
cases the words of the NP are important o 
match, and in the first case the (stemmed) 
main verb of the VP is important. Also, sen- 
tences that have PPs (prepositional phrases) 
with a preposition that often indicates loca- 
tion (e.g., "in," "near," etc.) are given a 
boost by the weighting scheme. 
4 Conclusion 
We have briefly discussed several reading 
comprehension systems that are able to im- 
prove on the results of \[3\]. While these are 
positive results, many of the lessons learned 
in this exercise are more negative. In par- 
ticular, while the NE data clearly helped 
a few percent, most of the extra syntactic 
and semantic annotations (i.e., parsing and 
coreference) were either of very small utility, 
or their utility came about in idiosyncratic 
ways. For example, probably the biggest im- 
pact of the parsing data was that it allowed 
people to experiment with the bag-of-verbs 
technique. Also, the parse trees served as the 
language for describing very question spe- 
cific techniques, uch as the ones for "where" 
questions presented in the previous section. 
Thus our tentative conclusion is that we 
are still not at a point that a task like chil- 
dren's reading comprehension tests is a good 
testing ground for NLP techniques. To the 
extent that these standard techniques are 
useful, it seems to be only in conjunction 
with other methods that are more directly 
aimed at the task. 
Of course, this is not to say that some- 
one else will not come up with better syntac- 
tic/semantic annotations that more directly 
lead to improvements on such tests. We can 
only say that so far we have not been able 
to do so. 
References 
1. CHARNIAK, E. A maximum-entropy- 
inspired parser. In Proceedings of the 
2000 Conference of the North American 
Chapter of the Assocation for Computa- 
tional Linguistics. ACL, New Brunswick 
N J, 2000. 
2. GE, N.,-HALE, J. AND CHARNIAK, E. 
A statistical approach to anaphora reso- 
lution. In Proceedings of the Sixth Work- 
shop on Very Large Corpora. 1998, 161- 
171. 
3. HIRSCHMAN, L., LIGHT, M., BRECK, E. 
AND BURGER, J. D. Deep read: a read- 
ing comprehension system. In Proceedings 
of the ACL 1999. ACL, New Brunswick, 
N J, 1999, 325-332. 
4. VILAIN, M. AND DAY, D. Finite-state 
parsing by rule sequences. In Interna- 
tional Conferences on ComputationM Lin- 
guistics (COLING-96). The International 
Conmmittee on Computational Linguis- 
tics, 1996. 
5 
