Guidelines for Annotating Temporal Information
Inderjeet Mani, George Wilson
The MITRE Corporation, W640
11493 Sunset Hills Road
Reston, Virginia 20190-5214, USA
+1-703-883-6149
imani@mitre.org
Lisa Ferro
The MITRE Corporation, K329
202 Burlington Road, Rte. 62
Bedford, MA 01730-1420, USA
+1-781-271-5875
lferro@mitre.org
Beth Sundheim
SPAWAR Systems Center, D44208
53140 Gatchell Road, Room 424B
Sand Diego, CA 92152-7420, USA
+1-619-553-4195
sundheim@spawar.navy.mil
ABSTRACT
This paper introduces a set of guidelines for annotating time
expressions with a canonicalized representation of the times they
refer to. Applications that can benefit from such an annotated
corpus include information extraction (e.g., normalizing temporal
references for database entry), question answering (answering
?when? questions), summarization (temporally ordering
information), machine translation (translating and normalizing
temporal references), and information visualization (viewing
event chronologies).
Keywords
Annotation, temporal information, semantics, ISO-8601.
1.
 
INTRODUCTION
The processing of temporal information poses numerous
challenges for NLP. Progress on these challenges may be
accelerated through the use of corpus-based methods. This paper
introduces a set of guidelines for annotating time expressions with
a canonicalized representation of the times they refer to.
Applications that can benefit from such an annotated corpus
include information extraction (e.g., normalizing temporal
references for database entry), question answering (answering
?when? questions), summarization (temporally ordering
information), machine translation (translating and normalizing
temporal references), and information visualization (viewing
event chronologies).
Our annotation scheme, described in detail in [Ferro et al 2000],
has several novel features:
?
 
It goes well beyond the one used in the Message
Understanding Conference [MUC7 1998], not only in terms
of the range of expressions that are flagged, but, also, more
importantly, in terms of representing and normalizing the
time values that are communicated by the expressions.
?
 
In addition to handling fully-specified time expressions [e.g.,
September 3rd, 1997), it also handles context-dependent
expressions. This is significant because of the ubiquity of
context-dependent time expressions; a recent corpus study
[Mani and Wilson 2000] revealed that more than two-thirds
of time expressions in print and broadcast news were
context-dependent ones. The context can be local (within the
same sentence), e.g., In 1995, the months of June and July
were devilishly hot, or global (outside the sentence), e.g., The
hostages were beheaded that afternoon. A subclass of these
context-dependent expressions are ?indexical? expressions,
which require knowing when the speaker is speaking to
determine the intended time value, e.g., now, today,
yesterday, tomorrow, next Tuesday, two weeks ago, etc.
Our scheme differs from the recent scheme of [Setzer and
Gaizauskas 2000] in terms of our in-depth focus on
representations for the values of specific classes of time
expressions, and in the application of our scheme to a variety of
different genres, including print news, broadcast news, and
meeting scheduling dialogs.
The annotation scheme has been designed to meet the
following criteria:
Simplicity with precision: We have tried to keep the scheme
simple enough to be executed confidently by humans, and yet
precise enough for use in various natural language processing
tasks.
Naturalness: We assume that the annotation scheme should reflect
those distinctions that a human could be expected to reliably
annotate, rather than reflecting an artificially-defined smaller set
of distinctions that automated systems might be expected to make.
This means that some aspects of the annotation will be well
beyond the reach of current systems.
Expressiveness:  The guidelines require that one specify time
values as fully as possible, within the bounds of what can be
confidently inferred by annotators. The use of ?parameters? and
the representation of ?granularity? (described below) are tools to
help ensure this.
Reproducibility: In addition to leveraging the [ISO-8601 1997]
format for representing time values, we have tried to ensure
consistency among annotators by providing an example-based
approach, with each guideline closely tied to specific examples.
While the representation accommodates both points and intervals,
the guidelines are aimed at using the point representation to the
extent possible, further helping enforce consistency.
The annotation process is decomposed into two steps: flagging a
temporal expression in a document, and identifying the time value
that the expression designates, or that the speaker intends for it to
designate. The flagging of temporal expressions is restricted to
those temporal expressions which contain a reserved time word
used in a temporal sense, called a ?lexical trigger?, which include
words like day, week, weekend, now, Monday, current, future, etc.
2. SEMANTIC DISTINCTIONS
Three different kinds of time values are represented: points in
time (answering the question ?when??), durations (answering
?how long??), and frequencies (answering ?how often??).
Points in time are calendar dates and times-of-day, or a
combination of both, e.g., Monday 3 pm, Monday next week, a
Friday, early Tuesday morning, the weekend. These are all
represented with values (the tag attribute VAL) in the ISO format,
which allows for representation of date of the month, month of the
year, day of the week, week of the year, and time of day, e.g.,
<TIMEX2 VAL=?2000-11-29-T16:30?>4:30 p.m. yesterday
afternoon</TIMEX2>.
Durations also use the ISO format to represent a period of time.
When only the period of time is known, the value is represented
as a duration, e.g.,
<TIMEX2 VAL=?P3D?>a three-day</TIMEX2> visit.
Frequencies reference sets of time points rather than particular
points.   SET and GRANULARITY attributes are used for such
expressions, with the PERIODICITY attribute being used for
regularly recurring times, e.g., <TIMEX2 VAL=?XXXX-WXX-2?
SET=?YES? PERIODICITY=?F1W?
GRANULARITY=?G1D?>every Tuesday</TIMEX2>. Here
?F1W? means frequency of once a week, and the granularity
?G1D? means the set members are counted in day-sized units.
The annotation scheme also addresses several semantic problems
characteristic of temporal expressions:
Fuzzy boundaries. Expressions like Saturday morning and Fall
are fuzzy in their intended value with respect to when the time
period starts and ends; the early 60?s is fuzzy as to which part of
the 1960?s is included. Our format for representing time values
includes parameters such as FA (for Fall), EARLY (for early,
etc.), PRESENT_REF (for today, current, etc.), among others.
For example, we have <TIMEX2 VAL=?1990-SU?>Summer of
1990</TIMEX2>. Fuzziness in modifiers is also represented, e.g.,
<TIMEX2 VAL=?1990? MOD=?BEFORE?>more than a
decade ago</TIMEX2>. The intent here is that a given
application may choose to assign specific values to these
parameters if desired; the guidelines themselves don?t dictate the
specific values.
Non-Specificity. Our scheme directs the annotator to represent the
values, where possible, of temporal expressions that do not
indicate a specific time.  These non-specific expressions include
generics, which state a generalization or regularity of some kind,
e.g., <TIMEX2 VAL=?XXXX-04?
NON_SPECIFIC=?YES?>April</TIMEX2> is usually wet, and
non-specific indefinites, like <TIMEX2 VAL="1999-06-XX"
NON_SPECIFIC="YES? GRANULARITY="G1D">a sunny day
in <TIMEX2 VAL="1999-06">June</TIMEX2></TIMEX2>.
3. USEFULNESS
Based on the guidelines, we have annotated a small reference
corpus, consisting of 35,000 words of newspaper text and 78,000
words of broadcast news [TDT2 1999]. Portions of this corpus
were used to train and evaluate a time tagger with a reported F-
measure of .83 [Mani and Wilson 2000]; the corpus has also been
used to order events for summarization.
Others have used temporal annotation schemes for the much more
constrained domain of meeting scheduling, e.g., [Wiebe et al
1998], [Alexandersson et al 1997], [Busemann et al 1997]; our
scheme has been applied to such domains as well. In particular,
we have begun annotation of the ?Enthusiast? corpus of meeting
scheduling dialogs used at CMU and by [Wiebe et al 1998]. Only
minor revisions to the guidelines? rules for tag extent have so far
been required for these dialogs.
This annotation scheme is also being leveraged in the Automatic
Content Extraction (ACE) program of the U.S. Department of
Defense, whose focus is on extraction of time-dependent relations
between pairs of ?entities? (persons, organizations, etc.).
Finally, initial feedback from Machine Translation system
grammar writers [Levin, personal communication] indicates that
the guidelines were found to be useful in extending an existing
interlingua for machine translation.
4. CONCLUSION
The annotation scheme we have developed appears applicable to a
wide variety of different genres of text. The semantic
representation used is also highly language-independent. In
Spring 2001, we will be embarking on a large-scale annotation
effort using a merged corpus consisting of Enthusiast data as well
as additional TDT2 data (inter-annotator agreement will also be
measured then). An initial annotation exercise carried out on a
sample of this merged corpus by 20 linguistics students using our
guidelines has been encouraging, with 12 of the students
following the guidelines in a satisfactory manner. In the future, we
expect to extend this scheme to multilingual corpora.
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Our thanks to Lynn Carlson (Department of Defense), Lori Levin
(Carnegie Mellon University), and Janyce Wiebe (University of
Pittsburgh) for providing the Enthusiast corpus to us.
6. REFERENCES
[1] Alexandersson, J., Riethinger, N. and Maier, E.
Insights into the Dialogue Processing of VERBMOBIL.
Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Applied Natural
Language Processing, 1997, 33-40.
[2] Busemann, S., Decleck, T., Diagne, A. K., Dini,
L., Klein, J. and Schmeier, S. Natural Language Dialogue
Service for Appointment Scheduling Agents. Proceedings of
the Fifth Conference on Applied Natural Language
Processing, 1997, 25-32.
[3] Ferro, L., Mani, I., Sundheim, B., and Wilson, G.
TIDES Temporal Annotation Guidelines. Draft Version
1.0. MITRE Technical Report MTR 00W0000094, October
2000.
[4] ISO-8601 ftp://ftp.qsl.net/pub/g1smd/8601v03.pdf
1997.
 [5] Mani, I. and Wilson, G. Robust Temporal
Processing of News, Proceedings of the ACL'2000
Conference, 3-6 October 2000, Hong Kong.
[6] MUC-7. Proceedings of the Seventh Message
Understanding Conference, DARPA. 1998.
[7] Setzer, A. and Gaizauskas, R. Annotating Events
and Temporal Information in Newswire Texts. Proceedings
of the Second International Conference On Language
Resources And Evaluation (LREC-2000), Athens, Greece,
31 May- 2 June 2000.
[8] TDT2
http://morph.ldc.upenn.edu/Catalog/LDC99T37.html 1999
[9] Wiebe,  J. M., O?Hara, T. P., Ohrstrom-Sandgren,
T. and McKeever, K. J. An Empirical Approach to
Temporal Reference Resolution. Journal of Artificial
Intelligence Research, 9, 1998, pp. 247-293.
A Multilingual Approach to Annotating
and Extracting Temporal Information1
George Wilson
Inderjeet Mani2
The MITRE Corporation,
W640
11493 Sunset Hills Road
Reston, VA 20190-5214
USA
gwilson@mitre.org
imani@mitre.org
Beth Sundheim
SPAWAR Systems Center,
D44208, 53140 Gatchell Rd.
San Diego, CA 92152-7420
USA
sundheim@spawar.navy.mil
Lisa Ferro
The MITRE Corporation,
K329, 202 Burlington Road
Bedford, MA 01730-1420
USA
lferro@mitre.org
                                                          
1 This work has been funded by DARPA?s Translingual Information Detection, Extraction, and Summarization (TIDES)
research program, under contract number DAA-B07-99-C-C201 and ARPA Order H049.
2 Also at the Department of Linguistics, Georgetown University, Washington, DC 20037.
Abstract
This paper introduces a set of
guidelines for annotating time
expressions with a canonicalized
representation of the times they refer
to, and describes methods for
extracting such time expressions from
multiple languages.
1 Introduction
The processing of temporal information poses
numerous challenges for NLP. Progress on these
challenges may be accelerated through the use
of corpus-based methods. This paper introduces
a set of guidelines for annotating time
expressions with a canonicalized representation
of the times they refer to, and describes methods
for extracting such time expressions from
multiple languages. Applications that can
benefit include information extraction (e.g.,
normalizing temporal references for database
entry), question answering (answering ?when?
questions), summarization (temporally ordering
information), machine translation (translating
and normalizing temporal references), and
information visualization (viewing event
chronologies).
Our annotation scheme, described in
detail in (Ferro et al 2000), has several novel
features, including the following:
It goes well beyond the one used in the Message
Understanding Conference (MUC7 1998), not
only in terms of the range of expressions that are
flagged, but, also, more importantly, in terms of
representing and normalizing the time values
that are communicated by the expressions.
In addition to handling fully-specified time
expressions (e.g., September 3rd, 1997), it also
handles context-dependent expressions. This is
significant because of the ubiquity of context-
dependent time expressions; a recent corpus
study (Mani and Wilson 2000) revealed that
more than two-thirds of time expressions in print
and broadcast news were context-dependent
ones. The context can be local (within the same
sentence), e.g., In 1995, the months of June and
July were devilishly hot, or global (outside the
sentence), e.g., The hostages were beheaded that
afternoon. A subclass of these context-
dependent expressions are ?indexical?
expressions, which require knowing when the
speaker is speaking to determine the intended
time value, e.g., now, today, yesterday,
tomorrow, next Tuesday, two weeks ago, etc.
The annotation scheme has been
designed to meet the following criteria:
? Simplicity with precision: We have tried to
keep the scheme simple enough to be
executed confidently by humans, and yet
precise enough for use in various natural
language processing tasks.
? Naturalness: We assume that the annotation
scheme should reflect those distinctions that
a human could be expected to reliably
annotate, rather than reflecting an
artificially-defined smaller set of
distinctions that automated systems might
be expected to make. This means that some
aspects of the annotation will be well
beyond the reach of current systems.
? Expressiveness:  The guidelines require that
one specify time values as fully as possible,
within the bounds of what can be
confidently inferred by annotators. The use
of ?parameters? and the representation of
?granularity? (described below) are tools to
help ensure this.
? Reproducibility: In addition to leveraging
the (ISO-8601 1997) format for representing
time values, we have tried to ensure
consistency among annotators by providing
an example-based approach, with each
guideline closely tied to specific examples.
While the representation accommodates
both points and intervals, the guidelines are
aimed at using the point representation to
the extent possible, further helping enforce
consistency.
The annotation process is decomposed into two
steps: flagging a temporal expression in a
document (based on the presence of specific
lexical trigger words), and identifying the time
value that the expression designates, or that the
speaker intends for it to designate. The flagging
of temporal expressions is restricted to those
temporal expressions which contain a reserved
time word used in a temporal sense, called a
?lexical trigger?, which include words like day,
week, weekend, now, Monday, current, future,
etc.
2 Interlingual Representation
2.1 Introduction
Although the guidelines were developed with
detailed examples drawn from English (along
with English-specific tokenization rules and
guidelines for determining tag extent), the
semantic representation we use is intended for
use across languages. This will permit the
development of temporal taggers for different
languages trained using a common annotation
scheme.
It will also allow for new methods for
evaluating machine translation of temporal
expressions at the level of interpretation as well
as at the surface level. As discussed in
(Hirschman et al 2000), time expressions
generally fall into the class of so-called named
entities, which includes proper names and
various kinds of numerical expressions.  The
translation of named entities is less variable
stylistically than the translation of general text,
and once predictable variations due to
differences in transliteration, etc. are accounted
for, the alignment of the machine-translated
expressions with a reference translation
produced by a human can readily be
accomplished. A variant of the word-error
metric used to evaluate the output of automatic
speech transcription can then be applied to
produce an accuracy score. In the case of our
current work on temporal expressions, it will
also be possible to use the normalized time
values to participate in the alignment and
scoring.
2.2 Semantic Distinctions
Three different kinds of time values are
represented: points in time (answering the
question ?when??), durations (answering ?how
long??), and frequencies (answering ?how
often??).
? Points in time are calendar dates and times-
of-day, or a combination of both, e.g.,
Monday 3 pm, Monday next week, a Friday,
early Tuesday morning, the weekend. These
are all represented with values (the tag
attribute VAL) in the ISO format, which
allows for representation of date of the
month, month of the year, day of the week,
week of the year, and time of day, e.g.,
<TIMEX2 VAL=?2000-11-
29T16:30?>4:30 p.m. yesterday afternoon
</TIMEX2>.
? Durations also use the ISO format to
represent a period of time. When only the
period of time is known, the value is
represented as a duration, e.g., <TIMEX2
VAL=?P3D?>a three-day </TIMEX2>
visit.
? Frequencies reference sets of time points
rather than particular points.  SET and
GRANULARITY attributes are used for
such expressions, with the PERIODICITY
attribute being used for regularly recurring
times, e.g., <TIMEX2 VAL=?XXXX-WXX-
2? SET=?YES? PERIODICITY=?F1W?
GRANULARITY=?G1D?>every
Tuesday</TIMEX2>.
Here ?F1W? means frequency of once a week,
and the granularity ?G1D? means the set
members are counted in day-sized units.
The annotation scheme also addresses several
semantic problems characteristic of temporal
expressions:
? Fuzzy boundaries. Expressions like
Saturday morning and Fall are fuzzy in their
intended value with respect to when the time
period starts and ends; the early 60?s is
fuzzy as to which part of the 1960?s is
included. Our format for representing time
values includes parameters such as FA (for
Fall), EARLY (for early, etc.),
PRESENT_REF (for today, current, etc.),
among others. For example, we have
<TIMEX2 VAL=?1990-SU?>Summer of
1990</TIMEX2>. Fuzziness in modifiers is
also represented, e.g., <TIMEX2
VAL=?1990? MOD=?BEFORE?>more
than a decade ago</TIMEX2>. The intent
here is that a given application may choose
to assign specific values to these parameters
if desired; the guidelines themselves don?t
dictate the specific values.
? Non-Specificity. Our scheme directs the
annotator to represent the values, where
possible, of temporal expressions that do not
indicate a specific time.  These non-specific
expressions include generics, which state a
generalization or regularity of some kind,
e.g., <TIMEX2 VAL=?XXXX-04?
NON_SPECIFIC=?YES?>April</TIMEX>
is usually wet, and non-specific indefinites,
like <TIMEX2 VAL="1999-06-XX"
NON_SPECIFIC="YES? GRANULARITY=
"G1D">a sunny day in <TIMEX2
VAL="199906">June</TIMEX2>
</TIMEX2>.
3 Reference Corpus
Based on the guidelines, we have arranged for 6
subjects to annotate an English reference corpus,
consisting of 32,000 words of a telephone dialog
corpus ? English translations of the ?Enthusiast?
corpus of Spanish meeting scheduling dialogs
used at CMU and by (Wiebe et al 1998), 35,000
words of New York Times newspaper text and
120,000 words of broadcast news (TDT2 1999).
This corpus will soon be made available to the
research community.
4 Time Tagger System
4.1 Architecture
The tagging program takes in a document which
has been tokenized into words and sentences and
tagged for part-of-speech. The program passes
each sentence first to a module that flags time
expressions, and then to another module (SC)
that resolves self-contained (i.e., ?absolute?)
time expressions. Absolute expressions are
typically processed through a lookup table that
translates them into a point or period that can be
described by the ISO standard.
The program then takes the entire
document and passes it to a discourse processing
module (DP) which resolves context-dependent
(i.e., ?relative?) time expressions (indexicals as
well as other expressions). The DP module
tracks transitions in temporal focus, using
syntactic clues and various other knowledge
sources.
The module uses a notion of Reference
Time to help resolve context-dependent
expressions. Here, the Reference Time is the
time a context-dependent expression is relative
to. The reference time (italicized here) must
either be described (as in ?a week from
Wednesday?) or implied (as in ?three days ago
[from today]?). In our work, the reference time
is assigned the value of either the Temporal
Focus or the document (creation) date. The
Temporal Focus is the time currently being
talked about in the narrative. The initial
reference time is the document date.
4.2 Assignment of Time Values
We now discuss the assigning of values to
identified time expressions. Times which are
fully specified are tagged with their value, e.g,
?June 1999? as 1999-06 by the SC module. The
DP module uses an ordered sequence of rules to
handle the context-dependent expressions. These
cover the following cases:
? Explicit offsets from reference time:
indexicals like ?yesterday?, ?today?,
?tomorrow?, ?this afternoon?, etc., are
ambiguous between a specific and a non-
specific reading. The specific use
(distinguished from the generic one by
machine learned rules discussed in (Mani
and Wilson 2000)) gets assigned a value
based on an offset from the reference time,
but the generic use does not. For example, if
?fall? is immediately preceded by ?last? or
?next?, then ?fall? is seasonal  (97.3%
accurate rule). If ?fall? is followed 2 words
after by a year expression, then ?fall? is
seasonal (86.3% accurate).
? Positional offsets from reference time:
Expressions like ?next month?, ?last year?
and ?this coming Thursday? use lexical
markers (underlined) to describe the
direction and magnitude of the offset from
the reference time.
? Implicit offsets based on verb tense:
Expressions like ?Thursday? in ?the action
taken Thursday?, or bare month names like
?February? are passed to rules that try to
determine the direction of the offset from
the reference time, and the magnitude of the
offset. The tense of a neighboring verb is
used to decide what direction to look to
resolve the expression.
? Further use of lexical markers:  Other
expressions lacking a value are examined
for the nearby presence of a few additional
markers, such as ?since? and ?until?, that
suggest the direction of the offset.
? Nearby Dates:  If a direction from the
reference time has not been determined,
some dates, like ?Feb. 14?, and other
expressions that indicate a particular date,
like ?Valentine?s Day?, may still be
untagged because the year has not been
determined.  If the year can be chosen in a
way that makes the date in question less
than a month from the reference date, that
year is chosen. Dates more than a month
away are not assigned values by this rule.
4.3 Time Tagging Performance
The system performance on a test set of 221
articles from the print and broadcast news
section of the reference corpus (the test set had a
total of 78,171 words) is shown in Table 13.
Note that if the human said the tag had no value,
and the system decided it had a value,  this is
treated as  an error. A baseline of just tagging
values of absolute, fully specified expressions
(e.g., ?January 31st, 1999?) is shown for
comparison in parentheses.
Type Human
Found
Correct
System
Found
System
Correct
F-
measure
TIMEX2 728 719 696 96.2
VAL 728 719 602
(234)
83.2
(32.3)
Table 1: Performance of Time Tagger
(English)
5 Multilingual Tagging
The development of a tagging program for other
languages closely parallels the process for
English and reuses some of the code. Each
language has its own set of lexical trigger words
that signal a temporal expression. Many of
these, e.g. day, week, etc., are simply
translations of English words.
Often, there will be some additional
triggers with no corresponding word in English.
For example, some languages contain a single
lexical item that would translate in English as
?the day after tomorrow?. For each language,
the triggers and lexical markers must be
identified.
As in the case of English, the SC
module for a new language handles the case of
absolute expressions, with the DP module
                                                          
3 The evaluated version of the system does not adjust the
Reference Time for subsequent sentences.
handling the relative ones. It appears that in
most languages, in the absence of other context,
relative expressions with an implied reference
time are relative to the present. Thus, tools built
for one language that compute offsets from a
base reference time will carry over to other
languages.
As an example, we will briefly describe
the changes that were needed to develop a
Spanish module, given our English one. Most of
the work involved pairing the Spanish surface
forms with the already existing computations,
e.g. we already computed ?yesterday? as
meaning ?one day back from the reference
point?. This had to be attached to the new
surface form ?ayer?. Because not all computers
generate the required character encodings, we
allowed expressions both with and without
diacritical marks, e.g., ma?ana and manana.
Besides the surface forms, there are a
few differences in conventions that had to be
accounted for. Times are mostly stated using a
24-hour clock. Dates are usually written in the
European form day/month/year rather than the
US-English convention of month/day/year.
A difficulty arises because of the use of
multiple calendric systems. While the Gregorian
calendar is widely used for business across the
world, holidays and other social events are often
represented in terms of other calendars. For
example, the month of Ramadan is a regularly
recurring event in the Islamic calendar, but
shifts around in the Gregorian4.
Here are some examples of tagging of
parallel text from Spanish and English with a
common representation.
<TIMEX2 VAL="2001-04-
01">hoy</TIMEX2>
<TIMEX2 VAL="2001-04-
01">today</TIMEX2>
<TIMEX2 VAL="1999-03-13">el trece de
marzo de 1999</TIMEX2>
<TIMEX2 VAL="1999-03-13">the thirteenth of
March, 1999</TIMEX2>
                                                          
4 Our annotation guidelines state that a holiday name is
markable but should receive a value only when that value
can be inferred from the context of the text, rather than
from cultural and world knowledge.
<TIMEX2 VAL="2001-W12">la semana
pasada</TIMEX2>
<TIMEX2 VAL="2001-W12">last
week</TIMEX2>
6 Related Work
Our scheme differs from the recent scheme of
(Setzer and Gaizauskas 2000) in terms of our in-
depth focus on representations for the values of
specific classes of time expressions, and in the
application of our scheme to a variety of
different genres, including print news, broadcast
news, and meeting scheduling dialogs. Others
have used temporal annotation schemes for the
much more constrained domain of meeting
scheduling, e.g., (Wiebe et al 1998),
(Alexandersson et al 1997), (Busemann et al
1997).  Our scheme has been applied to such
domains as well, our annotation of the
Enthusiast corpus being an example.
7 Conclusion
In the future, we hope to extend our English
annotation guidelines into a set of multilingual
annotation guidelines, which would include
language-specific supplements specifying
examples, tokenization rules, and rules for
determining tag extents. To support
development of such guidelines, we expect to
develop large keyword-in-context concordances,
and would like to use the time-tagger system as
a tool in that effort.  Our approach would be (1)
to run the tagger over the desired text corpora;
(2) to run the concordance creation utility over
the annotated version of the same corpora, using
not only TIMEX2 tags but also lexical trigger
words as input criteria; and (3) to partition the
output of the creation utility into entries that are
tagged as temporal expressions and entries that
are not so tagged.  We can then review the
untagged entries to discover classes of cases that
are not yet covered by the tagger (and hence,
possibly not yet covered by the guidelines), and
we can review the tagged entries to discover any
spuriously tagged cases that may correspond to
guidelines that need to be tightened up.
We also expect to create and distribute
multilingual corpora annotated according to
these guidelines. Initial feedback from machine
translation system grammar writers (Levin
2000) indicates that the guidelines were found to
be useful in extending an existing interlingua for
machine translation. For the existing English
annotations, we are currently carrying out inter-
annotator agreement studies of the work of the 6
annotators.
References
J. Alexandersson, N. Reithinger, and E. Maier.
Insights into the Dialogue Processing of
VERBMOBIL. Proceedings of the Fifth
Conference on Applied Natural Language
Processing, 1997, 33-40.
S. Busemann, T. Declerck, A. K. Diagne, L. Dini, J.
Klein, and S. Schmeier. Natural Language
Dialogue Service for Appointment Scheduling
Agents. Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on
Applied Natural Language Processing, 1997, 25-
32.
L. Ferro, I. Mani, B. Sundheim, and G. Wilson.
TIDES Temporal Annotation Guidelines. Draft
Version 1.0. MITRE Technical Report MTR
00W0000094, October 2000.
L. Hirschman, F. Reeder, J. Burger, and K. Miller,
Name Translation as a Machine Translation
Evaluation Task. Proceedings of LREC?2000.
ISO-8601 ftp://ftp.qsl.net/pub/g1smd/8601v03.pdf
1997.
L. Levin. Personal Communication.
I. Mani and G. Wilson. Robust Temporal Processing
of News, Proceedings of the ACL'2000
Conference, 3-6 October 2000, Hong Kong.
MUC-7. Proceedings of the Seventh Message
Understanding Conference, DARPA. 1998.
http://www.itl.nist.gov/iad/894.02/related_projects/muc/
A. Setzer and R. Gaizauskas. Annotating Events and
Temporal Information in Newswire Texts.
Proceedings of the Second International
Conference On Language Resources And
Evaluation (LREC-2000), Athens, Greece, 31
May- 2 June 2000.
TDT2
http://morph.ldc.upenn.edu/Catalog/LDC99T37.ht
ml 1999
J. M. Wiebe, T. P. O?Hara, T. Ohrstrom-Sandgren,
and K. J. McKeever. An Empirical Approach to
Temporal Reference Resolution. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research, 9, 1998, pp. 247-
293.
Appendix 1: Annotated
Corpus: Enthusiast Dialog
Example (one utterance)
Transcript of Spanish source:
EL LUNES DIECISIETE IMAGINO QUE
QUIERE DECIR EL DIECISIETE TENGO UN
SEMINARIO DESDE LAS DIEZ HASTA LAS
CINCO
Annotated English translation:
<TIMEX2 VAL=?2000-05-17?>MONDAY
THE SEVENTEENTH</TIMEX2> I IMAGINE
YOU MEAN <TIMEX2 VAL=?2000-05-
17?>THE SEVENTEENTH</TIMEX2> I
HAVE A SEMINAR FROM <TIMEX2
VAL=?2000-05-17T10?>TEN </TIMEX2>
UNTIL <TIMEX2 VAL=?2000-05-
17T17?>FIVE
</TIMEX2>
Note:  Elements of range expressions are tagged
separately.  The VAL includes date as well as
time because of the larger context.  The
annotator has confidently inferred that the
seminar is during the daytime, and has coded the
time portion of the VAL accordingly.
Appendix 2: Annotated
Corpus: New York Times
Article (excerpt)
   Dominique Strauss-Kahn, France's finance
minister, said: "<TIMEX2 VAL=?1999-01-01?>
Today</TIMEX2> is clearly <TIMEX2
NON_SPECIFIC=?YES?>a historic day for the
European enterprise</TIMEX2>. Europe will be
strong, stronger than in <TIMEX2
VAL=?PAST_REF?>the past</TIMEX2>,
because it will speak with a single monetary
voice."
   But even on <TIMEX2 VAL=?1998-12-31?>
Thursday </TIMEX2>, there were signs of
potential battles ahead.
   One hint came from Duisenberg, a former
Dutch central banker who was named president
of the European Central Bank only after a bitter
political fight <TIMEX2 VAL=?1998-05?>last
May</TIMEX2> between France and Germany.
Duisenberg, a conservative on monetary policy,
was favored by Helmut Kohl, who was
<TIMEX2 VAL=?1998-05?>then</TIMEX2>
chancellor of Germany. But President Jacques
Chirac of France insisted on the head of the
Bank of France, Jean-Claude Trichet.
   Germany and France eventually cut a deal
under which Duisenberg would become
president of the new European bank, but
"voluntarily" agree to step down well ahead of
<TIMEX2 VAL=?P8Y? MOD=?END?>the end
of his eight-year term</TIMEX2>.
