Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the NAACL, Companion Volume, pages 280?283,
New York City, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Automating the Creation of Interactive Glyph-supplemented Scatterplots for
Visualizing Algorithm Results
Dinoj Surendran
Department of Computer Science
University of Chicago
dinoj@cs.uchicago.edu
Abstract
Ndaona is a Matlab toolkit to create in-
teractive three-dimensional models of data
often found in NLP research, such as ex-
ploring the results of classification and di-
mensionality reduction algorithms. Such
models are useful for teaching, presen-
tations and exploratory research (such as
showing where a classification algorithm
makes mistakes).
Ndaona includes embedding and graph-
ics parameter estimation algorithms, and
generates files in the format of Partiview
(Levy, 2001), an existing free open-source
fast multidimensional data displayer that
has traditionally been used in the plane-
tarium community. Partiview1 supports a
number of enhancements to regular scat-
terplots that allow it to display more than
three dimensions? worth of information.
1 Supplemented Scatterplots
Scatterplots are not the most efficient way of repre-
senting information (Grinstein et al, 2001). How-
ever, they are intuitive and stable (Wong and Berg-
eron, 1997), and can be supplemented in several
ways. We describe some of these augmentations in
Section 1, basic Ndaona usage in Section 2, and fi-
nally a couple of some embedding methods in Sec-
tion 3.
1http://niri.ncsa.uiuc.edu/partiview
Figure 1: Regular and glyph-supplemented scat-
terplots showing how a linear kernel can separate
happy and sad faces from the Frey Face dataset.
1.1 Glyphs
Glyphs are icons that provide a visual representa-
tion of a datum. A simple example of a glyph is
a filled-in circle whose color and size convey two
additional dimensions of information. More com-
plex examples have been designed to present more
information (Tukey and Tukey, 1981) (Ward, 2002).
Partiview can use any image as a glyph, as long as
all images used can fit in graphics memory.
For example, Figure 1 shows faces from the Frey
Face Dataset2 in linear kernel space; two faces are
close together then the vectors u and v representing
have a high value of uT v. In this case, each point has
a natural visual representation ? the face itself. And
we therefore use the faces as lossless glyphs, with
each glyph representing a 560-dimensional vector
(20 x 28 pixel image).
A second example is in Figure 2. It shows Man-
darin syllables in a tone recognition experiment
(Surendran et al, 2005), with two syllables close
2Thanks to Sam Roweis for placing this data on his site.
280
Figure 2: A close-up screenshot of a 3D glyph-
supplemented scatterplot showing the performance
of a linear Support Vector Machine (SVM) on a
4-way Mandarin syllable tone classification task.
Ndaona embedded syllables so that those classified
similarly by the SVM are close together. The glyph
for each syllable represents the 20-dimensional vec-
tor input to the SVM. Syllables with the same tone
are represented by glyphs of the same color; the
white syllables in the foreground have falling tone.
together if the classification algorithm made simi-
lar predictions of their tone. The algorithm received
for each syllable a 20-dimensional vector that de-
scribed its normalized pitch contour of the syllable.
In this case, a histogram of the pitch contour, with
the area between the pitch contour and the horizon-
tal axis shaded for enhanced visibility, results in a
highly informative glyph.
A close-up look at the low tone syllables reveals
that the algorithm ?thinks? that any syllable whose
pitch contour decreases towards the end has a falling
tone which is what linguists expect. We can also
tell that many of the mistakes made by the algorithm
are due to the features and not the algorithm itself.
For instance, the several high tone syllables that are
close to the cluster of low-tone-syllables (and would
thus be classified as having low tone by the algo-
rithm) do in fact have a falling pitch contour.
1.2 Three Dimensions
Partiview users can smoothly spin, zoom, and move
the 3d scatterplot model even when it contains hun-
dreds of thousands of points. Interaction and motion
deal with difficulties (described in the information
visualization and statistical graphics literature) of vi-
sually estimating distances when a third dimension
is used (Jacoby, 1998).
1.3 Graphs
While Partiview is not the best software for display-
ing graphs, it can display lines of varying width and
color. This permits two bits of information to be dis-
played about binary relations between points.
1.4 Information about points
While text labels can be placed at points, this often
results in visual clutter. It is better to give the user
the option of only having labels displayed when ac-
tively requested. This option is called ?linking?.
Partiview has some linking capability. When a
user clicks on a point (and presses ?p?), the com-
mand window displays information about it, such
as its position, several features, and any ?comment?
provided by the user. For example, Figures 3 and
4 show the results of a 13-class dialog act classifica-
tion task ? the user supplied as comments the words
said during each dialog act. Some of these can be
seen in the command window of each screenshot.
1.5 Brushing
Brushing is the ability for users to select subsets
of data points and apply certain operations to them,
such as toggling their visibility (masking), changing
their color or size (Becker and Cleveland, 1987).
Partiview supports this very well, and it is possi-
bly the most important feature available for data ex-
ploration. For example, we can change the colors of
points to be that of any attribute of the data, includ-
ing its original features. This helps investigate what
original features the algorithm is actually using.
For example, in Figure 3 color represents class,
while in Figure 4 color represents duration. The
color could just as easily be changed to repre-
sent other attributes of the data; Ndaona estimates
Partiview parameters required for consistent behav-
ior across attributes by normalizing the color map
for each attribute.
1.6 Animation
Partiview supports animated data. Ndaona has been
written so that one can deal with various combina-
281
tions of static and dynamic (time-varying) graphical
elements, such as fixed points and varying edges, or
dynamic points and fixed edges (i.e. the edges al-
ways join the same points), or both dynamic points
and edges, fixed points and dynamic attributes, and
so on. The only difference to the user is that s/he
provides a cell array (list) of matrices for the dy-
namic element instead of a single matrix.
Figure 3: Partiview screenshot of a Ndaona-made
model showing the result of a dialog act classifica-
tion algorithm. Each point represents a dialog act,
and all acts of the same type are colored identically.
2 Usage
For flexibility of input, arguments to Ndaona are
supplied in parameter-value pairs. For example, say
P is a N ? 3 matrix representing the 3D coordinates
of N points and Q is a list of N images representing
the glyphs of each point. Ndaona includes tools to
create such images, or the user can provide their
own JPEGs. Either of the equivalent commands
ndaona(?POSITIONS?,P,?PICTURES?,Q)
ndaona(?POS?,P, ?PICS?,Q)
creates a 3D model with the pictures in Q repre-
sented at the positions for each point, such as that
in Figures 1 and 3. Graphics parameters controlling
picture sizes are automatically estimated by Ndaona.
Now suppose that the N points have time-varying
positions. Making P a list of N ? 3 matrices and
Figure 4: As for Figure 3 but now color represents
duration. Shorter acts (top left) are green.
using the same command as above creates a time-
varying scatterplot with the images moving about.
If this was classification and the true class of each
point is stored in a N -dimensional vector L, then
ndaona(?POS?,P,?PICS?,Q,?CLASS?,L)
creates the 3D model with the pictures colored
by class, with the same color for points of the same
class, such as that in Figure 2. Also, Partiview
provides a button for each class that toggles the
visibility of data points in that class. If each point
has A attributes stored in a N ?A matrix F, then
ndaona(?POS?,P,...,?ATTRIBUTES?,F)
creates a model as before, but with brushing avail-
able. The colors of each point can be changed ac-
cording to the r-th attribute by typing ?color ar?,
where ar is the automatically assigned name for the
r-th attribute. (Users can provide attribute names
with another parameter-value pair.)
If the N points also form the nodes of a (con-
nected or not) graph with Ne edges, then if the
edges are represented by a Ne?3 matrix or a sparse
Ne ?Ne matrix G, the command
ndaona(?POS?,P,...,?EDGES?,G)
282
creates the same scatterplot, overlaid with edges.
Additional parameter-value pairs in Ndaona can
be used to fine-tune graphics parameters, create files
in directory structures that are easy to compress and
distribute, change background color, etc.
3 Embedding into Three Dimensions
When visualizing the results of algorithms, users
may not have a three-dimensional embedding al-
ready available. However, algorithms have been pro-
posed to produce such embeddings, and we now de-
scribe some of those available in Ndaona. Ndaona
also implements basic dimensionality reduction al-
gorithms such as Principal Components Analysis,
Laplacian Eigenmaps, and Isomap.
3.1 Classification Probabilities
If users have a N ?K matrix S of prediction proba-
bilities from a K-class classification algorithm, with
S(n, k) having the probability (estimated by the al-
gorithm) that the n-th point is in class k, then this
can be supplied instead.
Ndaona uses the Parametric Embedding algo-
rithm (Iwata et al, 2004) to find a low-dimensional
embedding of the N points so that pairs of points
that were given similar predictions by the classifica-
tion algorithm (i.e. have low Kullback-Leibler dis-
tance between their prediction probability distribu-
tions) are closer together.
3.2 Kernel Matrices
Support vector machines (SVMs) and related meth-
ods depend on pairwise similarities of points, in the
form of a kernel matrix whos (i, j)-th entry rep-
resents the similarity of the i-th and j-th points.
Shawe-Taylor and Christianini (2004) suggest using
the eigenvectors corresponding to the three smallest
positive eigenvalues of the Laplacian of the N ?N
kernel matrix to define a N ? 3 positions matrix.
Ndaona implements an alternative that, in our expe-
rience, works better ? using the normalized Lapla-
cian of the kernel matrix (with negative entries re-
placed by zero).
4 Conclusion
Ndaona is an interface package that helps reearchers
produce compelling visual representations of their
data. Its output is a (time-varying) 3d model that
can be displayed by Partiview, an external data
viewer. Future plans include adding more scal-
able embedding algorithms, and allowing other out-
put formats. Ndaona, documentation, and exam-
ples of models created with it, can be found at
http://people.cs.uchicago.edu/?dinoj/ndaona
References
R A Becker and W S Cleveland. 1987. Brushing scatter-
plots. Technometrics, 29(2):127?142.
G Grinstein, M Trutschl, and U Cvek. 2001. High-
dimensional visualizations. In Proceedings of the 7th
Data Mining Conference-KDD.
T Iwata, K Saito, N Ueda, S Stromsten, T L Griffiths,
and Joshua B Tenenbaum. 2004. Parametric embed-
ding for class visualization. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 17.
William G. Jacoby. 1998. Statistical Graphics for Vi-
sualizing Multivariate Data. Sage University Papers
Series on Quantitative Applications in the Social Sci-
ences 07-120, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Stuart Levy. 2001. Interactive 3-d visualization of par-
ticle systems with partiview. In Astrophysical Su-
percomputing Using Particles (I.A.U. Symposium Pro-
ceedings), volume 208, pages 85?91. International As-
tronomical Union.
John Shawe-Taylor and Nello Cristianini. 2004. Kernel
Methods for Pattern Analysis. Cambridge University
Press.
Dinoj Surendran, Gina-Anne Levow, and Yi Xu. 2005.
Tone recognition in mandarin using focus. In Proceed-
ings of the 9th European Conference of Speech Com-
munication and Technology.
P A Tukey and J W Tukey. 1981. Summarization;
smoothing; supplementing views. In Vic Barnett, ed-
itor, Interpreting Multivariate Data, pages 245?275.
John Wiley and Sons.
Matthew O. Ward. 2002. A taxonomy of glyph place-
ment strategies for multidimensional data visualiza-
tion. Information Visualization, 1(3/4):194?210.
Pak Chung Wong and R Daniel Bergeron. 1997.
Thirty years of multidimensional multivariate visual-
ization. In Gregory M Nielson, Hans Hagan, and
Heinrich Muller, editors, Scientific Visualization -
Overviews, Methodologies and Techniques, pages 3?
33, Los Alamitos, CA. IEEE Computer Society Press.
283
