Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 169?172,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Illuminating Trouble Tickets with Sublanguage Theory  
 
Svetlana Symonenko, Steven Rowe, Elizabeth D. Liddy 
Center for Natural Language Processing 
School Of Information Studies 
Syracuse University 
Syracuse, NY  13244 
{ssymonen, sarowe, liddy}@syr.edu 
  
Abstract 
A study was conducted to explore the poten-
tial of Natural Language Processing (NLP)-
based knowledge discovery approaches for 
the task of representing and exploiting the 
vital information contained in field service 
(trouble) tickets for a large utility provider. 
Analysis of a subset of tickets, guided by 
sublanguage theory, identified linguistic pat-
terns, which were translated into rule-based 
algorithms for automatic identification of 
tickets? discourse structure. The subsequent 
data mining experiments showed promising 
results, suggesting that sublanguage is an ef-
fective framework for the task of discovering 
the historical and predictive value of trouble 
ticket data. 
1 Introduction 
Corporate information systems that manage cus-
tomer reports of problems with products or ser-
vices have become common nowadays. Yet, the 
vast amount of data accumulated by these systems 
remains underutilized for the purposes of gaining 
proactive, adaptive insights into companies? busi-
ness operations. 
Unsurprising, then, is an increased interest by 
organizations in knowledge mining approaches to 
master this information for quality assurance or 
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) pur-
poses. Recent commercial developments include 
pattern-based extraction of important entities and 
relationships in the automotive domain (Attensity, 
2003) and text mining applications in the aviation 
domain (Provalis, 2005).    
This paper describes an exploratory feasibility 
study conducted for a large utility provider. The 
company was interested in knowledge discovery 
approaches applicable to the data aggregated by its 
Emergency Control System (ECS) in the form of 
field service tickets. When a ?problem? in the 
company?s electric, gas or steam distribution sys-
tem is reported to the corporate Call Center, a new 
ticket is created. A typical ticket contains the 
original report of the problem and steps taken to 
fix it. An operator also assigns a ticket an Original 
Trouble Type, which can be changed later, as addi-
tional information clarifies the nature of the prob-
lem. The last Trouble Type assigned to a ticket 
becomes its Actual Trouble Type. 
Each ticket combines structured and unstruc-
tured data. The structured portion comes from sev-
eral internal corporate information systems. The 
unstructured portion is entered by the operator who 
receives information over the phone from a person 
reporting a problem or a field worker fixing it. This 
free text constitutes the main material for the 
analysis, currently limited to known-item search 
using keywords and a few patterns. The company 
management grew dissatisfied with such an ap-
proach as time-consuming and, likely, missing out 
on emergent threats and opportunities or discover-
ing them too late. Furthermore, this approach lacks 
the ability to knit facts together across trouble 
tickets, except for grouping them by date or gross 
attributes, such as Trouble Types. The company 
management felt the need for a system, which, 
based on the semantic analysis of ticket texts, 
would not only identify items of interest at a more 
granular level, such as events, people, locations, 
dates, relationships, etc., but would also enable the 
discovery of unanticipated associations and trends. 
The feasibility study aimed to determine 
whether NLP-based approaches could deal with 
169
such homely, ungrammatical texts and then to ex-
plore various knowledge mining techniques that 
would meet the client?s needs. Initial analysis of a 
sample of data suggested that the goal could be 
effectively accomplished by looking at the data 
from the perspective of sublanguage theory.  
The novelty of our work is in combining sym-
bolic NLP and statistical approaches, guided by 
sublanguage theory, which results in an effective 
methodology and solution for such data. 
This paper describes analyses and experiments 
conducted and discusses the potential of the sub-
language approach for the task of tapping into the 
value of trouble ticket data. 
2 Related Research 
Sublanguage theory posits that texts produced 
within a certain discourse community exhibit 
shared, often unconventional, vocabulary and 
grammar (Grishman and Kittredge, 1986; Harris, 
1991). Sublanguage theory has been successfully 
applied in biomedicine (Friedman et al, 2002; 
Liddy et al, 1993), software development (Etzkorn 
et al, 1999), weather forecasting (Somers, 2003), 
and other domains. Trouble tickets exhibit a spe-
cial discourse structure, combining system-
generated, structured data and free-text sections; a 
special lexicon, full of acronyms, abbreviations 
and symbols; and consistent ?bending? of grammar 
rules in favor of speed writing (Johnson, 1992; 
Marlow, 2004). Our work has also been informed 
by the research on machine classification tech-
niques (Joachims, 2002; Yilmazel et al, 2005). 
3 Development of the sublanguage model  
The client provided us with a dataset of 162,105 
trouble tickets dating from 1995 to 2005. An im-
portant part of data preprocessing included token-
izing text strings. The tokenizer was adapted to fit 
the special features of the trouble tickets? vocabu-
lary and grammar: odd punctuation; name variants; 
domain-specific terms, phrases, and abbreviations.  
Development of a sublanguage model began 
with manual annotation and analysis of a sample of 
73 tickets, supplemented with n-gram analysis and 
contextual mining for particular terms and phrases. 
The analysis aimed to identify consistent linguistic 
patterns: domain-specific vocabulary (abbrevia-
tions, special terms); major ticket sections; and 
semantic components (people, organizations, loca-
tions, events, important concepts).  
The analysis resulted in compiling the core do-
main lexicon, which includes acronyms for Trou-
ble Types (SMH - smoking manhole); departments 
(EDS - Electric Distribution); locations (S/S/C - 
South of the South Curb); special terms (PACM - 
Possible Asbestos Containing Material); abbrevia-
tions (BSMNT - basement, F/UP - follow up); and 
fixed phrases (NO LIGHTS, WHITE HAT). Origi-
nally, the lexicon was intended to support the de-
velopment of the sublanguage grammar, but, since 
no such lexicon existed in the company, it can now 
enhance the corporate knowledge base. 
Review of the data revealed a consistent struc-
ture for trouble ticket discourse. A typical ticket 
(Fig.1) consists of several text blocks ending with 
an operator?s ID (12345 or JS). A ticket usually 
opens with a complaint (lines 001-002) that pro-
vides the original account of a problem and often 
contains: reporting entity (CONST MGMT), time-
stamp, short problem description, location. Field 
work (lines 009-010) normally includes the name 
of the assigned employee, new information about 
the problem, steps needed or taken, complications, 
etc. Lexical choices are limited and section-
specific; for instance, reporting a problem typically 
opens with REPORTS, CLAIMS, or CALLED.  
 
Figure 1. A sample trouble ticket 
The resulting typical structure of a trouble ticket 
(Table 1) includes sections distinct in their content 
and data format. 
Section Name Data 
Complaint Original report about the problem, Free-text 
Office Action 
Office Note 
Scheduling actions, Structured 
text 
Field Report Field work, Free-text  
Job Referral 
Job Completion 
Job Cancelled 
Referring actions, Closing actions, 
Structured text 
Table 1. Sample discourse structure of a ticket. 
170
Analysis also identified recurring semantic 
components: people, locations, problem, time-
stamp, equipment, urgency, etc. The annotation of 
tickets by sections (Fig.2) and semantic compo-
nents was validated with domain experts.  
 
Figure 2. Annotated ticket sections. 
The analysis became the basis for developing 
logical rules for automatic identification of ticket 
sections and selected semantic components. 
Evaluation of system performance on 70 manually 
annotated and 80 unseen tickets demonstrated high 
accuracy in automatic section identification, with 
an error rate of only 1.4%, and no significant dif-
ference between results on the annotated vs. un-
seen tickets. Next, the automatic annotator was run 
on the entire corpus of 162,105 tickets. The anno-
tated dataset was used in further experiments. 
Identification of semantic components brings 
together variations in names and spellings under a 
single ?normalized? term, thus streamlining and 
expanding coverage of subsequent data analysis. 
For example, strings UNSAFE LADDER, HAZ, 
(hazard) and PACM (Possible Asbestos Containing 
Material) are tagged and, thus, can be retrieved as 
hazard indicators. ?Normalization? is also applied 
to name variants for streets and departments.  
The primary value of the annotation is in effec-
tive extraction of structured information from these 
unstructured free texts. Such information can next 
be fed into a database and integrated with other 
data attributes for further analysis. This will sig-
nificantly expand the range and the coverage of 
data analysis techniques, currently employed by 
the company. 
The high accuracy in automatic identification of 
ticket sections and semantic components can, to a 
significant extent, be explained by the relatively 
limited number and high consistency of the identi-
fied linguistic constructions, which enabled their 
successful translation into a set of logical rules. 
This also supported our initial view of the ticket 
texts as exhibiting sublanguage characteristics, 
such as: distinct shared common vocabulary and 
constructions; extensive use of special symbols and 
abbreviations; and consistent bending of grammar 
in favor of shorthand. The sublanguage approach 
thus enables the system to recognize effectively a 
number of implicit semantic relationships in texts.  
4 Leveraging pattern-based approaches 
with statistical techniques 
Next, we assessed the potential of some knowledge 
discovery approaches to meet company needs and 
fit the nature of the data. 
4.1 Identifying Related Tickets 
When several reports relate to the same or recur-
ring trouble, or to multiple problems affecting the 
same area, a note is made in each ticket, e.g.:  
RELATED TO THE 21 ON E38ST TICKET 9999 
Each of these related tickets usually contains 
some aspects of the trouble (Figure 3), but current 
analytic approaches never brought them together to 
create a complete picture of the problem, which 
may provide for useful associations. Semantic 
component related-ticket is expressed through pre-
dictable linguistic patterns that can be used as lin-
guistic clues for automatic grouping of related 
tickets for further analysis. 
Ticket 1 
..REPORTS FDR-26M49 OPENED AUTO @ 16:54..  
OTHER TICKETS RELATED TO THIS JOB      
========= TICKET 2 =========== TICKET 3 = 
Ticket 2 
.. CEILING IS IN VERY BAD CONDITION AND IN 
DANGER OFCOLLAPSE. ? 
Ticket 3 
.. CONTRACTOR IS DOING FOUNDATION 
WATERPROOFINGWORK ...  
Figure 3. Related tickets 
4.2 Classification experiments 
The analysis of Trouble Type distribution revealed, 
much to the company?s surprise, that 18% of tick-
171
ets had the Miscellaneous (MSE) Type and, thus, 
remained out-of-scope for any analysis of associa-
tions between Trouble Types and semantic compo-
nents that would reveal trends. A number of 
reasons may account for this, including uniqueness 
of a problem or human error. Review of a sample 
of MSE tickets showed that some of them should 
have a more specific Trouble Type. For example 
(Figure 4), both tickets, each initially assigned the 
MSE type, describe the WL problem, but only one 
ticket later receives this code.  
Ticket 1 Original Code="MSE" Actual Code="WL" 
WATER LEAKING INTO TRANSFORMER BOX IN 
BASEMENT OF DORM; ?  
Ticket 2 Original Code ="MSE" Actual Code ="MSE" 
? WATER IS FLOWING INTO GRADING WHICH 
LEADS TO ELECTRICIAL VAULT.   
Figure 4. Complaint sections, WL-problem 
Results of n-gram analyses (Liddy et al, 2006), 
supported our hypothesis that different Trouble 
Types have distinct linguistic features. Next, we 
investigated if knowledge of these type-dependent 
linguistic patterns can help with assigning specific 
Types to MSE tickets. The task was conceptualized 
as a multi-label classification, where the system is 
trained on complaint sections of tickets belonging 
to specific Trouble Types and then tested on tickets 
belonging either to these Types or to the MSE 
Type. Experiments were run using the Extended 
LibSVM tool (Chang and Lin, 2001), modified for 
another project of ours (Yilmazel et al, 2005). 
Promising results of classification experiments, 
with precision and recall for known Trouble Types 
exceeding 95% (Liddy et al, 2006), can, to some 
extent, be attributed to the fairly stable and distinct 
language ? a sublanguage ? of the trouble tickets.  
5 Conclusion and Future Work 
Initial exploration of the Trouble Tickets revealed 
their strong sublanguage characteristics, such as: 
wide use of domain-specific terminology, abbre-
viations and phrases; odd grammar rules favoring 
shorthand; and special discourse structure reflec-
tive of the communicative purpose of the tickets. 
The identified linguistic patterns are sufficiently 
consistent across the data, so that they can be de-
scribed algorithmically to support effective auto-
mated identification of ticket sections and semantic 
components.  
Experimentation with classification algorithms 
shows that applying the sublanguage theoretical 
framework to the task of mining trouble ticket data 
appears to be a promising approach to the problem 
of reducing human error and, thus, expanding the 
scope of data amenable to data mining techniques 
that use Trouble Type information.  
Our directions for future research include ex-
perimenting with other machine learning tech-
niques, utilizing the newly-gained knowledge of 
the tickets? sublanguage grammar, as well as test-
ing sublanguage analysis technology on other types 
of field service reports. 
6 References 
Improving Product Quality Using Technician Com-
ments.2003. Attensity. 
Chang, C.-C. and Lin, C.-J. 2001. LIBSVM 
http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvm. 
Etzkorn, L. H., Davis, C. G., and Bowen, L. L. 1999. 
The Language of Comments in Computer Software: 
A Sublanguage of English. Journal of Pragmatics, 
33(11): 1731-1756. 
Friedman, C., Kraa, P., and Rzhetskya, A. 2002. Two 
Biomedical Sublanguages:  a Description Based on 
the Theories of Zellig Harris. Journal of Biomedical 
Informatics, 35(4): 222-235. 
Grishman, R. and Kittredge, R. I. (Eds.). 1986. Analyz-
ing Language in Restricted Domains: Sublanguage 
Description and Processing. 
Harris, Z. A theory of language and information: a 
mathematical approach.  (1991). 
Joachims, T. Learning  to Classify Text using Support 
Vector Machines: Ph.D. Thesis  (2002). 
RFC 1297 - NOC Internal Integrated Trouble Ticket 
System Functional Specification Wishlist.1992. 
http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1297.html. 
Liddy, E. D., Jorgensen, C. L., Sibert, E. E., and Yu, E. 
S. 1993. A Sublanguage Approach to Natural Lan-
guage Processing for an Expert System. Information 
Processing & Management, 29(5): 633-645. 
Liddy, E. D., Symonenko, S., and Rowe, S. 2006. Sub-
language Analysis Applied to Trouble Tickets. 19th 
International FLAIRS Conference. 
Marlow, D. 2004. Investigating Technical Trouble Tick-
ets: An Analysis of a Homely CMC Genre. HICSS'37. 
Application of Statistical Content Analysis Text Mining 
to Airline Safety Reports.2005. Provalis. 
Somers, H. 2003. Sublanguage. In H. Somers (Ed.), 
Computers and Translation: A translator's guide. 
Yilmazel, O., Symonenko, S., Balasubramanian, N., and 
Liddy, E. D. 2005. Leveraging One-Class SVM and 
Semantic Analysis to Detect Anomalous Content. 
ISI/IEEE'05, Atlanta, GA. 
 
172
