Proceedings of the BioNLP Workshop on Linking Natural Language Processing and Biology at HLT-NAACL 06, pages 17?24,
New York City, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Term Generalization and Synonym Resolution for Biological Abstracts:
Using the Gene Ontology for Subcellular Localization Prediction
Alona Fyshe
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2E8
alona@cs.ualberta.ca
Duane Szafron
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2E8
duane@cs.ualberta.ca
Abstract
The field of molecular biology is growing
at an astounding rate and research findings
are being deposited into public databases,
such as Swiss-Prot. Many of the over
200,000 protein entries in Swiss-Prot 49.1
lack annotations such as subcellular lo-
calization or function, but the vast major-
ity have references to journal abstracts de-
scribing related research. These abstracts
represent a huge amount of information
that could be used to generate annotations
for proteins automatically. Training clas-
sifiers to perform text categorization on
abstracts is one way to accomplish this
task. We present a method for improving
text classification for biological journal
abstracts by generating additional text fea-
tures using the knowledge represented in
a biological concept hierarchy (the Gene
Ontology). The structure of the ontology,
as well as the synonyms recorded in it, are
leveraged by our simple technique to sig-
nificantly improve the F-measure of sub-
cellular localization text classifiers by as
much as 0.078 and we achieve F-measures
as high as 0.935.
1 Introduction
Can computers extract the semantic content of aca-
demic journal abstracts? This paper explores the use
of natural language techniques for processing bio-
logical abstracts to answer this question in a specific
domain. Our prototype method predicts the subcel-
lular localization of proteins (the part of the biolog-
ical cell where a protein performs its function) by
performing text classification on related journal ab-
stracts.
In the last two decades, there has been explosive
growth in molecular biology research. Molecular bi-
ologists organize their findings into a common set
of databases. One such database is Swiss-Prot, in
which each entry corresponds to a protein. As of
version 49.1 (February 21, 2006) Swiss-Prot con-
tains more than 200,000 proteins, 190,000 of which
link to biological journal abstracts. Unfortunately, a
much smaller percentage of protein entries are anno-
tated with other types of information. For example,
only about half the entries have subcellular localiza-
tion annotations. This disparity is partially due to
the fact that humans annotate these databases manu-
ally and cannot keep up with the influx of data. If a
computer could be trained to produce annotations by
processing journal abstracts, proteins in the Swiss-
Prot database could be curated semi-automatically.
Document classification is the process of cate-
gorizing a set of text documents into one or more
of a predefined set of classes. The classification
of biological abstracts is an interesting specializa-
tion of general document classification, in that sci-
entific language is often not understandable by, nor
written for, the lay-person. It is full of specialized
terms, acronyms and it often displays high levels
of synonymy. For example, the ?PAM complex?,
which exists in the mitochondrion of the biologi-
cal cell is also referred to with the phrases ?pre-
sequence translocase-associated import motor? and
17
?mitochondrial import motor?. This also illustrates
the fact that biological terms often span word bound-
aries and so their collective meaning is lost when
text is whitespace tokenized.
To overcome the challenges of scientific lan-
guage, our technique employs the Gene Ontology
(GO) (Ashburner et al 2000) as a source of expert
knowledge. The GO is a controlled vocabulary of
biological terms developed and maintained by biol-
ogists. In this paper we use the knowledge repre-
sented by the GO to complement the information
present in journal abstracts. Specifically we show
that:
? the GO can be used as a thesaurus
? the hierarchical structure of the GO can be used
to generalize specific terms into broad concepts
? simple techniques using the GO significantly
improve text classification
Although biological abstracts are challenging
documents to classify, solving this problem will
yield important benefits. With sufficiently accurate
text classifiers, the abstracts of Swiss-Prot entries
could be used to automatically annotate correspond-
ing proteins, meaning biologists could more effi-
ciently identify proteins of interest. Less time spent
sifting through unannotated proteins translates into
more time spent on new science, performing impor-
tant experiments and uncovering fresh knowledge.
2 Related Work
Several different learning algorithms have been ex-
plored for text classification (Dumais et al 1998)
and support vector machines (SVMs) (Vapnik,
1995) were found to be the most computationally ef-
ficient and to have the highest precision/recall break-
even point (BEP, the point where precision equals
recall). Joachims performed a very thorough evalu-
ation of the suitability of SVMs for text classifica-
tion (Joachims, 1998). Joachims states that SVMs
are perfect for textual data as it produces sparse
training instances in very high dimensional space.
Soon after Joachims? survey, researchers started
using SVMs to classify biological journal abstracts.
Stapley et al (2002) used SVMs to predict the sub-
cellular localization of yeast proteins. They created
a data set by mining Medline for abstracts contain-
ing a yeast gene name, which achieved F-measures
in the range [0.31,0.80]. F-measure is defined as
f =
2rp
r + p
where p is precision and r is recall. They expanded
their training data to include extra biological infor-
mation about each protein, in the form of amino acid
content, and raised their F-measure by as much as
0.05. These results are modest, but before Stapley
et al most localization classification systems were
built using text rules or were sequence based. This
was one of the first applications of SVMs to bio-
logical journal abstracts and it showed that text and
amino acid composition together yield better results
than either alone.
Properties of proteins themselves were again used
to improve text categorization for animal, plant and
fungi subcellular localization data sets (Ho?glund
et al 2006). The authors? text classifiers were
based on the most distinguishing terms of docu-
ments, and they included the output of four pro-
tein sequence classifiers in their training data. They
measure the performance of their classifier using
what they call sensitivity and specificity, though
the formulas cited are the standard definitions of
recall and precision. Their text-only classifier for
the animal MultiLoc data set had recall (sensitivity)
in the range [0.51,0.93] and specificity (precision)
[0.32,0.91]. The MultiLocText classifiers, which
include sequence-based classifications, have recall
[0.82,0.93] and precision [0.55,0.95]. Their overall
and average accuracy increased by 16.2% and 9.0%
to 86.4% and 94.5% respectively on the PLOC an-
imal data set when text was augmented with addi-
tional sequence-based information.
Our method is motivated by the improvements
that Stapley et al and Ho?glund et al saw when they
included additional biological information. How-
ever, our technique uses knowledge of a textual na-
ture to improve text classification; it uses no infor-
mation from the amino acid sequence. Thus, our ap-
proach can be used in conjunction with techniques
that use properties of the protein sequence.
In non-biological domains, external knowledge
has already been used to improve text categoriza-
tion (Gabrilovich and Markovitch, 2005). In their
18
research, text categorization is applied to news docu-
ments, newsgroup archives and movie reviews. The
authors use the Open Directory Project (ODP) as a
source of world knowledge to help alleviate prob-
lems of polysemy and synonymy. The ODP is a
hierarchy of concepts where each concept node has
links to related web pages. The authors mined these
web pages to collect characteristic words for each
concept. Then a new document was mapped, based
on document similarity, to the closest matching ODP
concept and features were generated from that con-
cept?s meaningful words. The generated features,
along with the original document, were fed into an
SVM text classifier. This technique yielded BEP as
high as 0.695 and improvements of up to 0.254.
We use Gabrilovich and Markovitch?s (2005) idea
to employ an external knowledge hierarchy, in our
case the GO, as a source of information. It has
been shown that GO molecular function annotations
in Swiss-Prot are indicative of subcellular localiza-
tion annotations (Lu and Hunter, 2005), and that GO
node names made up about 6% of a sample Medline
corpus (Verspoor et al 2003). Some consider GO
terms to be too rare to be of use (Rice et al 2005),
however we will show that although the presence of
GO terms is slight, the terms are powerful enough to
improve text classification. Our technique?s success
may be due to the fact that we include the synonyms
of GO node names, which increases the number of
GO terms found in the documents.
We use the GO hierarchy in a different way than
Gabrilovich et al use the ODP. Unlike their ap-
proach, we do not extract additional features from all
articles associated with a node of the GO hierarchy.
Instead we use synonyms of nodes and the names
of ancestor nodes. This is a simpler approach, as
it doesn?t require retrieving all abstracts for all pro-
teins of a GO node. Nonetheless, we will show that
our approach is still effective.
3 Methods
The workflow used to perform our experiments is
outlined in Figure 1.
3.1 The Data Set
The first step in evaluating the usefulness of GO as
a knowledge source is to create a data set. This pro-
Set of 
Proteins
Retrieve 
Abstracts
Set of 
Abstracts
Process 
Abstracts
Data Set 1 Data Set 2 Data Set 3
a
b
Figure 1: The workflow used to create data sets used
in this paper. Abstracts are gathered for proteins
with known localization (process a). Treatments are
applied to abstracts to create three Data Sets (pro-
cess b).
cess begins with a set of proteins with known sub-
cellular localization annotations (Figure 1). For this
we use Proteome Analyst?s (PA) data sets (Lu et al
2004; Szafron et al 2004). The PA group used these
data sets to create very accurate subcellular classi-
fiers based on the keyword fields of Swiss-Prot en-
tries for homologous proteins. Here we use PA?s
current data set of proteins collected from Swiss-
Prot (version 48.3) and impose one further crite-
rion: the subcellular localization annotation may not
be longer than four words. This constraint is in-
troduced to avoid including proteins where the lo-
calization category was incorrectly extracted from a
long sentence describing several aspects of localiza-
tion. For example, consider the subcellular anno-
tation ?attached to the plasma membrane by a lipid
anchor?, which could mean the protein?s functional
components are either cytoplasmic or extracellular
(depending on which side of the plasma membrane
the protein is anchored). PA?s simple parsing scheme
could mistake this description as meaning that the
protein performs its function in the plasma mem-
brane. Our length constraint reduces the chances of
including mislabeled training instances in our data.
19
Class Number of Number
Name Proteins of Abstracts
cytoplasm 1664 4078
endoplasmic
reticulum 310 666
extracellular 2704 5655
golgi a 41 71
lysosome 129 599
mitochondrion 559 1228
nucleus 2445 5589
peroxisome 108 221
plasma
membrane a 15 38
Total 7652 17175
aClasses with less than 100 abstracts were considered to
have too little training data and are not included in our experi-
ments.
Table 1: Summary of our Data Set. Totals are less
than the sum of the rows because proteins may be-
long to more than one localization class.
PA has data sets for five organisms (animal, plant,
fungi, gram negative bacteria and gram positive bac-
teria). The animal data set was chosen for our study
because it is PA?s largest and medical research has
the most to gain from increased annotations for an-
imal proteins. PA?s data sets have binary labeling,
and each class has its own training file. For exam-
ple, in the nuclear data set a nuclear protein appears
with the label ?+1?, and non-nuclear proteins ap-
pear with the label ??1?. Our training data includes
317 proteins that localize to more than one location,
so they will appear with a positive label in more than
one data set. For example, a protein that is both cyto-
plasmic and peroxisomal will appear with the label
?+1? in both the peroxisomal and cytoplasmic sets,
and with the label ??1? in all other sets. Our data
set has 7652 proteins across 9 classes (Table 1). To
take advantage of the information in the abstracts of
proteins with multiple localizations, we use a one-
against-all classification model, rather than a ?single
most confident class? approach.
3.2 Retrieve Abstracts
Now that a set of proteins with known localiza-
tions has been created, we gather each protein?s
abstracts and abstract titles (Figure 1, process a).
We do not include full text because it can be dif-
ficult to obtain automatically and because using
full text does not improve F-measure (Sinclair and
Webber, 2004). Abstracts for each protein are re-
trieved using the PubMed IDs recorded in the Swiss-
Prot database. PubMed (http://www.pubmed.
gov) is a database of life science articles. It should
be noted that more than one protein in Swiss-Prot
may point to the same abstract in PubMed. Because
the performance of our classifiers is estimated us-
ing cross-validation (discussed in Section 3.4) it is
important that the same abstract does not appear in
both testing and training sets during any stage of
cross-validation. To address this problem, all ab-
stracts that appear more than once in the complete
set of abstracts are removed. The distribution of the
remaining abstracts among the 9 subcellular local-
ization classes is shown in Table 1. For simplicity,
the fact that an abstract may actually be discussing
more than one protein is ignored. However, because
we remove duplicate abstracts, many abstracts dis-
cussing more than one protein are eliminated.
In Table 1 there are more abstracts than proteins
because each protein may have more than one asso-
ciated abstract. Classes with less than 100 abstracts
were deemed to have too little information for train-
ing. This constraint eliminated plasma membrane
and golgi classes, although they remained as nega-
tive data for the other 7 training sets.
It is likely that not every abstract associated with
a protein will discuss subcellular localization. How-
ever, because the Swiss-Prot entries for proteins in
our data set have subcellular annotations, some re-
search must have been performed to ascertain local-
ization. Thus it should be reported in at least one
abstract. If the topics of the other abstracts are truly
unrelated to localization than their distribution of
words may be the same for all localization classes.
However, even if an abstract does not discuss local-
ization directly, it may discuss some other property
that is correlated with localization (e.g. function).
In this case, terms that differentiate between local-
ization classes will be found by the classifier.
3.3 Processing Abstracts
Three different data sets are made by processing our
retrieved abstracts (Figure 1, process b). An ex-
20
   We studied the 
effect of p123 on 
the regulation of 
osmotic pressure.
"studi?:1, 
?effect?:1,
?p123?:1,
?regul?:1,
"osmot?:1,
"pressur?:1
"studi?:1, 
?effect?:1,
?p123?:1,
?regul?:1,
"osmot?:1,
"pressur?:1,
"osmoregulation":1
"studi?:1, 
?effect?:1,
?p123?:1,
?regul?:1,
"osmot?:1,
"pressur?:1,
"osmoregulation":1,
"GO_homeostasis":1,
"GO_physiological 
process":1,
"GO_biological process":1
D
a
t
a
s
e
t
 
1
D
a
t
a
s
e
t
 
2
D
a
t
a
s
e
t
 
3
Figure 2: A sentence illustrating our three meth-
ods of abstract processing. Data Set 1 is our base-
line, Data Set 2 incorporates synonym resolution
and Data Set 3 incorporates synonym resolution and
term generalization. Word counts are shown here for
simplicity, though our experiments use TFIDF.
ample illustrating our three processing techniques is
shown in Figure 2.
In Data Set 1, abstracts are tokenized and each
word is stemmed using Porter?s stemming algo-
rithm (Porter, 1980). The words are then trans-
formed into a vector of <word,TFIDF> pairs.
TFIDF is defined as:
TFIDF (wi) = f(wi) ? log(
n
D(wi)
)
where f(wi) is the number of times word wi ap-
pears in documents associated with a protein, n is
the total number of training documents and D(wi)
is the number of documents in the whole training
set that contain the word wi. TFIDF was first pro-
posed by Salton and Buckley (1998) and has been
used extensively in various forms for text catego-
rization (Joachims, 1998; Stapley et al 2002). The
words from all abstracts for a single protein are
amalgamated into one ?bag of words? that becomes
the training instance which represents the protein.
3.3.1 Synonym Resolution
The GO hierarchy can act as a thesaurus for
words with synonyms. For example the GO encodes
the fact that ?metabolic process? is a synonym for
?metabolism?(see Figure 3). Data Set 2 uses GO?s
?exact synonym? field for synonym resolution and
adds extra features to the vector of words from Data
Set 1. We search a stemmed version of the abstracts
regulation of 
osmotic pressure
biological 
process
physiological 
process
homeostasis metabolism
growth
thermo-
regulation
osmo-
regulation
metabolic 
process
Figure 3: A subgraph of the GO biological process
hierarchy. GO nodes are shown as ovals, synonyms
appear as grey rectangles.
for matches to stemmed GO node names or syn-
onyms. If a match is found, the GO node name
(deemed the canonical representative for its set of
synonyms) is associated with the abstract. In Fig-
ure 2 the phrase ?regulation of osmotic pressure?
appears in the text. A lookup in the GO synonym
dictionary will indicate that this is an exact synonym
of the GO node ?osmoregulation?. Therefore we as-
sociated the term ?osmoregulation? with the training
instance. This approach combines the weight of sev-
eral synonyms into one representative, allowing the
SVM to more accurately model the author?s intent,
and identifies multi-word phrases that are otherwise
lost during tokenization. Table 2 shows the increase
in average number of features per training instance
as a result of our synonym resolution technique.
3.3.2 Term Generalization
In order to express the relationships between
terms, the GO hierarchy is organized in a directed
acyclic graph (DAG). For example, ?thermoregula-
tion? is a type of ?homeostasis?, which is a ?phys-
iological process?. This ?is a? relationship is ex-
pressed as a series of parent-child relationships (see
Figure 3). In Data Set 3 we use the GO for synonym
resolution (as in Data Set 2) and we also use its hi-
erarchical structure to generalize specific terms into
broader concepts. For Data Set 3, if a GO node name
(or synonym) is found in an abstract, all names of
ancestors to the match in the text are included in the
21
Class Data Data Data
Set 1 Set 2 Set 3
cytoplasm 166 177 203
endoplasmic
reticulum 162 171 192
extracellular 148 155 171
lysosome 244 255 285
mitochondrion 155 163 186
nucleus 147 158 183
peroxisome 147 156 182
Overall Average 167 176 200
Table 2: Average number of features per training
instance for 7 subcellular localization categories in
animals. Data Set 1 is the baseline, Data Set 2 in-
corporates synonym resolution and Data Set 3 uses
synonym resolution and term generalization.
training instance along with word vectors from Data
Set 2 (see Figure 2). These additional node names
are prepended with the string ?GO ? which allows
the SVM to differentiate between the case where a
GO node name appears exactly in text and the case
where a GO node name?s child appeared in the text
and the ancestor was added by generalization. Term
generalization increases the average number of fea-
tures per training instance (Table 2).
Term generalization gives the SVM algorithm the
opportunity to learn correlations that exist between
general terms and subcellular localization even if
the general term never appears in an abstract and
we encounter only its more specific children. With-
out term generalization the SVM has no concept of
the relationship between child and parent terms, nor
between sibling terms. For some localization cate-
gories more general terms may be the most informa-
tive and in other cases specific terms may be best.
Because our technique adds features to training in-
stances and never removes any, the SVM can as-
sign lower weights to the generalized terms in cases
where the localization category demands it.
3.4 Evaluation
Each of our classifiers was evaluated using 10 fold
cross-validation. In 10 fold cross-validation each
Data Set is split into 10 stratified partitions. For the
first ?fold?, a classifier is trained on 9 of the 10 par-
titions and the tenth partition is used to test the clas-
sifier. This is repeated for nine more folds, holding
out a different tenth each time. The results of all
10 folds are combined and composite precision, re-
call and F-measures are computed. Cross-validation
accurately estimates prediction statistics of a classi-
fier, since each instance is used as a test case at some
point during validation.
The SVM implementation libSVM (Chang and
Lin, 2001) was used to conduct our experiments. A
linear kernel and default parameters were used in all
cases; no parameter searching was done. Precision,
recall and F-measure were calculated for each ex-
periment.
4 Results and Discussion
Results of 10 fold cross-validation are reported in
Table 3. Data Set 1 represents the baseline, while
Data Sets 2 and 3 represent synonym resolution and
combined synonym resolution/term generalization
respectively. Paired t-tests (p=0.05) were done be-
tween the baseline, synonym resolution and term
generalization Data Sets, where each sample is one
fold of cross-validation. Those classifiers with sig-
nificantly better performance over the baseline ap-
pear in bold in Table 3. For example, the lysosome
classifiers trained on Data Set 2 and 3 are both sig-
nificantly better than the baseline, and results for
Data Set 3 are significantly better than results for
Data Set 2, signified with an asterisk. In the case
of the nucleus classifier no abstract processing tech-
nique was significantly better, so no column appears
in bold.
In six of the seven classes, classifiers trained on
Data Set 2 are significantly better than the base-
line, and in no case are they worse. In Data Set
3, five of the seven classifiers are significantly bet-
ter than the baseline, and in no case are they worse.
For the lysosome and peroxisome classes our com-
bined synonym resolution/term generalization tech-
nique produced results that are significantly better
than synonym resolution alone. The average results
of Data Set 2 are significantly better than Data Set
1 and the average results of Data Set 3 are signifi-
cantly better than Data Set 2 and Data Set 1. On av-
erage, synonym resolution and term generalization
combined give an improvement of 3%, and synonym
22
Class
Data Set 1 Data Set 2 Data Set 3
Baseline Synonym Resolution Term Generalization
F-measure F-Measure ? F-Measure ?
cytoplasm 0.740 (?0.049) 0.758 (?0.042) +0.017 0.761 (?0.042) +0.021
endoplasmic
reticulum 0.760 (?0.055) 0.779 (?0.068) +0.019 0.786 (?0.072) +0.026
extracellular 0.931 (?0.009) 0.935 (?0.009) +0.004 0.935 (?0.010) +0.004
lysosome 0.746 (?0.107) 0.787 (? 0.100) +0.041 0.820* (?0.089) +0.074
mitochondrion 0.840 (?0.041) 0.848 (?0.038) +0.008 0.852 (?0.039) +0.012
nucleus 0.885 (?0.014) 0.885 (? 0.016) +0.001 0.887 (?0.019) +0.003
peroxisome 0.790 (?0.054) 0.823 (?0.042) +0.033 0.868* (?0.046) +0.078
Average 0.815 (?0.016) 0.832 (?0.012) +0.017 0.845* (?0.009) +0.030
Table 3: F-measures for stratified 10 fold cross-validation on our three Data Sets. Results deemed signifi-
cantly improved over the baseline (p=0.05) appear in bold, and those with an asterisk (*) are significantly
better than both other data sets. Change in F-measure compared to baseline is shown for Data Sets 2 and 3.
Standard deviation is shown in parentheses.
resolution alone yields a 1.7% improvement. Be-
cause term generalization and synonym resolution
never produce classifiers that are worse than syn-
onym resolution alone, and in some cases the result
is 7.8% better than the baseline, Data Set 3 can be
confidently used for text categorization of all seven
animal subcellular localization classes.
Our baseline SVM classifier performs quite well
compared to the baselines reported in related
work. At worst, our baseline classifier has F-
measure 0.740. The text only classifier reported
by Ho?glund et al has F-measure in the range
[0.449,0.851] (Ho?glund et al 2006) and the text
only classifiers presented by Stapley et al begin with
a baseline classifier with F-measure in the range
[0.31,0.80] (Stapley et al 2002). Although their
approaches gave a greater increase in performance
their low baselines left more room for improvement.
Though we use different data sets than Ho?glund
et al (2006), we compare our results to theirs on a
class by class basis. For those 7 localization classes
for which we both make predictions, the F-measure
of our classifiers trained on Data Set 3 exceed the F-
measures of the Ho?glund et al text only classifiers
in all cases, and our Data Set 3 classifier beats the F-
measure of the MutliLocText classifier for 5 classes
(see supplementary material http://www.cs.
ualberta.ca/?alona/bioNLP). In addition,
our technique does not preclude using techniques
presented by Ho?glund et al and Stapley et al, and
it may be that using a combination of our approach
and techniques involving protein sequence informa-
tion may result in an even stronger subcellular local-
ization predictor.
We do not assert that using abstract text alone is
the best way to predict subcellular localization, only
that if text is used, one must extract as much from
it as possible. We are currently working on incorpo-
rating the classifications given by our text classifiers
into Proteome Analyst?s subcellular classifier to im-
prove upon its already strong predictors (Lu et al
2004), as they do not currently use any information
present in the abstracts of homologous proteins.
5 Conclusion and Future work
Our study has shown that using an external informa-
tion source is beneficial when processing abstracts
from biological journals. The GO can be used as a
reference for both synonym resolution and term gen-
eralization for document classification and doing so
significantly increases the F-measure of most sub-
cellular localization classifiers for animal proteins.
On average, our improvements are modest, but they
indicate that further exploration of this technique is
warranted.
We are currently repeating our experiments for
PA?s other subcellular data sets and for function pre-
diction. Though our previous work with PA is not
23
text based, our experience training protein classifiers
has led us to believe that a technique that works well
for one protein property often succeeds for others
as well. For example our general function classifier
has F-measure within one percent of the F-measure
of our Animal subcellular classifier. Although we
test the technique presented here on subcellular lo-
calization only, we see no reason why it could not be
used to predict any protein property (general func-
tion, tissue specificity, relation to disease, etc.). Fi-
nally, although our results apply to text classification
for molecular biology, the principle of using an on-
tology that encodes synonyms and hierarchical re-
lationships may be applicable to other applications
with domain specific terminology.
The Data Sets used in these experiments are
available at http://www.cs.ualberta.ca/
?alona/bioNLP/.
6 Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Greg Kondrak, Colin Cherry,
Shane Bergsma and the whole NLP group at the
University of Alberta for their helpful feedback and
guidance. We also wish to thank Paul Lu, Rus-
sell Greiner, Kurt McMillan and the rest of the
Proteome Analyst team. This research was made
possible by financial support from the Natural Sci-
ences and Engineering Research Council of Canada
(NSERC), the Informatics Circle of Research Excel-
lence (iCORE) and the Alberta Ingenuity Centre for
Machine Learning (AICML).
References
Michael Ashburner et al 2000. Gene ontology: tool for
the unification of biology the gene ontology consor-
tium. Nature Genetics, 25(1):25?29.
Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin, 2001. LIB-
SVM: a library for support vector machines. Soft-
ware available at http://www.csie.ntu.edu.
tw/?cjlin/libsvm.
Susan T. Dumais et al 1998. Inductive learning al-
gorithms and representations for text categorization.
In Proc. 7th International Conference on Information
and Knowledge Management CIKM, pages 148?155.
Evgeniy Gabrilovich and Shaul Markovitch. 2005. Fea-
ture generation for text categorization using world
knowledge. In IJCAI-05, Proceedings of the Nine-
teenth International Joint Conference on Artificial In-
telligence, pages 1048?1053.
Annette Ho?glund et al 2006. Significantly improved
prediction of subcellular localization by integrating
text and protein sequence data. In Pacific Symposium
on Biocomputing, pages 16?27.
Thorsten Joachims. 1998. Text categorization with su-
port vector machines: Learning with many relevant
features. In ECML ?98: Proceedings of the 10th Eu-
ropean Conference on Machine Learning, pages 137?
142.
Zhiyong Lu and Lawrence Hunter. 2005. GO molecular
function terms are predictive of subcellular localiza-
tion. volume 10, pages 151?161.
Zhiyong Lu et al 2004. Predicting subcellular local-
ization of proteins using machine-learned classifiers.
Bioinformatics, 20(4):547?556.
Martin F. Porter. 1980. An algorithm for suffix stripping.
Program, 14(3):130?137.
Simon B Rice et al 2005. Mining protein function from
text using term-based support vector machines. BMC
Bioinformatics, 6:S22.
Gail Sinclair and Bonnie Webber. 2004. Classification
from full text: A comparison of canonical sections
of scientific papers. In COLING 2004 International
Joint workshop on Natural Language Processing in
Biomedicine and its Applications (NLPBA/BioNLP)
2004, pages 69?72.
B. J. Stapley et al 2002. Predicting the sub-cellular lo-
cation of proteins from text using support vector ma-
chines. In Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing, pages
374?385.
Duane Szafron et al 2004. Proteome analyst: Custom
predictions with explanations in a web-based tool for
high-throughput proteome annotations. Nucleic Acids
Research, 32:W365?W371.
Vladimir N Vapnik. 1995. The nature of statistical
learning theory. Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., New
York, NY, USA.
Cornelia M. Verspoor et al 2003. The gene ontology as a
source of lexical semantic knowledge for a biological
natural language processing application. Proceedings
of the SIGIR?03 Workshop on Text Analysis and Search
for Bioinformatics.
24
