The Architecture of a Standard Arabic lexical database: some figures, ratios 
and categories from the DIINAR.1 source program 
Ramzi ABB?S 
SIIa / SILATb, 
ENSSIBc, 
17-21, bd. du 11 nov. 
1918,  
69623 Villeubanne 
Cedex, France 
abbes@enssib.fr 
 
a
 SII: Syst?mes d?Information et Inter-
faces, research centre, ENSSIB 
 
 
Joseph DICHY 
?LISAd / SILATb, 
Universit? Lumi?re-Lyon 2, 
86, rue Pasteur 
69365 Lyon Cedex 07, France 
joseph.dichy@univ-lyon2.fr 
 
d
 ?LISA: ?pist?mologie, Linguistique, 
Ing?nierie et S?miologie de l?Arabe, 
research centre, Lumi?re-Lyon 2 
University 
Mohamed HASSOUN 
SIIa / SILATb, 
ENSSIBc, 
17-21, bd. du 11 nov. 
1918,  
69623 Villeubanne Cedex, France
 
hassoun@enssib.fr 
 
c ENSSIB: ?cole Nationale Sup?rieure 
des Sciences de l?Information et des 
Biblioth?que. 
 
b
 SILAT: Syst?mes d?information, Linguistique, Ing?nierie de l?Arabe et Terminologie, research group common to the 
Lyon 2 Lumi?re University and ENSSIB. (Silat is Arabic for ?link?, ?relation?.) 
Abstract 
This paper is a contribution to the issue ? 
which has, in  the course of the last decade, 
become critical ? of the basic requirements 
and validation criteria for lexical language 
resources in Standard Arabic. The work is 
based on a critical analysis of the architecture 
of the DIINAR.1 lexical database, the entries 
of which are associated with grammar-lexis 
relations operating at word-form level (i.e. in 
morphological analysis). Investigation shows a 
crucial difference, in the concept of ?lexical 
database?, between source program and 
generated lexica. The source program un-
derlying DIINAR.1 is analysed, and some fig-
ures and ratios are presented. The original 
categorisations are, in the course of scrutiny, 
partly revisited. Results and ratios given here 
for basic entries on the one hand, and for 
generated lexica of inflected word-forms on 
the other. They aim at giving a first answer to 
the question of the ratios between the number 
of lemma-entries and inflected word-forms 
that can be expected to be included in, or 
generated by, a Standard Arabic lexical dB. 
These ratios can be considered as one overall 
language-specific criterion for the analysis, 
evaluation and validation of lexical dB-s in 
Arabic. 
 
Keywords: Arabic lexical databases ? Arabic 
script ? word-formatives grammar ? lemma-
entries ? morphosyntactic specifiers. 
1 Introduction 
In the present state of the art in the development 
of software and language resources in Arabic, there 
is an urgent need for evaluation and validation 
criteria based on solid analytic grounds: there ex-
ists nowadays a subsequent number of Arabic lexi-
cal databases, and more are under completion.  
Existing lexical dB-s are not always, for the time 
being, available as such to researchers and/or de-
velopers, because they are usually embedded in 
software (such as a morphological analyser or a 
parser), and are still very difficult to make use of 
independently. It is to be expected, though, that the 
issue of availability will be overcome in a reasona-
bly near future, and that a number of Arabic lexical 
databases will be found on the market, or on cata-
logues such as, in Europe, that of ELRA1, and in 
the USA, that of LDC2. The on-going European 
project NEMLAR is presently working on the 
availability of language resources including lexical 
databases3. As a result, the crucial question of the 
quality and consistency of these databases should 
be met as soon as possible. 
 
                                                     
1
 European Language Resources Association, 55, 
rue Brillat-Savarin ? 75013 Paris, 
France. 
2
 Linguistic Data Consortium, University of Pennsyl-
vania, 3600 Market Street, Suite 810, Philadelphia, PA 
19108, USA. 
3
 NEMLAR (Network for Euro-Mediterranean LAn-
guage Resources) is coordinated by Pr. Bente 
Maegaard, Center for Sprogteknologi (CST), Copenha-
gen. E-mail and site: nemlar@cst.dk, 
www.nemlar.org. 
One of the criteria for the evaluation and valida-
tion of a lexical database for Arabic is both quan-
titative (how many?) and qualitative (what of, 
precisely?). In this paper, which refers to previous 
work on the processing of Arabic and the related 
lexical resources4, we will try and give evidence on 
the structure of a lexical database, founded on an 
analysis of the DIINAR.1 database5. Quantitative 
results are only interesting if they can be inter-
preted in such a way as to yield information on the 
actual structure and categories of the lexicon of the 
language under consideration. We will endeavour 
to show that a quantitative and qualitative analysis 
of the lexical categories incorporated in DIINAR.1 
can be interpreted with this respect. Moreover, the 
investigation leads to proposing a more consistent 
organisation of lexical information and relations, 
which should be included in future versions of 
DIINAR. 
2 The type of lexical dB required by the auto-
matic analysis of Arabic 
What are the fundamental requirements of a 
lexical database in Arabic? The first challenge to 
be met upon endeavouring to build language re-
sources in Arabic is that of the structure of the 
writing system of the language (Dichy, 1990), the 
two main features of which are: non diacriticized 
script in standard texts (? 2.1) and the structure of 
the word-form (? 2.2). The combined effect of 
these features entails the need for a lexical data-
base that includes a subsequent number of gram-
mar-lexis relations (? 2.3). Such a dB is to be 
considered as a sine qua non condition of high-
level and elaborate Arabic NLP. 
                                                     
4
 The research and development work referred to in 
the SILAT research group goes back to the 1980ies and 
has been going on since (Descl?s et ali 1983, Dichy & 
Hassoun, eds. 1989, Dichy 1984/89, 1987, 1993, 1997, 
2000, Lelubre 1993, Braham 1998, Braham & Ghazali 
1998). It includes a number of doctoral dissertations 
(Hassoun 1987, Abu Al-Chay 1988, Dichy, 1990, Gader 
1992, Ghenima 1998). For further developments, see: 
Ezzahid 1996, Labed & Lelubre 1997, Abbas 1998, 
Dichy & Hassoun 1998, Ammar & Dichy 1999a et b, 
Abb?s 1999, Dichy 1998, 2001a et b, Ghazali & 
Braham 2001, Lelubre 2001, Ouersighni 2002, Zaafrani 
2002, Dichy & Fargali, 2003. 
5
 
DIINAR.1
 (DIctionnaire INformatis? de l?Arabe), 
Arabic acronym Ma??l? (?Mu?jam al-?Arabiyya l-??l??), 
is a comprehensive Arabic Language dB operating at 
word-form level (morphological analysis or generation). 
It has been completed in close cooperation, in Tunis by 
IRSIT (now SOTETEL-IT - A. Braham and S. Ghazali), 
and in France by ENSSIB (M. Hassoun) and the 
Lumi?re-Lyon 2 University (J. Dichy). See Dichy, 
Braham, Ghazali & Hassoun, 2002.  
2.1 Non diacriticized writing 
It is well-known that Arabic script belongs to a 
group of Semitic writings originating from ancient 
Phoenician alphabets, such as Hebrew, Aramaic or 
Syriac. Phonographic translation is basically re-
stricted to the notation of consonants and ?long 
vowels?. In the course of time, these writing sys-
tems have developed additional diacritic symbols, 
mainly for the needs of the oral reading of sacred 
texts (Bible, New Testament, Koran). Arabic writ-
ing has thus been provided with a sophisticated 
system of diacritical marks (comparable to the 
Massora diacritics which were later devised for the 
Hebrew Bible). Standard writing nevertheless dis-
regards these symbols. This results in a high de-
gree of homography, accounting for the multiple 
analyses encountered in a majority of single words 
by morphological analysers (which are, needless to 
recall, bound to consider every word off-context). 
 
2.2 ?Nucleus? and ?extensions?: a quick re-
call of the structure of word-forms in 
written Arabic 
Unlike automatic recognition software, human 
readers are, of course, able to combine semantic, 
syntactic and morphological analyses. They are 
helped in their reading of Arabic written utterances 
by another major feature of the writing system: the 
very regular structure of the word-form. This 
structure has been introduced and extensively de-
scribed previously (Descl?s ed., 1983; Dichy 1984, 
1990; Hassoun, 1987 ? after the pioneering work 
of Cohen, 1961/70), and is only recalled here for 
the sake of clarity. 
Word-forms in Arabic can be described on the 
whole as consisting of a nucleus formative (hence-
forth NF) to which extension formatives (hence-
forth EF) are added, either to the left or to the right 
(Dichy, 1997). Ante-positioned EF-s are abbrevi-
ated as aEF, and post-positioned ones as pEF. The 
nucleus formative, usually called stem, can be rep-
resented in terms of prosodic or non-concatenative 
morphology (after J. McCarthy?s original and 
much discussed insights, 1981). In Semitic mor-
phology, the stem is considered, according to a 
somewhat recent, but very widely followed tradi-
tion, as a compound of root and pattern. One must 
keep in mind, though, that many nouns cannot be 
analysed in such a way: they are referred to as 
quasi-stems (Dichy & Hassoun, eds., 1989).  
Arabic word-forms consist of:  
? proclitics (PCL), which include mono-consonan-
tal conjunctions, e.g. wa-, ?and? , li-, ?in order 
to?, or  prepositions, i.e. bi-, ?in, at? or ?by?, etc.;  
? a prefix (PRF). The category, after D. Cohen?s 
representation of the word-form, only includes 
the prefixes of the imperfective, e.g., ya-, pre-
fixed morpheme of the 3rd person;  
? a stem, which can be represented in terms of a 
ROOT (an ordered triple of consonants, or, by 
extension of the system, a quadruple) and a 
PATTERN (roughly: a template of syllables, the 
consonants of which are the triple of the ROOT to 
which monoconsonantal affixes are added). The 
stem takabbar, ?to be haughty?, thus consists of 
the 3-consonant ROOT /k-b-r/ and of the 
PATTERN /taR1aR2R2aR3/, where R1, R2 and R3 
stand for ?radical consonant 1, 2, 3?, and are in-
stantiated by the triple of the ROOT (R1=k, R2=b, 
R3=r). Nouns that cannot be analysed in ROOT 
and PATTERN are conventionally referred to as 
quasi-stems, e.g.: ?ism???l, ?Ishmael?, y?n?sk?, 
?UNESCO?, kahram?n, ?amber?;  
? suffixes (SUF), such as verb endings, nominal 
cases, the nominal feminine ending -at, etc.;  
? enclitics (ECL). In Arabic, enclitics are comple-
ment pronouns. 
 
In the table below two apparently equivalent rep-
resentations of the structure of the Arabic word-
form are given. The main difference between them 
lies in the fact that (2) aims at highlighting the 
relations between nucleus and extension forma-
tives (NF and EF-s), featuring a triangle (in bold-
face below). The rules governing the relations 
between morphemes embedded in the word-form 
are included in a word-formatives grammar 
(henceforth WFG ? Dichy, 1987, 1997). These 
rules, and the features they involve, are distributed 
along these three relations, a great number of 
which are related to the lexical nucleus, and have 
to rely upon the finite set of grammar-lexis rela-
tions operating at word-level (formalised in Dichy, 
1990). 
 
 
 
(1)  
?Traditional? 
representation 
of the word-
form (D. 
Cohen, 
1961/70, Des-
cl?s, ed., 1983) 
  
 
maximal  
______word-form______ 
|                                             | 
minimal  
__word-form__ 
|                            | 
 
##PCL # PRF +STEM+ SUF # ECL## 
 
STEM = <ROOT??PATTERN> 
 
 
(2) 
Nucleus-
extensions 
representation 
(Dichy, 1997) 
 
 
NF 
/         \ 
aEF   ?   pEF 
/     \          /     \ 
PCL  PRF   SUF ECL 
 
 
Table 1: Structure of the word-form in Arabic 
2.3 Word-formatives grammar (WFG) and 
word-level grammar-lexis relations 
Complex as it may appear, the above structure is 
regular, and remains, up to a certain point, 
recognisable from a psychological stand. It is, 
subsequently, very restrictive: Arabic word-forms 
include one lexical stem and one only6. In fact, the 
word-formatives grammar (WFG) accounts for the 
regular structure of the word-form.  
Rules involving word-formatives (the above nu-
cleus and extension formatives, NF and EF) are 
based on three fundamental types of relations 
(Dichy, 1987):   ?entails?, ?> ?excludes?, ** ?is 
compatible with? (or ?admits?), the third of which 
is attached to the opposed pair of the first two as an 
?elsewhere? relation of a special kind, directly 
connected to ambiguity in language analysis 
processes (Dichy, 2000). In generation, all 
?compatibility? (or ?admit?) relations can in fact be 
rewritten in terms of ?entail? or ?exclude? rules 
associated with specific sets of word-formatives. 
?Compatibility? relations are mostly useful in the 
formalisation of recognition rules, when ambiguity 
is at stake7. The formal structure of the WFG thus 
includes relations of the three types above, which 
are, in turn, involved in either one of the two 
following combination schemes: 
 

 EF  EF combinations, such as PCL ? SUF 
rules, e.g.:  
 PCL = bi     SUF = {i, in, a, an, ?na, ?, ayni, ay} 
 which can be phrased as: ?the proclitic preposi-
tion bi# entails one of the indirect (or genitive) 
case suffixes?. Other rules will point to a given 
case suffix in a given utterance.  
 

 NF  EF combinations, such as STEM ? SUF 
rules, e.g.:  
STEM = ?diptote?    SUF = {u, a, i} 
 which can be phrased as: ?a stem whose declen-
sion is diptote entails case-endings belonging to 
the listed set?. (Diptote stems may also be com-
patible with dual or plural suffixes, which is 
taken into account in another rule.) 
 
Another type of relation to be encoded in a lexi-
cal database is: 
                                                     
6
. A few exceptive compound items exist, but they are 
kept marginal by the structure of the language, for the 
obvious reasons hinted at here, unlike what has hap-
pened in Modern Hebrew, as opposed to the Biblical 
and Medieval state of the language (Kirtchuk, 1997). 
7
. Automatic recognition and generation are not to be 
considered as reverse processes. Evidence from Arabic 
is given in Descl?s, ed., 1983; Dichy, 1984, 1997, 2000. 
 NF  NF linking combinations, which have to 
be encoded whenever the morphological varia-
tion is not rule-predictable (cf. Mel uk?s concept 
of syntactic, 1982). This is the case in a majority 
of singular  ?broken plural? links in nouns or 
adjectives, as well as in ?perfec-
tive?  ?imperfective? (m?d?  mud?ri?) links, 
in verbs belonging to ?simple? PATTERNS (al-fi?l 
al-mujarrad).  
 
In an Arabic lexical dB, lexical entries (NF-s or 
STEMS in the above representation) need to be as-
sociated with morphosyntactic specifiers ensuring 
their insertion in word-forms, and their morpho-
logical variation (conjugation or declension). Mor-
phosyntactic specifiers, in other words, account 
for: 
? grammar-lexis relations, i.e. NF  EF combina-
tions; 
? morpho-lexical variation, i.e. NF  NF linking 
combinations. 
 
Lexical entries thus ?entail?, ?exclude? or ?admit? 
a number of grammatical morphemes listed in the 
various fields of the word-form as word-forma-
tives, either on a non regular basis, or on the basis 
of rules founded on semantic features that cannot 
be deduced from the formal structure of the mor-
pheme. As shown in Dichy (1997), morphosyntac-
tic specifiers make up formally, in a lexical 
database, for information associated in the 
speaker?s memory to various levels of linguistic 
analysis (morpho-phonological, syntactic or se-
mantic features). 
This structure has often been disregarded in the 
elaboration of Arabic lexical databases on the as-
sumption that the representation of lexical entries 
as a mere combination of PATTERN and ROOT (plus 
a number of suffixes) is sufficient. This is defi-
nitely not the case: evidence recalled in this para-
graph (also in Hassoun & Dichy, eds. 1989, Dichy, 
1997, Dichy & Fergaly, 2003) show that grammar-
lexis relations operating at word-form level can 
only be taken into account if information is associ-
ated to whole stems (or nuclei), or to stem+suffix 
?frozen? compounds. These relations cannot be 
predicted on the sole basis of patterns. 
The description of the WFG outlined in this 
paragraph has led to the elaboration of exhaustive 
and finite sets of morphosyntactic specifiers liable 
to be associated to the non finite lexical entries of 
an Arabic database (Dichy, 1997). These sets have 
been associated with the entries of the DIINAR.1 
Arabic Language database. The WFG has been on 
the other hand implemented in the related genera-
tion and analysis source programs.  
 
Another lexical LR including morphosyntactic 
information at word level is the lexicon elaborated 
and completed by Timothy Buckwalter, which has 
been used in the finite-state morphological analy-
ser elaborated at the European Xerox Research 
Centre (Meylan, France)8. 
3 A few figures and ratios from DIINAR.1: 
generated lexica vs. source lexicon 
In the previous section, we outlined the structure 
of the WFG and the information associated with 
lexical entries in the source program of the 
DIINAR.1 database.  
It is essential to note that the expression lexical 
database is ambiguous, i.e. that it is liable to refer, 
either: 
? to a source program drawing on lists of basic 
lexical or grammatical items (related to a gram-
mar of the kind outlined in the previous section), 
? or a set of generated lexica, the items of which 
can be either basic (as in the source program) or 
combined, i.e. resulting from the combination of 
basic items, according to the rules of the word-
formatives grammar. 
 
Software relying partly or entirely on morpho-
logical analysis may, or may not, need all the in-
formation outlined in section 2. They draw on 
lexica generated by the source program associated 
with the dB (Hassoun, 1987). Generated lexica can 
be restricted to a subset of information, as in a 
spelling checker (Gader, 1992), or extended to all 
available information, as in a parser (Ouersighni, 
2002) or in an interactive language teaching soft-
ware (Zaafrani, 2002). In the current section, we 
will examine the architecture of the DIINAR.1 
database, from the standpoint of the relation be-
tween the figures of the basic entries included 
(? 3.1 and 3.2), and that of the inflected word-
forms (? 3.3). 
 
3.1 The basic figures of the DIINAR.1 source 
program 
The total number of lemma-entries in the 
DIINAR.1 database is : 121,522. 
This includes 445 tool-words belonging to vari-
ous grammatical categories (e.g.: prepositions, 
conjunctions, etc.) and the prototype of a proper 
names database of 1,384 entries. Both types of 
entries are associated with a particular word-for-
matives grammar, and with their own subsets of 
morpho-syntactic specifiers. 
The main parts of the database include: 
                                                     
8
. Beesley, 1998, 2001, Beesley and Karttunen, 2003. 
Also: Buckwalter, 2002. 
 Nouns, including adjectives   29,534 
[Broken plural nominal forms]    [9,565] 
Verbs   19,457 
Deverbals:  
- infinitive forms (masdar)   23,274 
- active participles (?ism al-f??il)   17,904 
- passive participles (?ism al-
maf??l) 
  13,373 
- ?analogous adjectives? (sifa 
musabbaha) 
    5,781 
- ?nouns of time & place? (?ism 
al-mak?n wa-z-zam?n) 
  10,370 
Total number of deverbals  [70,702] 
Subtotal of lemmas 119,693 
Table 2: Number of lemmas and items belonging 
to main major lexical categories 
3.2 Comments and critical analysis 
(1)  
Table 2 features two ratios of general interest for 
the structure of the Arabic general Lexicon:  
? The ratio between broken plural nominal forms 
(which are not counted as lemmas9) and nouns 
and adjectives is roughly of one to four. 
? Deverbals appear to be 3.6 more numerous than 
verbs. 
 
(2) 
The above categorisation follows that of tradi-
tional Arabic grammar. Two sub-categorisations 
should, nevertheless be revisited for linguistic con-
sistency reasons:  
? Adjectives (although they can appear as nouns in 
many syntactic structures) should be isolated. 
This will be needed, of course, in parsing ? even 
in ?shallow parsing?. Adjectives in Arabic can be 
identified through syntactic tests. 
? ?Nouns of time and place? (?asm??u l-mak?n wa-
z-zam?n) should not, in future versions of 
DIINAR, remain in the ?deverbal? category. 
They are in fact (except for the earliest stages in 
the development of the language) inserted in 
syntactic structures as full nouns. 
 
(3) 
It is to be noted, on the other hand, that (except 
for ?nouns of time and place?) DIINAR.1 is very 
consistent in distinguishing between nouns and 
deverbals: deverbals re-used as nouns, and 
showing full nominal features appear, in the dB, 
                                                     
9
. ?Broken plural? forms are related to a singular 
noun-form lemma. Links between singular and plural 
forms, in the dB, are described as NF 
 
 NF linking 
combinations (see ? 2.3). 
twice (as ?deverbals? and as ?nouns?, with their 
related morphosyntactic specifiers), e.g.: 
? s?kin, plur. s?kin?n, s?kin?t, ?dwelling?, 
?inhabiting?, is a deverbal, e.g.:  
 Nahnu s?kin?na mad?nata al-?iskandariyya = 
?We live in Alexandria?. 
? s?kin, plur. sukkn (broken plural form), ?inhabi-
tant?, is a full noun (appearing in the first line of 
Table 2), e.g.:  
 Nahnu sukk?nu mad?nati l-?iskandariyya = ?We 
are the inhabitants of Alexandria?. 
 
(4) 
The number of roots in DIINAR.1 is 6,546, it 
being understood that a great many nouns cannot 
be analysed in ROOT and PATTERN. (On the other 
hand, all the verbs and deverbals of the language 
can ? Dichy, 1984/89.) 
 
3.3 The DIINAR.1 lexica of inflected word-
forms 
The number of combined proclitics (which are 
effectively in use in Modern Standard Arabic), 
suffixes, prefixes and enclitics is shown in the ta-
bles below: 
 
Proclitics (combined) 64 
Prefixes 8 
Suffixes (combined) 67 
Enclitics 13 
Table 3: Total number of extension forma-
tives (EF-s) 
 Associa- 
ted with 
nouns 
Associa- 
ted with 
verbs 
Common 
to both 
types 
Proclitics 44 13 7 
Prefixes 0 8 0 
Suffixes 11 42 0 
Enclitics 1 1 11 
Table 4: EF-s associated with nominal and/or 
verbal stems 
It is easy to imagine, on the basis of the above 
table, that one could generate huge figures through 
multiplying the number of extension formatives 
among themselves, then multiplying the result by 
the number of nouns and/or verbs. In order to 
avoid ?over-powerful? inflation of data, a consis-
tent database needs to be filtered through (a) a 
word-formatives grammar and (b) morphosyntactic 
specifiers associated to stems. 
 
The overall figures for inflected forms lexica 
generated by the DIINAR.1 can be broken down as 
shown in Table 5: 
 
 a 
Number 
of nuclei 
or stems 
b 
Number of 
inflected 
forms 
b/a 
ratio 
Verbs 
 
19,457 3,060,716 157.3 
Deverbals 
 
70,702 2,909,772 41.15 
Nouns and 
adjectives 
(+broken 
plurals) 
39,099 1,781,316 45.55 
Gramma-
tical words 
445 --- --- 
Proper 
names 
 
1,384 11,403 8.23 
Total figure 
and ratio 
 
131,087 7,774,938  
59.31 
Table 5: Inflected word-forms, i.e., ?minimal 
word-forms? (see Table 1) 
3.4 The fundamental ratio between lemma-
entries and inflected word-forms 
High as they may seem, the above figures are not 
over-powerful, and result from stem-by-stem fil-
tering of information through morphosyntactic 
specifiers and the associated word-formatives 
grammar.  
One can also compare the ratio between the total 
number of stems and that of inflected forms to 
what can be found in another language, which is 
equally known to be a highly inflected one. The 
Xerox Spanish Lexical Transducer contained, in 
1996 over 46,000 base-forms, and generated over 
3,400,000 inflected word-forms (Beesley & 
Karttunen, 2003, p. xvii). The ratio between 
inflected forms and base-forms in the Xerox 
Spanish database was then of around 74 to one. In 
the DIINAR.1 dB, the same ratio is of just under 
60 to one, which can be considered as reasonable. 
The question of how many ?maximal word? 
forms can be correctly generated remains to be 
introduced and discussed in a further paper. 
4 The rationale beyond ratios: towards a first 
set of validation criteria for Arabic lexica 
The ratios considered in the present paper are di-
vided in two general categories: 
 
? The category encountered in ? 3.2 involves 
NF  NF linking combinations (? 2.3):  
(a) The ratio between the number of noun lem-
mas (in general vocabulary) and that of ?bro-
ken plurals? is of 1 ?broken plural? for every 
4 nouns. 
(b) The overall ratio between verbs and 
deverbals gives an average of 3.6 deverbals 
for one verb. 
 
? The ratios given in ? 3.3 and 3.4 consider the 
number of basic entries, such as nouns, verbs, 
deverbals, etc., and the inflected forms generated 
through the rules of the WFG and the grammar-
lexis relations specifiers included in the dB. In 
nouns, the relatively high ratio of 45.55 is due to 
the combination of case-endings with other suf-
fixes. In proper names, case-endings are limited, 
because they do not vary according to definite-
ness or indefiniteness, and also because some 
categories of proper names are in addition not 
liable to be followed by the relative suffix ?iyy). 
 
In this contribution, the numbers of lemma-en-
tries reflect the state of the DIINAR.1 database, 
which is likely to be modified, in the course of 
time, through eliminating lemmas corresponding to 
words that have fallen out of use or through adding 
new entries. Ratios, on the other hand, reflect the 
word-formatives grammar as well as the overall 
structure of the sets of morpho-syntactic specifiers 
associated to lexical entries. They are, on he 
whole, to remain stable. It is therefore reasonable 
to consider that they should be added to the 
language-specific parts of a check-list devised for 
the evaluation and validation of Arabic lexical 
resources, or of multilingual lexica including 
Arabic. 
 
5 Acknowledgements 
The present work is presented with the support 
of the NEMLAR Euro-Mediterranean project (see 
note 3).  
The generated lexica of DIINAR.1 are to be 
made available through the European Language 
Resources Association (ELRA), and The 
Evaluation and Language resources Distribution 
Agency (ELDA), Paris, http://www.elda.fr. 
 
References  
Wijdan Abbas Mekki. 1998. D?finition et 
description des unit?s linguistiques intervenant 
dans l?indexation automatique des textes en 
arabe, Doct. Dissert., ENSSIB/Universit? 
Lyon 2. 
Ramzi Abb?s. 1999. Conception d?un prototype de 
concordancier de la langue arabe, M?moire de 
DEA en Sciences de l?information et de la 
communication, ENSSIB. 
Najim Abu Al-Chay. 1988. Un Syst?me expert 
pour l'analyse et la production des verbes arabes 
dans une perspective d'Enseignement Assist? par 
Ordinateur. Doct. Dissert., Universit? Lyon 1. 
S. Ammar. & J. Dichy. 1999a. Les verbes arabes, 
Paris, Hatier (collection Bescherelle - Original 
introduction in French). 
? 1999b.
 
Al-?Af??l al-?arabiyya, Paris, Hatier 
(collection Bescherelle - Original Arabic 
introduction). 
Kenneth Beesley. 1989/91. ?Computer Analysis of 
Arabic Morphology: A two-level approach with 
detours.? In Bernard Comrie and Mushira Eid, 
eds., 1991. Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics 
III: Papers from the Third Annual Symposium on 
Arabic Linguistics, Amsterdam, John 
Benjamins: 155-172. 
? 2001. Finite-State Morphological Analysis and 
Generation of Arabic at Xerox Research: Status 
and Plans in 2001. In ACL 39th Annual Meeting. 
Workshop on Arabic Language Processing; 
Status and Prospect, Toulouse: 1-8. 
Kenneth Beesley & Lauri Karttunen. 2003. Finite 
State Morphology. CSLI Publications, Stanford, 
California. 
Abdelfattah Braham & Salem Ghazali. 1998. 
Q??idatu l-bay?n?t al-mu?jamiyya al-?arabiyya, 
?aw masr?? Mu?jam al-?Arabiyya l-??liyy, 
?Ma??l?-DIINAR?, has?la wa-??f?q. Al-Majalla l-
?Arabiyya li-l-?ul?m, 32: 14-23. 
Tim Buckwalter. 2002. Buckwalter Arabic 
Morphological Analyzer Version 1.0. Linguistic 
Data Consortium, catalog number LDC2002L49 
and ISBN 1-58563-257-0. <http://www.ldc. 
upenn.edu/Catalog/CatalogEntry.jsp?catalogId=
LDC2002L49 > 
David Cohen. 1961/70. ?Essai d'une analyse 
automatique de l'arabe?. T.A. informations, 1961. 
Reprod. in D. Cohen. 1970. ?tudes de 
linguistique s?mitique et arabe. Paris, Mouton: 
49-78. 
Jean-Pierre Descl?s, ed. 1983. (H. Abaab, J.-P. 
Descl?s, J. Dichy, D.E. Kouloughli, M.S. 
Ziadah). Conception d'un synth?tiseur et d'un 
analyseur morphologiques de l'arabe, en vue 
d'une utilisation en Enseignement assist? par 
Ordinateur, Rapport r?dig? sous la direction de 
J.-P. Descl?s, ? la demande du Minist?re fran?ais 
des Affaires ?trang?res (sous-direction de la 
Politique linguistique). 
Joseph Dichy. 1984/89. ?Vers un mod?le d?analyse 
automatique du mot graphique non-vocalis? en 
arabe?, in Dichy & Hassoun, 1989: 92-158. 
? 1987. ?The SAMIA Research Program, Year 
Four, Progress and Prospects?. Processing 
Arabic Report 2, T.C.M.O., Nijmegen 
University: 1-26. 
? 1990. L??criture dans la repr?sentation de la 
langue : la lettre et le  mot en arabe. State Doct. 
Dissert. th?se d??tat (en linguistique), Universit? 
Lumi?re-Lyon 2. 
? 1993. ?Knowledge-system simulation and the 
computer-aided learning of Arabic verb-form 
synthesis and analysis?. Processing Arabic 
Report 6/7, T.C.M.O., Nijmegen University: 67-
84, 92-95. 
? 1997. ?Pour une lexicomatique de l?arabe : 
l?unit? lexicale simple et l?inventaire fini des 
sp?cificateurs du domaine du mot?. Meta 42, 
spring 1997, Qu?bec, Presses de l?Universit? de 
Montr?al: 291-306. 
? 1998. ?M?moire des racines et m?moire des 
mots : le lexique stratifi? de l?arabe?. T. 
Baccouche, A. Clas et S. Mejri, eds., La 
M?moire des mots. Special issue of: Revue 
Tunisienne de Sciences Sociales, 117: 93-107. 
? 2000. ?Morphosyntactic Specifiers to be 
associated to Arabic Lexical Entries - 
Methodological and Theoretical Aspects?. 
Proceedings of the ACIDA? 2000 conference, 
Monastir (Tunisia), 22-24 March 2000, Corpora 
and Natural Language Processing vol.: 55-60.  
? 2001a. ?Une premi?re classification des verbes 
arabes en fonction de leur structure 
d?arguments?. A. Fassi Fehri, ed., Actes du 
colloque international G?n?ration Syst?matique 
de la langue et Traduction automatique, (Rabat, 
15-17 novembre 1999). Special issue of: 
Recherches Linguistiques, IERA, May 2001, 
vol. 2 : 39-70. 
? 2001b. ?On lemmatization in Arabic. A formal 
definition of the Arabic entries of multilingual 
lexical databases?. ACL 39th Annual Meeting. 
Workshop on Arabic Language Processing; 
Status and Prospect, Toulouse: 23-30. 
J. Dichy, A. Braham, S. Ghazali, M. Hassoun. 
2002. La base de connaissances linguistiques 
DIINAR.1 (DIctionnaire INformatis? de l?Arabe, 
version 1), Proceedings of the International 
Symposium on The Processing of Arabic, Tunis 
(La Manouba University), 18-20 April 2002. 
J. Dichy & Ali Fargaly. 2003. Roots & Patterns vs. 
Stems plus Grammar-Lexis Specifications: on 
what basis should a multilingual lexical database 
centred on Arabic be built? IXth Machine 
Translation Summit (New-Orleans, Sept. 23-27, 
2003), Proceedings of the Workshop on Machine 
Translation for Semitic Languages: Issues and 
Approaches: 1-8 
J. Dichy & M.O. Hassoun, eds. 1989. Simulation 
de mod?les linguistiques et Enseignement Assist? 
par Ordinateur de l'arabe - Travaux SAMIA I. 
Paris, Conseil International de la Langue 
Fran?aise. 
J. Dichy & M.O. Hassoun. 1998. Some aspects of 
the DIINAR-MBC research programme?. In A. 
Ubaydly, ed., 1998: 2.8.1-6.  
Everhard Ditters, ed. 1986-1995. Processing 
Arabic Report 1 (1986), 2 (1987), 3 (1988), 4 
(1989), 5 (1990), 6/7 (1993), 9 (1995), Institute 
for the Languages and Cultures of the Middle-
East., Nijmegen University. 
Samia Ezzahid. 1996. M?thodologie d??laboration 
d?une base de donn?es lexicale de l?arabe 
(vocabulaire g?n?ral) d?apr?s la th?orie Sens-
Texte d?Igor Mel?cuk. Doct. diss. Universit? 
Lyon 2. 
Bernard Fradin. 1994. L'approche ? deux niveaux 
en morphologie computationnelle et les 
d?veloppements r?cents de la morphologie?, in 
B. Fradin, ed., Morphologie computationnelle, 
T.A.L., 35, 1994-2, Paris, ATALA: 9-48. 
Nabil Gader. 1992. Conception et r?alisation d?un 
prototype de correcteur orthographique de 
l?arabe. M?moire de DEA en Sciences de 
l?information et de la communication, ENSSIB. 
Salem Ghazali & Abdelfattah Braham. 2001. 
?Dictionary Definitions and Corpus-Based 
Evidence in Modern Standard Arabic?. In ACL 
39th Annual Meeting. Workshop on Arabic 
Language Processing; Status and Prospect, 
Toulouse: 51-57. 
Malek Ghenima. 1998. Analyse morpho-syntaxique 
en vue de la voyellation assist?e par ordinateur 
des textes ?crits en arabe. Doct. dissert., 
ENSSIB/Universit? Lyon 2. 
Mohamed Hassoun. 1987. Conception d'un 
dictionnaire pour le traitement automatique de 
l'arabe dans diff?rents contextes d'application. 
State doct. dissert., Universit? Lyon 1. 
Pablo Kirtchuk. 1997. Renouvellement 
grammatical, renouvellement lexical et 
renouvellement conceptuel en s?mitique, in C. 
Boisson & Ph. Thoiron, eds, 1997, Autour de la 
d?nomination, Presses Universitaires de Lyon: 
41-69. 
Lamia Labed & Xavier Lelubre. 1997. ?DIINAR-
TOPT: conception d?une base de donn?es 
terminologique Arabe/fran?ais dans le domaine 
de l?optique?. In JST?97: 1?res JST FRANCIL 
1997: L?ing?nierie de la langue : de la recherche 
au produit, Avignon, 15-16 avril 1997, Aupelf-
Uref/Francil: 523-8. 
Xavier Lelubre. 1993. ?Courseware for the theory 
and practice of Arabic conjugation?. Processing 
Arabic Report, 6/7, TCMO, Nijmegen 
University: 85-89 and 92-95. 
? 2001. ?A Scientific Arabic Terms Data Base: 
Linguistic Approach for a Representation of 
Lexical and Terminological Features?. In ACL 
39th Annual Meeting. Workshop on Arabic 
Language Processing; Status and Prospect, 
Toulouse: 66-72. 
Igor Mel uk. 1982. Towards a Language of 
Linguistics, A System of Formal Notions for 
Theoretical Morphology, M?nchen : Wilhem 
Fink Verlag. 
Riadh Ouersighni. 2002. La conception et la 
r?alisation d?un syst?me d?analyse morpho-
syntaxique robuste pour l?arabe : utilisation 
pour la d?tection et le diagnostic des fautes 
d?accord. Doct. dissert., ENSSIB/Universit? 
Lyon 2. 
SAMIA [Research Group]. 1984. ?Enseignement 
Assist? par Ordinateur de l'arabe. Simulation ? 
l'aide d'un mod?le linguistique, la morphologie?. 
Actes du Colloque ?E.A.O. 84?, (Lyon, 4-5 
septembre 1984), Paris, Agence de 
l'informatique: 81-96. 
Ahmad Ubaydly, ed. 1998. Proceedings of the 6th 
International Conference and Exhibition on 
Multilingual Computing (ICEMCO 98), Centre 
of Middle Eastern Studies, University of 
Cambridge. 
Riadh Zaafrani. 2002. D?veloppement d?un 
environnement interactif d?apprentissage avec 
ordinateur de l?arabe langue ?trang?re. Doct. 
dissert., ENSSIB/Universit? Lyon 2.  
 
Proceedings of the EMNLP 2014 Workshop on Arabic Natural Langauge Processing (ANLP), pages 155?159,
October 25, 2014, Doha, Qatar.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
TECHLIMED system description for the Shared Task on Automatic
Arabic Error Correction
Djamel MOSTEFA
Techlimed
42 rue de l?Universit?e
Lyon, France
Omar ASBAYOU
Techlimed
42 rue de l?Universit?e
Lyon, France
{firstname.lastname}@techlimed.com
Ramzi ABBES
Techlimed
42 rue de l?Universit?e
Lyon, France
Abstract
This article is a system description paper
and reports on the participation of Tech-
limed in the ?QALB-2014 shared task? on
evaluation of automatic arabic error cor-
rection systems organized in conjunction
with the EMNLP 2014 Workshop on Ara-
bic Natural Language Processing. Cor-
recting automatically texts in Arabic is a
challenging task due to the complexity and
rich morphology of the Arabic language
and the lack of appropriate resources, (e.g.
publicly available corpora and tools). To
develop our systems, we considered sev-
eral approaches from rule based systems
to statistical methods. Our results on the
development set show that the statistical
system outperforms the lexicon driven ap-
proach with a precision of 71%, a recall of
50% and a F-measure of 59%.
1 Introduction
Automatic error correction is an important task
in Natural Language Processing (NLP). It can be
used in a wide range of applications such as word
processing tools (e.g. Microsoft Office, Openof-
fice, . . . ), machine translation, information re-
trieval, optical character recognition . . . Automatic
error correction tools on Arabic are underperform-
ing in comparison with other languages like En-
glish or French. This can be explained by the lack
of appropriate resources (e.g. publicly available
corpora and tools) and the complexity of the Ara-
bic language. Arabic is a challenging language for
any NLP tool for many reasons. Arabic has a rich
and complex morphology compared to other latin
languages. Short vowels are missing in the texts
but are mandatory from a grammatical point of
view. Moreover they are needed to disambiguate
between several possibilities of words. Arabic
is a rich language.There are many synonyms and
Arabic is a highly agglutinative, inflectional and
derivational language and uses clitics (proclitics
and enclitics). Arabic has many varieties. Mod-
ern Standard Arabic includes the way Arabic is
written in the news or in formal speech. Classi-
cal Arabic refers to religious and classical texts.
Dialectal Arabic has no standard rules for orthog-
raphy and is based on the pronunciation. There-
fore a same word can be written using many differ-
ent surface forms depending on the dialectal ori-
gin of the writer. Another very popular way of
writing Arabic on the Internet and the social me-
dia like Facebook or Tweeter is to use ?Arabizi?, a
latinized form of writing Arabic using latin letters
and digits (Aboelezz, 2009).
For our participation in this evaluation task, we
tried to implement two different approaches. The
first approach is a lexicon driven spell checker. For
this, we have plan to adapt and test state-of-the-
art spell checkers. The second approach is a pure
statistical approach by considering the correction
problem as a statical machine translation task.
The paper is organized as follows: section 2
gives an overview of the automatic error correction
evaluation task and resources provided by the or-
ganizers; section 3 describes the systems we have
developed for the evaluations; and finally in sec-
tion 4 we discuss the results and draw some con-
clusion.
2 Task description and language
resources
The aim of the QALB Shared Task on Automatic
Arabic Error Correction (Mohit, 2014) is to evalu-
ate automatic text correction systems for the Ara-
bic language. The objective of the task is to cor-
rect automatically texts in Arabic provided by the
organizers. The QALB corpus is used for the eval-
uation task. A training set and a development set
with gold standard is provided for system train-
155
ing and development. The training and develop-
ment sets are made of sentences with errors com-
ing from newspapers articles and the gold stan-
dard is made of manual annotations of the sen-
tences. The annotations were made by human
annotators who used a correction guidelines de-
scribed in (Zaghouani, 2014). The corrections are
made of substitutions, insertions, deletions, splits,
merges, moves of words and punctuation marks.
The training set is made of 19,411 sentences and
1M tokens. The development set includes 1,017
sentences for around 53k tokens.
The evaluation is performed by comparing the
gold standard with the hypothesis using the Lev-
enshtein edit distance (Levenshtein, 1966) and
the implementation of the M2 scorer (Dahlmeier,
2012). Then for each sentence the Precision, Re-
call and F-measure are calculated.
Finally a test set of 968 sentences for 52k tokens
with no gold standard has to be corrected automat-
ically for the evaluation.
3 System description
For our participation in this evaluation campaign,
we studied two main approaches. The first one
is a lexical driven approach using dictionaries to
correct the errors. Different lexicons were evalu-
ated using Hunspell as spellchecking and correc-
tion tool.
The second approach is a statistical machine trans-
lation point of view by considering the automatic
error correction problem as a translation task. For
this we used the statistical machine translation sys-
tem Moses (Koehn, 2007), to train a model on the
training data provided by the organizers.
3.1 Baseline system
Since this the time first we are trying to develop
a spellchecker and correction tool for Arabic, we
wanted to have some figures about the perfor-
mance of spellcheckers on Arabic.
We used the development set to test the per-
formance of various spellchecker and correction
tools. We corrected the development set automati-
cally using the spellchecker module of the follow-
ing softwares:
? Microsoft Word 2013
? OpenOffice 2014
? Hunspell
For Microsoft Word and OpenOffice we used
the default configuration for correcting Arabic text
and disabled the grammar correction.
Hunspell is an open source spellchecker widely
used in the open source community. It is the
spellchecker of many well-known applications
such as OpenOffice, LibreOffice, Firefox, Thun-
derbird, Chrome, etc. It is the next generation of
lexical based spellcheckers in line with Myspell,
Ispell and Aspell. It is highly configurable, sup-
ports Unicode and rich morphology languages like
Arabic or Hungarian. Hunspell uses mainly two
files for spellchecking and correction. The first
one is a dictionary file *.dic which contains ba-
sically a wordlist and for each word, a list of ap-
plicable rules that can be applied to the word. The
second one is an affix file *.aff which contains a
list of possible affixes and the rules of application.
More information on these files can be found in
the Hunspell manual
1
.
Hunspell is an interactive spellchecker. It takes
as an input a text to be corrected and for each word
that is not found using the loaded dictionary and
affix files, it gives a list of suggestions to correct
the word. For the correction which must be fully
automatic, we forced Hunspell to always correct
the word with the first suggestion without any hu-
man intervention.
The dictionaries/affixes used for the evalua-
tion is coming from the Ayaspell project(Ayaspell,
2008). The dictionary contains 52 725 entries and
the affix file contains 11859 rules.
The results are given in Table 1
Dictionary Precision Recall F-measure
Word 45.7 16.6 24.3
Hunspell 51.8 18.8 27.6
OpenOffice 56.1 20.7 30.2
Table 1: Results on the development set for Word,
Hunspell/Ayaspell and OpenOffice(in percentage)
The best results are the ones obtained by
OpenOffice with a precision of 56.1%, a recall of
20.7% and a F-measure of 30.2%.
We would like to mention that these spellcheck-
ers do not correct the punctuations which may ex-
plain the relative low recall scores.
1
http://sourceforge.net/projects/hunspell/files/Hunspell/Documentation/
156
3.2 Statistical machine translation system
Our second approach is to consider the automatic
correction problem as a translation problem by
considering the sentences to be corrected as a
source language and the correct sentences as a tar-
get language. Since the organizers provided us
with a 1 million tokens corpora with and with-
out spelling errors, we tried to build a statisti-
cal machine translation system using the parallel
data. We used the Moses (Koehn, 2007), a Statis-
tical Machine Translation (SMT) system to train
a phrase based translation model with the train-
ing data. The training data provided is made of
erroneous sentences and for each sentence a list
of corrections to be applied. To build the paral-
lel error/correct text corpus we applied the correc-
tions to the sentences. We came up with a par-
allel corpus of 19421 sentences and 102k tokens
for the error version and 112k tokens for the cor-
rected version. Moses requires a parallel corpus
to train a translation model, a development set to
tune the translation model and also a monolingual
language model in the target language. Since we
had to evaluate the performance on the develop-
ment data provided by the organizers, we had to
use part of the training data as a development data
for Moses. So we split the 20k sentences included
in the training data in a new training set of 18k
and a new development data of 2k sentences. We
trained standard phrase based models using the
surface word form with no morphological analy-
sis or segmentation. For the word alignment in the
training process, we used GIZA++ (Och, 2003).
The 2k sentences were used to tune the SMT mod-
els.
Corpus # Sentences Usage
train18k 18000 train
dev-train2k 1411 dev
dev 1017 test
Table 2: Bitexts used for the SMT system
For the language models we used corpora of
newspapers publicly available or collected by
Techlimed. The sources are coming from the
Open Source Arabic Corpora (Saad, 2010) (20M
words), the Adjir corpus (Adjir, 2005) (147M
words) and other corpora we collected from var-
ious online newspapers for a total of 300M
words. The language model was created with the
IRSTLM toolkit (Federico, 2008).
We evaluated the translation models on the de-
velopment set using different sizes of monolin-
gual corpus. The 3 systems were trained on the
same parallel corpus but with different size for fir
monolingual data for System100, System200 and
System300 with respectively 100M words, 200M
words and 300M words. The results are given in
table 3.
System Precision Recall F-measure
System100 70.7 48.8 57.8
System200 70.7 49.6 58.3
System300 70.8 50.1 58.7
Table 3: Results on the development set (in per-
centage) for the 3 SMT systems
We can see from table 3 that the size of the lan-
guage model has no impact on the precision but
increases slightly the recall of 1.3% in absolute
(2.6% in relative).
The BLEU scores (Papineni, 2002) measured
on Sytem100, System200, System300 are respec-
tively 65.45, 65.82 and 65.98.
We also tried to combine Hunspell/Ayaspell
with the SMT system by correcting the output of
the SMT system with Hunspell/Ayaspell but didn?t
get any improvement.
4 Discussion
The results obtained by the SMT system is much
more better than the ones obtained with Hun-
spell/Ayaspell with a F-measure of 58.7% for the
best SMT system and 27,6 for Hunspell/Ayaspell.
We have to mention that the training corpus pro-
vided by the organizers of 1 million words with
the manual annotations enabled us to train a statis-
tical system that learn automatically the correction
made by the annotators while Hunspell/Ayaspell
was not adapted to the correction guidelines. In
particular the punctuations are not corrected by
Hunspell/Ayaspell and this explains the difference
of recall between the SMT system (50.1%) and
Hunspell/Ayaspell (20.7%). If we have a look at
the gold standard of the development set, 38.6%
of the manual annotations concern punctuation
marks with 6266 punctuation marks annotations
for an overall total of 16,231 annotations. While
there are clear rules for strong punctuation marks
like period, question or exclamation marks, there
are no clear grammatical rules for the weak punc-
tuation marks, especially for commas which con-
157
cern 4,117 annotations of the gold standard of
the development set (25.4%). Another point that
we would like to mention is that a spell checker
and correction tool is usually used in an inter-
active mode by proposing n-best candidates for
the correction of a word. When looking at Hun-
spell/Ayspell correction candidates for an error,
we saw the correction was not in position 1 but
in the list of candidates. So it would be interesting
to compare the correction on the n-best candidates
and not only on the first candidate for Hunspell
and the SMT system.
5 Conclusion
This paper has reported on the participation of
Techlimed in the QALB Shared Task on Auto-
matic Arabic Error Correction. This is the first
time we tried to develop a spellchecker for Arabic
and have investigated two approaches. The first
one is a lexicon driven approach using Hunspell as
a spellchecker and correction tool and the second
one is a SMT systems using Moses for training a
statistical machine translation model on the 1 mil-
lion tokens corpus provided by the organizers. The
best results were obtained with the SMT system
which, especially, was able to deal with the punc-
tuation marks corrections. We also tested an hy-
brid system by combining Hunspell and the SMT
system but didn?t get better results than the SMT
system alone. Our perspective is to improve the
results by using hybrid systems based on the Di-
iNAR lexical database (Abbes, 2004) and also a
large arabic named entity dictionary, both owned
and developped by Techlimed We will also try to
used factored translation models with the Tech-
limed Part-Of-Speech taggers. And more training
data will also improve the quality of the correc-
tions.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the QALB Shared Task or-
ganizers for setting up this evaluation campaign on
automatic error correction tool for Arabic and for
providing us with the language resources and tools
that we used for the development of our systems.
References
Ramzi Abb`es, Joseph Dichy, and Mohamed Hassoun.
2004. The architecture of a standard arabic lexical
database: some figures, ratios and categories from
the Diinar. 1 source program. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Computational Approaches to Arabic
Script-based Languages, pages 15?22. Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2004.
Mariam Aboelezz. 2009. Latinised arabic and connec-
tions to bilingual ability. In Papers from the Lan-
caster University Postgraduate Conference in Lin-
guistics and Language Teaching, 2009.
Ahmed Abdelali. 2005. http://aracorpus.e3rab.com/
Ayaspell Arabic dictionary project, 2008.
http://ayaspell.sourceforge.net
Daniel Dahlmeier and Hwee Tou Ng. 2012. Bet-
ter evaluation for grammatical error correction. In
Proceedings of the 2012 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 568?572. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, 2012.
Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi, and Mauro Cet-
tolo. 2008. Irstlm: an open source toolkit for han-
dling large scale language models. In Interspeech,
pages 1618?1621, 2008.
Hunspell, 2007. http://hunspell.sourceforge.net/
Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, et al. 2007. Moses: Open source
toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL
on Interactive Poster and Demonstration Sessions,
pages 177?180. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, 2007.
Vladimir Levenshtein. 1966. Binary codes capable of
correcting deletions, insertions and reversals. In So-
viet physics doklady, volume 10, page 707, 1966.
Behrang Mohit, Alla Rozovskaya, Nizar Habash, Wa-
jdi Zaghouani, and Ossama Obeid. 2014. The First
QALB Shared Task on Automatic Text Correction
for Arabic. In Proceedings of EMNLP Workshop on
Arabic Natural Language Processing, Doha, Qatar,
October 2014.
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A sys-
tematic comparison of various statistical alignment
models. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19?51,
2003.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 40th annual meeting on association for compu-
tational linguistics, pages 311?318. Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2002.
Motaz K Saad and Wesam Ashour. 2010 Osac: Open
source arabic corpora. In 6th ArchEng Int. Sympo-
siums, EEECS, volume 10, 2010.
158
Wajdi Zaghouani, Behrang Mohit, Nizar Habash, Os-
sama Obeid, Nadi Tomeh, Alla Rozovskaya, Noura
Farra, Sarah Alkuhlani, and Kemal Oflazer. 2014.
Large scale arabic error annotation: Guidelines and
framework. In Proceedings of the Ninth Inter-
national Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC?14), Reykjavik, Iceland, May
2014. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).
159
