Proceedings of the Workshop on Frontiers in Linguistically Annotated Corpora 2006, pages 70?77,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Issues in Synchronizing the English Treebank and PropBank 
 
Olga Babko-Malayaa, Ann Biesa, Ann Taylorb, Szuting Yia, Martha Palmerc,  
Mitch Marcusa, Seth Kulicka and Libin Shena 
aUniversity of Pennsylvania, bUniversity of York, cUniversity of Colorado 
{malayao,bies}@ldc.upenn.edu, {szuting,mitch,skulick,libin}@linc.cis.upenn.edu,
at9@york.ac.uk, Martha.Palmer@colorado.edu
 
Abstract 
The PropBank primarily adds semantic 
role labels to the syntactic constituents in 
the parsed trees of the Treebank. The 
goal is for automatic semantic role label-
ing to be able to use the domain of local-
ity of a predicate in order to find its ar-
guments. In principle, this is exactly what 
is wanted, but in practice the PropBank 
annotators often make choices that do not 
actually conform to the Treebank parses. 
As a result, the syntactic features ex-
tracted by automatic semantic role label-
ing systems are often inconsistent and 
contradictory. This paper discusses in de-
tail the types of mismatches between the 
syntactic bracketing and the semantic 
role labeling that can be found, and our 
plans for reconciling them. 
1 Introduction 
The PropBank corpus annotates the entire Penn 
Treebank with predicate argument structures by 
adding semantic role labels to the syntactic 
constituents of the Penn Treebank.  
Theoretically, it is straightforward for PropBank 
annotators to locate possible arguments based on 
the syntactic structure given by a parse tree, and 
mark the located constituent with its argument 
label. We would expect a one-to-one mapping 
between syntactic constituents and semantic 
arguments. However, in practice, PropBank 
annotators often make choices that do not 
actually conform to the Penn Treebank parses. 
The discrepancies between the PropBank and 
the Penn Treebank obstruct the study of the syn-
tax and semantics interface and pose an immedi-
ate problem to an automatic semantic role label-
ing system. A semantic role labeling system is 
trained on many syntactic features extracted from 
the parse trees, and the discrepancies make the 
training data inconsistent and contradictory. In 
this paper we discuss in detail the types of mis-
matches between the syntactic bracketing and the 
semantic role labeling that can be found, and our 
plans for reconciling them. We also investigate 
the sources of the disagreements, which types of 
disagreements can be resolved automatically, 
which types require manual adjudication, and for 
which types an agreement between syntactic and 
semantic representations cannot be reached. 
1.1 Treebank  
The Penn Treebank annotates text for syntactic 
structure, including syntactic argument structure 
and rough semantic information. Treebank anno-
tation involves two tasks: part-of-speech tagging 
and syntactic annotation. 
The first task is to provide a part-of-speech tag 
for every token. Particularly relevant for Prop-
Bank work, verbs in any form (active, passive, 
gerund, infinitive, etc.) are marked with a verbal 
part of speech (VBP, VBN, VBG, VB, etc.). 
(Marcus, et al 1993; Santorini 1990) 
The syntactic annotation task consists of 
marking constituent boundaries, inserting empty 
categories (traces of movement, PRO, pro), 
showing the relationships between constituents 
(argument/adjunct structures), and specifying a 
particular subset of adverbial roles. (Marcus, et 
al. 1994; Bies, et al 1995) 
Constituent boundaries are shown through 
syntactic node labels in the trees. In the simplest 
case, a node will contain an entire constituent, 
complete with any associated arguments or 
modifiers. However, in structures involving syn-
tactic movement, sub-constituents may be dis-
placed. In these cases, Treebank annotation 
represents the original position with a trace and 
shows the relationship as co-indexing. In (1) be-
low, for example, the direct object of entail is 
shown with the trace *T*, which is coindexed to 
the WHNP node of the question word what. 
 
(1) (SBARQ (WHNP-1 (WP What ))
(SQ (VBZ does )
(NP-SBJ (JJ industrial )
(NN emigration ))
(VP (VB entail)
(NP *T*-1)))
(. ?))
70
In (2), the relative clause modifying a journal-
ist has been separated from that NP by the prepo-
sitional phrase to al Riyadh, which is an argu-
ment of the verb sent. The position where the 
relative clause originated or ?belongs? is shown 
by the trace *ICH*, which is coindexed to the 
SBAR node containing the relative clause con-
stituent. 
 
(2)(S (NP-SBJ You)  
(VP sent
(NP (NP a journalist)
(SBAR *ICH*-2))
(PP-DIR to
(NP al Riyadh))
(SBAR-2
(WHNP-3 who)
(S (NP-SBJ *T*-3)
(VP served
(NP (NP the name)
(PP of
(NP Lebanon)))
(ADVP-MNR
magnificently))))))
 
Empty subjects which are not traces of move-
ment, such as PRO and pro, are shown as * (see 
the null subject of the infinite clause in (4) be-
low). These null subjects are coindexed with a 
governing NP if the syntax allows. The null sub-
ject of an infinitive clause complement to a noun 
is, however, not coindexed with another node in 
the tree in the syntax. This coindexing is shown 
as a semantic coindexing in the PropBank anno-
tation. 
The distinction between syntactic arguments 
and adjuncts of the verb or verb phrase is made 
through the use of functional dashtags rather than 
with a structural difference. Both arguments and 
adjuncts are children of the VP node. No distinc-
tion is made between VP-level modification and 
S-level modification. All constituents that appear 
before the verb are children of S and sisters of 
VP; all constituents that appear after the verb are 
children of VP.  
Syntactic arguments of the verb are NP-SBJ, 
NP (no dashtag), SBAR (either ?NOM-SBJ or no 
dashtag), S (either ?NOM-SBJ or no dashtag),  
-DTV, -CLR (closely/clearly related), -DIR with 
directional verbs. 
Adjuncts or modifiers of the verb or sentence 
are any constituent with any other adverbial 
dashtag, PP (no dashtag), ADVP (no dashtag). 
Adverbial constituents are marked with a more 
specific functional dashtag if they belong to one 
of the more specific types in the annotation sys-
tem (temporal ?TMP, locative ?LOC, manner  
?MNR, purpose ?PRP, etc.). 
Inside NPs, the argument/adjunct distinction is 
shown structurally. Argument constituents (S and 
SBAR only) are children of NP, sister to the head 
noun. Adjunct constituents are sister to the NP 
that contains the head noun, child of the NP that 
contains both:  
 
(NP (NP head)
(PP adjunct)) 
1.2 PropBank   
PropBank is an annotation of predicate-argument 
structures on top of syntactically parsed, or Tree-
banked, structures. (Palmer, et al 2005; Babko-
Malaya, 2005). More specifically, PropBank 
annotation involves three tasks: argument 
labeling, annotation of modifiers, and creating 
co-reference chains for empty categories.  
The first goal is to provide consistent argu-
ment labels across different syntactic realizations 
of the same verb, as in   
 
(3) [ARG0 John] broke [ARG1 the window]   
 [ARG1 The window] broke.  
 
As this example shows, semantic arguments 
are tagged with numbered argument labels, such 
as Arg0, Arg1, Arg2, where these labels are de-
fined on a verb by verb basis.  
The second task of the PropBank annotation 
involves assigning functional tags to all modifi-
ers of the verb, such as MNR (manner), LOC 
(locative), TMP (temporal), DIS (discourse con-
nectives), PRP (purpose) or DIR (direction) and 
others. 
And, finally, PropBank annotation involves 
finding antecedents for ?empty? arguments of the 
verbs, as in (4). The subject of the verb leave in 
this example is represented as an empty category 
[*] in Treebank. In PropBank, all empty catego-
ries which could be co-referred with a NP within 
the same sentence are linked in ?co-reference? 
chains:  
 
(4) I made a decision [*] to leave 
 
Rel:    leave,   
Arg0: [*] -> I 
 
As the following sections show, all three tasks 
of PropBank annotation result in structures 
which differ in certain respects from the corre-
sponding Treebank structures. Section 2 presents 
71
our approach to reconciling the differences be-
tween Treebank and PropBank with respect to 
the third task, which links empty categories with 
their antecedents. Section 3 introduces mis-
matches between syntactic constituency in Tree-
bank and PropBank. Mismatches between modi-
fier labels are not addressed in this paper and are 
left for future work. 
2 Coreference and syntactic chains  
PropBank chains include all syntactic chains 
(represented in the Treebank) plus other cases of 
nominal semantic coreference, including those  
in which the coreferring NP is not a syntactic 
antecedent. For example, according to PropBank 
guidelines, if a trace is coindexed with a NP in 
Treebank, then the chain should be reconstructed: 
 
(5) What-1 do you like [*T*-1]? 
 
Original PropBank annotation: 
Rel: like 
Arg0: you 
Arg1: [*T*] -> What 
 
Such chains usually include traces of A and A? 
movement and PRO for subject and object con-
trol. On the other hand, not all instances of PROs 
have syntactic antecedents. As the following ex-
ample illustrates, subjects of infinitival verbs and 
gerunds might have antecedents within the same 
sentence, which cannot be linked as a syntactic 
chain. 
 
(6) On the issue of abortion , Marshall Coleman 
wants  to take away your right  [*] to choose 
and give it to the politicians .  
 
ARG0:          [*] -> your 
REL:           choose 
 
Given that the goal of PropBank is to find all 
semantic arguments of the verbs, the links be-
tween empty categories and their coreferring NPs 
are important, independent of whether they are 
syntactically coindexed or not. In order to recon-
cile the differences between Treebank and Prop-
Bank annotations, we decided to revise Prop-
Bank annotation and view it as a 3 stage process. 
First, PropBank annotators should not recon-
struct syntactic chains, but rather tag empty cate-
gories as arguments. For example, under the new 
approach annotators would simply tag the trace 
as the Arg1 argument in (7): 
(7) What-1 do you like [*T*-1]? 
 
Revised PropBank annotation: 
Rel: like 
Arg0: you 
Arg1: [*T*]  
  
As the second stage, syntactic chains will be re-
constructed automatically, based on the 
coindexation provided by Treebank (note that the 
trace is coindexed with the NP What in (7)). And, 
finally, coreference annotation will be done on 
top of the resulting resource, with the goal of 
finding antecedents for the remaining empty 
categories, including empty subjects of infinitival 
verbs and gerunds.   
One of the advantages of this approach is that 
it allows us to distinguish different types of 
chains, such as syntactic chains (i.e., chains 
which are derived as the result of syntactic 
movement, or control coreference), direct 
coreference chains (as illustrated by the example 
in (6)), and semantic type links for other ?indi-
rect? types of links between an empty category 
and its antecedent.  
Syntactic chains are annotated in Treebank, 
and are reconstructed automatically in PropBank. 
The annotation of direct coreference chains is 
done manually on top of Treebank, and is re-
stricted to empty categories that are not 
coindexed with any NP in Treebank. And, finally, 
as we show next, a semantic type link is used for 
relative clauses and a coindex link for verbs of 
saying. 
A semantic type link is used when the antece-
dent and the empty category do not refer to the 
same entity, but do have a certain kind of rela-
tionship. For example, consider the relative 
clause in (8):  
 
(8) Answers that we?d like to have 
 
Treebank annotation: 
(NP (NP answers)
(SBAR (WHNP-6 which)
(S (NP-SBJ-3 we)
(VP 'd
(VP like
(S (NP-SBJ *-3)
(VP to
(VP have
(NP *T*-6)
))))))))
 
In Treebank, the object of the verb have is a trace, 
which is coindexed with the relative pronoun. In 
72
the original PropBank annotation, a further link 
is provided, which specifies the relative pronoun 
as being of ?semantic type? answers.  
 
(9) Original PropBank annotation: 
Arg1:    [NP *T*-6] -> which -> answers 
 rel:         have 
 Arg0:     [NP-SBJ *-3] -> we 
 
This additional link between which and answers 
is important for many applications that make use 
of preferences for semantic types of verb argu-
ments, such as Word Sense Disambiguation 
(Chen & Palmer 2005). In the new annotation 
scheme, annotators will first label traces as ar-
guments: 
 
(10) Revised PropBank annotation (stage 1): 
Rel:  have 
Arg1: [*T*-6]  
Arg0: [NP-SBJ *-3] 
 
As the next stage, the trace [*T*-6] will be 
linked to the relative pronoun automatically (in 
addition to the chain [NP-SBJ *-3] -> we being 
automatically reconstructed). As the third stage, 
PropBank annotators will link which to answers. 
However, this chain will be labeled as a ?seman-
tic type? to distinguish it from direct coreference 
chains and to indicate that there is no identity 
relation between the coindexed elements. 
Verbs of saying illustrate another case of links 
rather than coreference chains. In many sen-
tences with direct speech, the clause which intro-
duces a verb of saying is ?embedded? into the 
utterance. Syntactically this presents a problem 
for both Treebank and Propbank annotation. In 
Treebank, the original annotation style required a 
trace coindexed to the highest S node as the ar-
gument of the verb of saying, indicating syntactic 
movement. 
 
(11) Among other things, they said  [*T*-1] , Mr. 
Azoff would develop musical acts for a new 
record label . 
 
Treebank annotation: 
(S-1 (PP Among
(NP other things))
(PRN ,
(S (NP-SBJ they)
(VP said
(SBAR 0
(S *T*-1))))
,)
(NP-SBJ Mr. Azoff)
(VP would
(VP develop
(NP (NP musical acts)
(PP for
(NP a new record
label)))))
.)
In PropBank, the different pieces of the utterance, 
including the trace under the verb said, were 
concatenated 
 
(12) Original PropBank annotation: 
ARG1:      [ Among other things] [ Mr. 
Azoff] [ would develop musical acts for a 
new record label] [ [*T*-1]] 
ARG0:       they 
rel:        said 
 
Under the new approach, in stage one, Tree-
bank annotation will introduce not a trace of the 
S clause, but rather *?*, an empty category indi-
cating ellipsis. In stage three, PropBank annota-
tors will link this null element to the S node, but 
the resulting chain will not be viewed as  ?direct? 
coreference. A special tag will be used for this 
link, in order to distinguish it from other types of 
chains. 
 
(13) Revised PropBank  annotation: 
ARG1:      [*?*] (-> S) 
ARG0:       they 
rel:        said 
3 Differences in syntactic constituency  
3.1 Extractions of mismatches between 
PropBank and Treebank 
In order to make the necessary changes to both 
the Treebank and the PropBank, we have to first 
find all instances of mismatches. We have used 
two methods to do this: 1) examining the argu-
ment locations; 2) examining the discontinuous 
arguments. 
 
Argument Locations  In a parse tree which ex-
presses the syntactic structure of a sentence, a 
semantic argument occupies specific syntactic 
locations: it appears in a subject position, a verb 
complement location or an adjunct location. 
Relative to the predicate, its argument is either a 
sister node, or a sister node of the predicate?s 
ancestor. We extracted cases of PropBank argu-
ments which do not attach to the predicate spine, 
and filtered out VP coordination cases. For ex-
ample, the following case is a problematic one 
because the argument PP node is embedded too 
73
deeply in an NP node and hence it cannot find a 
connection with the main predicate verb lifted. 
This is an example of a PropBank annotation 
error. 
 
(14) (VP (VBD[rel] lifted) 
(NP us) )
(NP-EXT
(NP a good 12-inches)
(PP-LOC[ARGM-LOC] above
(NP the water level))))
 
However, the following case is not problem-
atic because we consider the ArgM PP to be a 
sister node of the predicate verb given the VP 
coordination structure:  
 
(15) (VP (VP (VB[rel] buy)  
(NP the basket of ? )
(PP in whichever market ?))
(CC and)
(VP (VBP sell)
(NP them)
(PP[ARGM] in the more
expensive market)))
 
Discontinuous Arguments happen when Prop-
Bank annotators need to concatenate several 
Treebank constituents to form an argument.  Dis-
continuous arguments often represent different 
opinions between PropBank and Treebank anno-
tators regarding the interpretations of the sen-
tence structure. 
For example, in the following case, the Prop-
Bank concatenates the NP and the PP to be the 
Arg1. In this case, the disagreement on PP at-
tachment is simply a Treebank annotation error. 
 
(16) The region lacks necessary mechanisms for 
handling the aid and accounting items. 
 
Treebank annotation: 
(VP lacks
(NP necessary mechanisms)
(PP for
(NP handing the aid?)))
 
PropBank annotation: 
REL: lacks 
Arg1: [NP necessary mechanisms][PP for 
handling the aid and accounting items] 
 
All of these examples have been classified into 
the following categories: (1) attachment ambi-
guities, (2) different policy decisions, and (3) 
cases where one-to-one mapping cannot be pre-
served. 
3.2 Attachment ambiguities  
Many cases of mismatches between Treebank 
and PropBank constituents are the result of am-
biguous interpretations. The most common ex-
amples are cases of modifier attachment ambi-
guities, including PP attachment. In cases of am-
biguous interpretations, we are trying to separate 
cases which can be resolved automatically from 
those which require manual adjudication. 
 
PP-Attachment  The most typical case of PP 
attachment annotation disagreement is shown in 
(17).  
 
(17) She wrote a letter for Mary. 
 
Treebank annotation: 
(VP wrote
(NP (NP a letter)
(PP for
(NP Mary))))
 
PropBank annotation: 
REL: write 
Arg1: a letter 
Arg2: for Mary 
 
In (17), the PP ?for Mary? is attached to the 
verb in PropBank and to the NP in Treebank. 
This disagreement may have been influenced by 
the set of roles of the verb ?write?, which in-
cludes a beneficiary as its argument.  
 
(18) Frameset write:  Arg0: writer 
   Arg1: thing written 
   Arg2: beneficiary 
 
Examples of this type cannot be automatically 
resolved and require manual adjudication. 
Adverb Attachment  Some cases of modifier 
attachment ambiguities, on the other hand, could 
be automatically resolved. Many cases of mis-
matches are of the type shown in (19), where a 
directional adverbial follows the verb. In Tree-
bank, this adverbial is analyzed as part of an 
ADVP which is the argument of the verb in 
question. However, in PropBank, it is annotated 
as a separate ArgM-DIR.  
(19) Everything is going back to Korea or Japan. 
 
 
74
Treebank annotation:  
(S (NP-SBJ (NN Everything) )
(VP (VBZ is)
(VP (VBG[rel] going)
(ADVP-DIR
(RB[ARGM-DIR] back)
(PP[ARG2] (TO to)
(NP (NNP Korea)
(CC and)
(NNP Japan)
))))) (. .))
 
Original PropBank annotation: 
Rel: going 
ArgM-DIR: back 
Arg2: to Korea or Japan 
 
For examples of this type, we have decided to 
automatically reconcile PropBank annotations to 
be consistent with Treebank, as shown in (20). 
 
(20) Revised PropBank annotation: 
Rel:  going 
Arg2: back to Korea or Japan 
3.3 Sentential complements 
Another area of significant mismatch between 
Treebank and PropBank annotation involves sen-
tential complements, both infinitival clauses and 
small clauses. In general, Treebank annotation 
allows many more verbs to take sentential com-
plements than PropBank annotation. 
For example, the Treebank annotation of the 
sentence in (21) gives the verb keep a sentential 
complement which has their markets active un-
der the S as the subject of the complement clause. 
PropBank annotation, on the other hand, does not 
mark the clause but rather labels each subcon-
stituent as a separate argument. 
 
(21)  ?keep their markets active 
 
Treebank annotation: 
(VP keep
(S (NP-SBJ their markets)
(ADJP-PRD active)))
 
PropBank annotation: 
REL: keep 
Arg1: their markets 
Arg2: active 
 
In Propbank, an important criterion for decid-
ing whether a verb takes an S argument, or de-
composes it into two arguments (usually tagged 
as Arg1 and Arg2) is based on the semantic in-
terpretation of the argument, e.g. whether the 
argument can be interpreted as an event or pro-
position. 
For example, causative verbs (e.g. make, get), 
verbs of perception (see, hear), and intensional 
verbs (want, need, believe), among others, are 
analyzed as taking an S clause, which is inter-
preted as an event in the case of causative verbs 
and verbs of perception, and as a proposition in 
the case of intensional verbs. On the other hand, 
?label? verbs (name, call, entitle, label, etc.), do 
not select for an event or proposition and are 
analyzed as having 3 arguments: Arg0, Arg1, 
and Arg2. 
Treebank criteria for distinguishing arguments, 
on the other hand, were based on syntactic 
considerations, which did not always match with 
Propbank. For example, in Treebank, evidence of 
the syntactic category of argument that a verb 
can take is used as part of the decision process 
about whether to allow the verb to take a small 
clause. Verbs that take finite or non-finite (verbal) 
clausal arguments, are also treated as taking 
small clauses. The verb find takes a finite clausal 
complement as in We found that the book was 
important and also a non-finite clausal comple-
ment as in We found the book to be important. 
Therefore, find is also treated as taking a small 
clause complement as in We found the book 
important.  
 
(22) (S (NP-SBJ We) 
(VP found
(S (NP-SBJ the book)
(ADJP-PRD important))))
 
The obligatory nature of the secondary predi-
cate in this construction also informed the deci-
sion to use a small clause with a verb like find. In 
(22), for example, important is an obligatory part 
of the sentence, and removing it makes the sen-
tence ungrammatical with this sense of find (?We 
found the book? can only be grammatical with a 
different sense of find, essentially ?We located 
the book?). 
With verbs that take infinitival clausal com-
plements, however, the distinction between a 
single S argument and an NP object together 
with an S argument is more difficult to make. 
The original Treebank policy was to follow the 
criteria and the list of verbs taking both an NP 
object and an infinitival S argument given in 
Quirk, et al (1985).  
Resultative constructions are frequently a 
source of mismatch between Treebank annota-
75
tion as a small clause and PropBank annotation 
with Arg1 and Arg2. Treebank treated a number 
of resultative as small clauses, although certain 
verbs received resultative structure annotation, 
such as the one in (23). 
 
(23) (S (NP-SBJ They) 
(VP painted
(NP-1 the apartment)
(S-CLR (NP-SBJ *-1)
(ADJP-PRD orange))))
 
In all the mismatches in the area of sentential 
complementation, Treebank policy tends to 
overgeneralize S-clauses, whereas Propbank 
leans toward breaking down clauses into separate 
arguments.  
This type of mismatch is being resolved on a 
verb-by-verb basis. Propbank will reanalyze 
some of the verbs (like consider and find), which 
have been analyzed as having 3 arguments, as 
taking an S argument. Treebank, on the other 
hand, will change the analysis of label verbs like 
call, from a small clause analysis to a structure 
with two complements. 
Our proposed structure for label verbs, for ex-
ample, is in (24). 
 
(24) (S (NP-SBJ[Arg0] his parents) 
(VP (VBD called)
(NP-1[Arg1] him)
(S-CLR[Arg2]
(NP-SBJ *-1)
(NP-PRD John))))
 
This structure will accommodate both Treebank 
and PropBank requirements for label verbs. 
4 Where Syntax and Semantics do not 
match  
Finally, there are some examples where the dif-
ferences seem to be impossible to resolve with-
out sacrificing some important features of Prop-
Bank or Treebank annotation. 
4.1 Phrasal verbs   
PropBank has around 550 phrasal verbs like 
keep up, touch on, used to and others, which are 
analyzed as separate predicates in PropBank. 
These verbs have their own set of semantic roles, 
which is different from the set of roles of the cor-
responding ?non-phrasal? verbs, and therefore 
they require a separate PropBank entry. In Tree-
bank, on the other hand, phrasal verbs are not 
distinguished. If the second part of the phrasal 
verb is labeled as a verb+particle combination in 
the Treebank, the PropBank annotators concate-
nate it with the verb as the REL. If Treebank la-
bels the second part of the ?phrasal verb? as part 
of a prepositional phrase, there is no way to re-
solve the inconsistency.   
 
(25) But Japanese institutional investors are used 
to quarterly or semiannual payments on their in-
vestments, so ?  
 
Treebank annotation: 
(VBN used)
(PP (TO to)
(NP quarterly or ?
on their investments))
 
PropBank annotation: 
      Arg1: quarterly or ? on their investments 
 Rel: used to (?used to? is a separate predi-
cate in PropBank) 
4.2 Conjunction  
In PropBank, conjoined NPs and clauses are 
usually analyzed as one argument, parallel to 
Treebank. For example, in John and Mary came, 
the NP John and Mary is a constituent in Tree-
bank and it is also marked as Arg0 in PropBank. 
However, there are a few cases where one of the 
conjuncts is modified, and PropBank policy is to 
mark these modifiers as ArgMs. For example, in 
the following NP, the temporal ArgM now modi-
fies a verb, but it only applies to the second con-
junct.  
 
(26) 
(NP (NNP Richard)
(NNP Thornburgh) )
(, ,)
(SBAR
(WHNP-164 (WP who))
(S
(NP-SBJ-1 (-NONE- *T*-164))
(VP
(VBD went)
(PRT (RP on) )
(S
(NP-SBJ (-NONE- *-1))
(VP (TO to)
(VP (VB[rel] become)
(NP-PRD
(NP[ARG2]
(NP (NN governor))
(PP (IN of)
(NP
(NNP
Pennsylvania))))
76
(CC and)
(PRN (, ,)
(ADVP-TMP (RB now))
(, ,) )
(NP[ARG2] (NNP U.S.)
(NNP Attorney)
(NNP General))
)))))))
 
In PropBank, cases like this can be decom-
posed into two propositions: 
 
(27) Prop1:      rel: become    
                Arg1: attorney general         
                Arg0: [-NONE- *-1]                       
         
   Prop2: rel:  become    
  ArgM-TMP: now   
  Arg0: [-NONE- *-1] 
Arg1: a governor               
 
In Treebank, the conjoined NP is necessarily 
analyzed as one constituent. In order to maintain 
the one-to-one mapping between PropBank and 
Treebank, PropBank annotation would have to 
be revised in order to allow the sentence to have 
one proposition with a conjoined phrase as an 
argument. Fortunately, these types of cases do 
not occur frequently in the corpus. 
4.3 Gapping 
Another place where the one-to-one mapping 
is difficult to preserve is with gapping construc-
tions. Treebank annotation does not annotate the 
gap, given that gaps might correspond to differ-
ent syntactic categories or may not even be a 
constituent. The policy of Treebank, therefore, is 
simply to provide a coindexation link between 
the corresponding constituents:  
 
(28) Mary-1 likes chocolates-2 and  
 Jane=1 ? flowers=2 
 
This policy obviously presents a problem for 
one-to-one mapping, since Propbank annotators 
tag Jane and flowers as the arguments of an im-
plied second likes relation, which is not present 
in the sentence. 
5 Summary 
In this paper we have considered several types 
of mismatches between the annotations of the 
English Treebank and the PropBank: coreference 
and syntactic chains, differences in syntactic 
constituency, and cases in which syntax and se-
mantics do not match. We have found that for the 
most part, such mismatches arise because Tree-
bank decisions are based primarily  on syntactic 
considerations while PropBank decisions give 
more weight  to semantic representation.. 
In order to reconcile these differences we have 
revised the annotation policies of both the Prop-
Bank and Treebank in appropriate ways. A 
fourth source of mismatches is simply annotation 
error in either the Treebank or PropBank. Look-
ing at the mismatches in general has allowed us 
to find these errors, and will facilitate their cor-
rection.  
References 
Olga Babko-Malaya. 2005. PropBank Annotation 
Guidelines. http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~mpalmer/ 
project_pages/PBguidelines.pdf 
Ann Bies, Mark Ferguson, Karen Katz, Robert Mac-
Intyre. 1995. Bracketing Guidelines for Treebank 
II Style. Penn Treebank Project, University of 
Pennsylvania, Department of Computer and Infor-
mation Science Technical Report MS-CIS-95-06. 
Jinying Chen and Martha Palmer. 2005. Towards Ro-
bust High Performance Word Sense Disambigua-
tion of English Verbs Using Rich Linguistic Fea-
tures. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Joint 
Conference on Natural Language Processing, 
IJCNLP2005, pp. 933-944. Oct. 11-13, Jeju Island, 
Republic of Korea. 
M. Marcus, G. Kim, M. Marcinkiewicz, R. MacIn-
tyre, A. Bies, M. Ferguson, K. Katz & B. Schas-
berger, 1994. The Penn Treebank: Annotating 
predicate argument structure. Proceedings of the 
Human Language Technology Workshop, San 
Francisco. 
M. Marcus, B. Santorini and M.A. Marcinkiewicz, 
1993. Building a large annotated corpus of English: 
the Penn Treebank. Computational Linguistics. 
Martha Palmer, Dan Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury. 
2005. The proposition bank: An annotated corpus 
of semantic roles. Computational Linguistics, 
31(1). 
R. Quirk, S. Greenbaum, G. Leech and J. Svartvik. 
1985. A Comprehensive Grammar of the English 
Language. Longman, London. 
B. Santorini. 1990. Part-of-speech tagging guidelines 
for the Penn Treebank Project. University of Penn-
sylvania, Department of Computer and Information 
Science Technical Report MS-CIS-90-47. 
77
