Non-Contiguous Word Sequences for Information Retrieval
Antoine Doucet and Helena Ahonen-Myka
Department of Computer Science
P.O. Box 26 (Teollisuuskatu 23)
FIN-00014 University of Helsinki,
Finland,
Antoine.Doucet@cs.helsinki.fi, Helena.Ahonen-Myka@cs.helsinki.fi
Abstract
The growing amount of textual information
available electronically has increased the need
for high performance retrieval. The use of
phrases was long seen as a natural way to im-
prove retrieval performance over the common
document models that ignore the sequential as-
pect of word occurrences in documents, consid-
ering them as ?bags of words?. However, both
statistical and syntactical phrases showed disap-
pointing results for large document collections.
In this paper we present a recent type of
multi-word expressions in the form of Maxi-
mal Frequent Sequences (Ahonen-Myka, 1999).
Mined phrases rather than statistical or syntac-
tical phrases, their main strengths are to form
a very compact index and to account for the
sequentiality and adjacency of meaningful word
co-occurrences, by allowing for a gap between
words.
We introduce a method for using these
phrases in information retrieval and present our
experiments. They show a clear improvement
over the well-known technique of extracting fre-
quent word pairs.
1 Introduction
The constantly growing number of electronic
documents increases the need for high perfor-
mance retrieval, the precision of a system being
the percentage of relevant documents among the
total number of hits returned to a query.
Most information retrieval systems do not ac-
count for word order in a document. However,
we can assume that there must exist a way to ac-
count for word order, which permits to improve
retrieval performance. Zhai et al (1997) men-
tion many problems due the use of single word
terms only. They observe that some word asso-
ciations have a totally different meaning of the
?sum? of the meanings of the words that com-
pose them (e.g., ?hot dog? is usually not used
to refer to a warm dog !). Other lexical units
pose similar problems (e.g., ?kick the bucket?).
Work on the use of phrases in IR has been car-
ried out for more than 25 years. Early results
were very promising. However, unexpectedly,
the constant growth of test collections caused
a drastic fall in the quality of the results. In
1975, Salton et al (1975) show an improve-
ment in average precision over 10 recall points
between 17% and 39%. In 1989, Fagan (1989)
reiterated the exact same experiments with a 10
Mb collection and obtained improvements from
11% to 20%. This negative impact of the col-
lection size was lately confirmed by Mitra et al
(1987) over a 655 Mb collection, improving the
average precison by only one percent ! Turpin
and Moffat (1999) revisited and extended this
work to obtain improvements between 4% and
6%.
A conclusion of this related work is that
phrases improve results in low levels of recall,
but are globally inefficient for the n first ranked
documents. According to Mitra et al (1987),
this low benefit from phrases to the best an-
swers is explained by the fact that phrases pro-
mote documents that deal with only one aspect
of possibly multi-faceted queries. For example,
a topic of TREC-4 is about ?problems associ-
ated with pension plans, such as fraud, skim-
ming, tapping or raiding?. Several top-ranked
documents discuss pension plans, but no related
problem. Mitra et al (1987) term this problem
as one of inadequate query coverage.
In our opinion, this does not contradict the
idea that adding document descriptors account-
ing for word order must permit to improve the
performance of IR systems. But related work
shows the need for another way to combine
phrase and word term descriptors (Smeaton and
Kelledy, 1998) and even more the fact that the
phrases currently used to model documents are
not well suited for that.
In the next section, we will briefly describe
Second ACL Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Integrating Processing, July 2004, pp. 88-95
the vector space model (sometimes quoted as
?bag of words?, for it simply ignores words? po-
sitions). We will then describe the different
types of phrases used in related work (section
3). In section 4, we define our own phrases
(maximal frequent sequences) and explain how
they will be better document descriptors than
those found in the state of the art. In section 5,
we present a technique to incorporate maximal
frequent sequences into document indexing and
query processing, so as to properly take advan-
tage of this extra information in an information
retrieval framework. In section 6, we present
our experiments and results, before we conclude
the paper in section 7.
2 Vector Space Model
2.1 Preprocessing
The first step of the process is to clean the data.
A way to do this consists in skipping a set of
words that are considered least informative, the
stopwords. We also discarded all words of small
size (less than three characters).
We then reduced each word to its stem us-
ing the Porter algorithm (Porter, 1980). For
example, the words ?models?, ?modelling? and
?modeled? are all stemmed to ?model?. This
technique for reducing words to their root per-
mits to further reduce the number of word
terms.
This feature selection phase brings more com-
putational comfort for the next steps since it
greatly reduces the size of the document collec-
tion representation in the vector space model
(the dimension of the vector space).
2.2 Vector Space Model
The set of the distinct remaining word stems
W is used to represent the document collec-
tion within the vector space model. Each docu-
ment is represented by a ?W?-dimensional vec-
tor filled in with a weight standing for the im-
portance of each word token with respect to that
document. To calculate this weight, we use a tf-
normalized version of the ?tfc? term-weighted
components as described by Salton and Buck-
ley (1988), i.e.:
tfidfw =
tfw ? log Nnw
max(tf) ?
?
?
wi?W
(
tfwi ? log
N
nwi
)2
,
where tfw is the term frequency of the word
w. N is the total number of documents in the
collection and nw the number of documents in
which w occurs.
3 The use of phrases in IR
There are various ways to incorporate phrases
in the document modeling. The usual technique
is to consider phrases as supplementary terms
of the vector space, with the same technique
as for word terms. In other words, phrases are
thrown into the bag of words. However, Strza-
lkowski and Carballo (1996) argue that using
a standard weighting scheme is inappropriate
for mixed feature sets (such as single words and
phrases). The weight given to least frequent
phrases is considered too low. Their specificity
is nevertheless often crucial in order to deter-
mine the relevance of a document (Lahtinen,
2000). In weighting the phrases, the interde-
pendency between a phrase and the words that
compose it is another difficult issue to account
for Strzalkowski et al (1998).
There are two main types of phrases: statisti-
cal phrases, formed by straight word occurrence
counts, and syntactical phrases.
Statistical Phrases. Mitra et al (1987)
form a statistical phrase for each pair of 2
stemmed adjacent words that occur in at least
25 documents of the TREC-1 collection. The
selected pairs are then sorted in lexicograph-
ical order. In this technique, we see 2 prob-
lems. First, this lexicographical sorting means
to ignore crucial information about word pairs:
their order of occurrence ! This is equivalent
to saying that AB is identical to BA. Further-
more, no gap is allowed, although it is frequent
to represent the same concept by adding at least
one word between two others. For example,
this definition of a phrase does not permit to
note any similarity between the two text frag-
ments ?XML document retrieval? and ?XML
retrieval?. This model is thus quite far from
natural language.
Syntactical Phrases. The technique pre-
sented by Mitra et al (1987) for extracting
syntactical phrases is based on a parts-of-speech
analysis (POS) of the document collection. A
set of tag sequence patterns are predefined to
be recognized as useful phrases. All maximal
sequences of words accepted by this grammar
form the set of syntactical phrases. For exam-
ple, a sequence of words tagged as ?verb, car-
dinal number, adjective, adjective, noun? will
constitute a syntactical phrase of size 5. Every
sub-phrase occurring in this same order is also
generated, with an unlimited gap (e.g., the pair
?verb, noun? is also generated). This technique
offers a sensible representation of natural lan-
guage. Unfortunately, to obtain the POS of a
whole document collection is very costful. The
index size is another issue, given that all phrases
are stored, regardless of their frequency. In the
experiments, the authors indeed admit to cre-
ating no index a priori, but instead that the
phrases were generated according to each query.
This makes the process tractable, but implies
very slow answers from the retrieval system, and
quite a long wait for the end user.
On top of computational problems, we see a
few further issues. First, the lack of a mini-
mal frequency threshold to reduce the number
of phrases in the index. This means that unfre-
quent phrases are taking up most of the space,
and have a big influence on the results, whereas
their low frequency may simply illustrate an in-
adequate use or a typographical error. To al-
low an illimited gap so as to generate subpairs
is dangerous as well: the phrase ?I like to eat
hot dogs? will generate the subpair ?hot dogs?,
but it will also generate the subpair ?like dogs?,
whose semantical meaning is very far from that
of the original sentence.
Other types of phrases. Many efficient
techniques exist to extract multiword ex-
pressions, collocations, lexical units and id-
ioms (Church and Hanks, 1989; Smadja, 1993;
Dias et al, 2000; Dias, 2003). Unfortunately,
very few have been applied to information re-
trieval with a deep evaluation of the results.
Maximal Frequent Sequences. We pro-
pose Maximal Frequent Sequences (MFS) as a
new alternative to account for word ordering in
the modeling of textual documents. One of their
strength is the fact that they are extracted if
and only if they occur more often than a given
frequency threshold, which hopefully permits
to avoid storing the numerous least significant
phrases. A gap between words is allowed within
the extraction process itself, permitting to deal
with a larger variety of language.
4 Maximal Frequent Sequences
In our approach, we represent documents by
word features within the vector space model,
and by Maximal Frequent Sequences, account-
ing for the sequential aspect of text. For each
of those two representations, a Retrieval Sta-
tus Value (RSV) is computed. Those values are
later combined to form a single RSV per docu-
ment.
4.1 Definition and Extraction
Technique
MFS are sequences of words that are frequent
in the document collection and, moreover, that
are not contained in any other longer frequent
sequence. Given a frequency threshold ?, a se-
quence is considered to be frequent if it appears
in at least ? documents.
Ahonen-Myka (1999) presents an algorithm
combining bottom-up and greedy methods,
which permits to extract maximal sequences
without considering all their frequent subse-
quences. This is a necessity, since maximal fre-
quent sequences in documents may be rather
long.
Nevertheless, when we tried to extract the
maximal frequent sequences from the collection
of documents, their number and the total num-
ber of word features in the collection did pose a
clear computational problem and did not actu-
ally permit to obtain any result.
To bypass this complexity problem, we de-
composed the collection of documents into sev-
eral disjoint subcollections, small enough so
that we could efficiently extract the set of max-
imal frequent sequences of each subcollection.
Joining all the sets of MFS?, we obtained an ap-
proximate of the maximal frequent sequence set
for the full collection.
We conjecture that more consistent subcol-
lections permit to obtain a better approxima-
tion. This is due to the fact that maximal fre-
quent sequences are formed from similar text
fragments. Accordingly, we formed the subcol-
lection by clustering similar documents together
using the well-known k-means algorithm (see for
example Willett (1988) or Doucet and Ahonen-
Myka (2002)).
4.2 Main Strengths of the Maximal
Frequent Sequences
The method efficiently extracts all the maxi-
mal frequent word sequences from the collec-
tion. From the definitions above, a sequence is
said to be maximal if and only if no other fre-
quent sequence contains that sequence.
Furthermore, a gap between words is allowed:
in a sentence, the words do not have to appear
continuously. A parameter g tells how many
other words two words in a sequence can have
between them. The parameter g usually gets
values between 1 and 3.
For instance, if g = 2, a phrase ?President
Bush? will be found in both of the following
text fragments:
..President of the United States Bush..
..President George W. Bush..
Note: Articles, prepositions and small words
were pruned away during the preprocessing.
This allowance of gaps between words of a
sequence is probably the strongest specificity of
the method, compared to most existing meth-
ods for extracting text descriptors. This greatly
increases the quality of the phrase, since pro-
cessing takes the variety of natural language
into account.
The other powerful specificity of the tech-
nique is the ability to extract maximal frequent
sequences of any length. This permits to ob-
tain a very compact description of documents.
For example, by restricting the length of phrases
to 8, the presence, in the document collection,
of a frequent phrase of 25 words would result
in thousands of phrases representing the same
knowledge as this one maximal sequence.
The result of this extraction is that each doc-
ument of the collection is described by a (pos-
sibly empty) set of MFS.
5 Evaluating Documents
Once documents and queries are represented
within our two models, a way to estimate the
relevance of a document with respect to a query
remains to be found. As mentioned earlier,
we compute two separate RSV values for the
word features vector space model and the MFS
model. In the second step, we aggregate these
two RSVs into one single relevance score for
each document with respect to a query.
5.1 Word features RSV
The vector space model offers a very conve-
nient framework for computing similarities be-
tween documents and queries. Indeed, there
exist a number of techniques to compare two
vectors, Euclidean distance, Jaccard and cosine
similarity being the most frequently used in IR.
We have used cosine similarity because of its
computational efficiency. By normalizing the
vectors, which we did in the indexing phase,
cosine(
??
d1,
??
d2) indeed simplifies to the vector
product (d1 ? d2).
5.2 MFS RSV
The first step is to create an MFS index for
the document collection. Once a set of maxi-
mal frequent sequences has been extracted and
each document is attached to the correspond-
ing phrases, as detailed in the previous section,
it remains to define the procedure to match a
phrase describing a document and a keyphrase
(from a query).
Note that from here onwards, keyphrase de-
notes a phrase found in a query, and maximal
sequence denotes a phrase extracted from a doc-
ument.
Our approach consists in decomposing
keyphrases of the query into pairs. Each of
these pairs is bound to a score representing its
quantity of relevance. Informally speaking, the
quantity of relevance of a word pair tells how
much it makes a document relevant to include
an occurrence of this pair. This value depends
on the specificity of the pair (expressed in terms
of inverted document frequency) and modifiers,
among which is an adjacency coefficient, reduc-
ing the quantity of relevance given to a pair
formed by two words that are not adjacent.
5.2.1 Definitions:
Let D be a collection of N documents and
A1 . . . Am a keyphrase of size m. Let Ai and
Aj be 2 words of A1 . . . Am occurring in this or-
der, and n be the number of documents of the
collection in which AiAj was found. We define
the quantity of relevance of the pair AiAj to be:
Qrel(AiAj) = idf(AiAj , D) ? adj(AiAj),
where idf(AiAj , D) represents the specificity
of AiAj in collection D:
idf(AiAj , D) = log
(
N
n
)
,
and when decomposing the keyphrase
A1 . . . Am into pairs, adj(AiAj) is a score mod-
ifier to penalize word pairs AiAj formed from
non-adjacent words, and d(Ai,Aj) indicates the
number of words appearing between the two
words Ai and Aj (d(Ai,Aj) = 0 signifies that
Ai and Aj are adjacent):
adj(AiAj) =
?
??
??
1, if d(Ai,Aj) = 0
?1, 0 ? ?1 ? 1, if d(Ai,Aj) = 1
?2, 0 ? ?2 ? ?1 if d(Ai,Aj) = 2
. . .
?m?2, 0 ? ?m?2 ? ?m?3, if d(Ai,Aj) = m?2
Accordingly, the larger the distance between
the two words, the lower a quantity of relevance
is attributed to the corresponding pair. In our
runs, we will actually ignore distances higher
than 1 (i.e., (k > 1) ? (?k = 0)).
5.2.2 Example:
For example, ignoring distances above 1, a
keyphrase ABCD is decomposed into 5 tuples
(pair, adjacency coefficient):
(AB, 1), (BC, 1), (CD, 1), (AC, ?1), (BD, ?1)
Let us compare this keyphrase to the doc-
uments d1, d2, d3, d4 and d5, described respec-
tively by the frequent sequences AB, AC, AFB,
ABC and ACB. The corresponding quantities of
relevance brought by the keyphrase ABCD are
shown in table 1. Note that in practice, we lost
the maximality property during the partition-
join step presented in subsection 4.1. Hence,
there can be a frequent sequence AB together
with a frequent sequence ABC, if they were ex-
tracted from two different document clusters.
Assuming equal idf values, we observe that
the quantities of relevance form a coherent
order. The longest matches rank first, and
matches of equal size are untied by adja-
cency. Moreover, non-adjacent matches (AC
and ABC) are not ignored as in many other
phrase representations (Mitra et al, 1987).
5.3 Aggregated RSV
In practice, some queries do not contain any
keyphrase, and some documents do not contain
any MFS. However, there can of course be cor-
rect answers to these queries, and those docu-
ments must be relevant to some queries. Also,
all documents containing the same matching
phrases get the same MFS RSV. Therefore, it is
necessary to find a way to separate them. The
word-based cosine similarity measure is very ap-
propriate for that.
Another natural response would have been to
re-decompose the pairs into single words and
form document vectors accordingly. However,
this would not be satisfying, because the least
frequent words are all missed by the algorithm
for MFS extraction. An even more impor-
tant category of missed words is that of fre-
quent words that do not frequently co-occur
with other words. The loss would be consid-
erable.
This is the reason to compute another RSV
using a basic word-features vector space model.
<Keywords>
"concurrency control"
"semantic transaction management"
"application" "performance benefit"
"prototype" "simulation" "analysis"
</Keywords>
Figure 1: Topic 47
To combine both RSVs to one single score, we
must first make them comparable by mapping
them to a common interval. To do so, we
used Max Norm, as presented by Vogt and Cot-
trell (1998), which permits to bring all positive
scores within the range [0,1]:
New Score =
Old Score
Max Score
Following this normalization step, we aggre-
gate both RSVs using a linear interpolation fac-
tor ? representing the relative weight of scores
obtained with each technique (similarly as in
Marx et al (2002)).
Aggregated Score = ??RSVWord Features+(1??)?RSVMFS
The evidence of experiments with the INEX
2002 collection showed good results when
weighting the single word RSV with the num-
ber of distinct word terms in the query (let a be
that number), and the MFS RSV with the num-
ber of distinct word terms found in keyphrases
of the query (let b be that number). Thus:
? =
a
a+ b
For example, in Figure 1 showing topic 47,
there are 11 distinct word terms and 7 distinct
word terms occurring in keyphrases. Thus, for
this topic, we have ? = 1111+7 .
6 Experiments and Results
We based our experiments on the 494Mb INEX
document collection (Initiative for the Evalu-
ation of XML retrieval1). INEX was created
in 2002 to compensate the lack of an evalua-
tion forum for the XML information retrieval.
This collection consists of 12,107 scientific ar-
ticles written in English from IEEE journals,
combined to a set of queries and correspond-
ing manual assessments. The specificity of this
1available at http://inex.is.informatik.uni-
duisburg.de:2003/
Document MFS Corresponding pairs Matches Quantity of relevance
d1 AB AB AB idf(AB)
d2 ACD AC CD AD AC CD idf(CD) + ?1.idf(AC)
d3 AFB AF FB AB AB idf(AB)
d4 ABC AB BC AC AB BC AC idf(AB) + idf(BC) + ?1.idf(AC)
d5 ACB AC CB AB AC AB idf(AB) + ?1.idf(AC)
Table 1: Quantity of relevance stemming from various indexing phrases w.r.t. a keyphrase query
ABCD
document collection is its rich logical structure
into sections, subsections, paragraphs, lists, etc.
However, in the present experiments, we ignore
this structure and only exploit plain text to re-
turn full articles as our candidate retrieval an-
swers.
The manual assessments indeed tell us which
candidate answers are relevant and which ones
are not. We use these relevance values to com-
pute precision and recall measures, which per-
mit scoring each set of candidate answers, and
equivalently the means by which each set was
obtained. In our experiments, we used average
precision over the n first hits as our main refer-
ence. This evaluation measure was first intro-
duced by Raghavan et al (1989) and was used
as the official evaluation measure in the INEX
2002 campaign (Go?vert et al, 2003).
Protocol of the Experiments. As a base-
line, we computed and evaluated a run using
only single word terms, as detailed in section
2. Our goal was to compare our new tech-
nique to the state of the art. Thus we com-
puted one run using our technique (aggregat-
ing the MFS RSVs and the single word term
RSVs topic-wise, with the weighting scheme
mentioned hereabove), and one run by calcu-
lating all statistical phrases following the defi-
nition of Mitra et al (1987). The only differ-
ence is that we did not set a minimal document
frequency threshold. We made this choice from
the standpoint that our aim was not to mea-
sure efficiency, but the quality of the results.
The corresponding number of features is given
in table 2. We extracted 328,289 MFS of dif-
ferent sizes. Their splitting forms no more than
674,257 pairs (this number is probably lower be-
cause the same pair can be extracted from nu-
merous MFS).
MFS vs. Statistical Phrases. For those
representations, the average precision for the n
first retrieved documents are presented in ta-
ble 3. We learn two things from those results.
Number of Features
Word terms (Baseline) 156,723
Statitiscal Phrases 4,941,051
MFS 674,257
Table 2: Number of feature terms
Weight of the word RSV Words & Stat. Pairs
Topicwise (subsection 5.3.) 0.05825
20% 0.05902
40% 0.05957
60% 0.05843
80% 0.05527
100% 0.05302
Table 4: Average Precision@100 for various lin-
ear combinations
First, the fact that phrases improve results in
lower levels of recall is confirmed, as greater
improvement is obtained when we check fur-
ther down the ranked list. Second, our tech-
nique outperforms that of statistical phrases.
However, as we use different phrases indeed,
but also a different technique to match them
against queries, it remains to find out whether
the improvement stems from the MFS them-
selves, from the way they are used, or from both.
Thus we experimented with various linear
combinations to aggregate the word term RSV
and the statistical phrase RSV. The results are
presented in table 4. The technique of gath-
ering word and pairs features within the same
vector space clearly performs better in this case.
Therefore, the better performance of MFS is not
only due to the aggregation weigthing scheme
presented in subsection 5.3. This underlines
their intrinsic quality as document descriptors.
Word Terms Words and Stat. Phrases Words and MFS
Average Precision@100 0.05302 0.06199 (+16.9%) 0.06713 (+26.6%)
Average Precision@50 0.64419 0.62456 (-3.0%) 0.64411 (-0.0%)
Average Precision@10 0.67101 0.65021 (-3.1%) 0.66293 (-1.2%)
Table 3: Average Precision@n
7 Conclusions
We have introduced a new type of phrases to
the problem of information retrieval. We have
developed and presented a method to use maxi-
mal frequent sequences in information retrieval.
Using the INEX document collection, we com-
pared it to a well-known technique of the state
of the art. Our technique outperformed that
of statistical phrases, known to be perform-
ing comparably to syntactical and linguistical
phrases from the literature.
These results are due to the allowance of a
gap between words forming a sequence, offer-
ing a more realistic model of natural language.
Furthermore, the number of phrases to index is
rather small. A weak spot is the greedy algo-
rithm to extract MFS. But many improvements
are under way on this side, and the partition-
join technique mentioned in subsection 4.1 al-
ready permits to extract good approximations
efficiently.
Our results confirm that the best improve-
ments are obtained at the highest levels of re-
call. Therefore, MFS would be most useful in
the case of exhaustive information needs. Cases
where no relevant information should be missed,
and 100% recall should be reached in a mini-
mal number of hits (their inner ordering being
a less serious matter). Typically, examples of
such information lie in the judicial domain and
in patent searching.
More experiments remain to be done, to find
out whether similar improvements can be ob-
tained from other document collections. The
INEX collection is of scientific articles and con-
sistently uses a terminology of its own. Whether
similar performance would be observed from a
more general document collection such as news-
paper articles has to be verified.
The use of phrases is factual in many lan-
guages, which makes us optimistic regarding
an application of this work to multilingual
document corporas. Thinking of the other
techniques, the gap should give us robustness
against the challenges of multilingualism.
8 Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the Academy of Fin-
land under project 50959: DoReMi - Document
Management, Information Retrieval and Text
Mining.
References
Helena Ahonen-Myka. 1999. Finding All Fre-
quent Maximal Sequences in Text. In Pro-
ceedings of the 16th International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning ICML-99 Work-
shop on Machine Learning in Text Data Anal-
ysis, Ljubljana, Slovenia, pages 11?17. J. Ste-
fan Institute, eds. D. Mladenic and M. Gro-
belnik.
Kenneth W. Church and Patrick Hanks. 1989.
Word association norms, mutual information,
and lexicography. In Proceedings of the 27th
meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL), pages 76?83.
Gae?l Dias, Sylvie Guillore?, Jean-Claude Bas-
sano, and Jose? Gabriel Pereira Lopes. 2000.
Combining linguistics with statistics for mul-
tiword term extraction: A fruitful as-
sociation? In Proceedings of Recherche
d?Informations Assistee par Ordinateur 2000
(RIAO 2000).
G. Dias. 2003. Multiword unit hybrid extrac-
tion. In Workshop on Multiword Expressions
of the 41st ACL meeting. Sapporo. Japan.
A. Doucet and H. Ahonen-Myka. 2002. Naive
clustering of a large xml document collec-
tion. In Proceedings of the First Workshop
of the Initiative for the Evaluation of XML
Retrieval (INEX), pages 81?87, Schloss Dag-
suhl, Germany.
J. L. Fagan. 1989. The effectiveness of a non-
syntactic approach to automatic phrase in-
dexing for document retrieval. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science,
40:115?132.
Norbert Go?vert, Gabriella Kazai, Norbert Fuhr,
and Mounia Lalmas. 2003. Evaluating the ef-
fectiveness of content-oriented XML retrieval.
Technical report, University of Dortmund,
Computer Science 6.
Timo Lahtinen. 2000. Automatic Indexing: an
approach using an index term corpus and
combining linguistic and statistical methods.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Helsinki.
M. Marx, J. Kamps, and M. de Rijke. 2002.
The university of amsterdam at inex.
M. Mitra, C. Buckley, A. Singhal, and
C. Cardie. 1987. An analysis of statisti-
cal and syntactic phrases. In Proceedings
of RIAO97, Computer-Assisted Information
Searching on the Internet, pages 200?214.
M. F. Porter. 1980. An algorithm for suffix
stripping. Program, 14(3):130?137.
V. V. Raghavan, P. Bollmann, and Jung G. S.
1989. A critical investigation of recall and
precision as measures of retrieval system per-
formance. ACM Transactions on Informa-
tion Systems, 7(3):205?229.
G. Salton and C. Buckley. 1988. Term-
weighting approaches in automatic text re-
trieval. Information Processing and Manage-
ment: an International Journal, 24(5):513?
523.
G. Salton, C.S. Yang, and C.T. Yu. 1975. A
theory of term importance in automatic text
analysis. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science, 26:33?44.
F. Smadja. 1993. Retrieving collocations from
text: Xtract. Journal of Computational Lin-
guistics, 19:143?177.
A. F. Smeaton and F. Kelledy. 1998. User-
chosen phrases in interactive query formula-
tion for information retrieval. In Proceedings
of the 20th BCS-IRSG Colloquium.
Tomek Strzalkowski and Jose Perez Carballo.
1996. Natural language information retrieval:
TREC-4 report. In Text REtrieval Confer-
ence, pages 245?258.
Tomek Strzalkowski, Gees C. Stein, G. Bowden
Wise, Jose Perez Carballo, Pasi Tapanainen,
Timo Jarvinen, Atro Voutilainen, and Jussi
Karlgren. 1998. Natural language informa-
tion retrieval: TREC-6 report. In Text RE-
trieval Conference, pages 164?173.
A. Turpin and A. Moffat. 1999. Statistical
phrases for vector-space information retrieval.
In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGIR Con-
ference on Research and Development in In-
formation Retrieval, pages 309?310.
Christopher C. Vogt and Garrison W. Cottrell.
1998. Predicting the performance of linearly
combined IR systems. In Research and Devel-
opment in Information Retrieval, pages 190?
196.
P. Willett. 1988. Recent trends in hierar-
chic document clustering: a critical re-
view. Information Processing and Manage-
ment, 24(5):577?597.
Zhai, Chengxiang, Xiang Tong,
N. Milic Frayling, and Evans D.A. 1997.
Evaluation of syntactic phrase indexing.
In Proceedings of the 5th Text Retrieval
Conference, TREC-5, pages 347?358.
