Proceedings of the Analyzing Conversations in Text and Speech (ACTS) Workshop at HLT-NAACL 2006, pages 15?22,
New York City, New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Computational Measures for Language Similarity across Time 
 in Online Communities 
 
David Huffaker   Joseph Jorgensen    Francisco Iacobelli    Paul Tepper   Justine Cassell  
Northwestern University 
{d-huffaker, josephj, f-iacobelli, ptepper, justine}@northwestern.edu 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper examines language similarity 
in messages over time in an online com-
munity of adolescents from around the 
world using three computational meas-
ures: Spearman?s Correlation Coefficient, 
Zipping and Latent Semantic Analysis.  
Results suggest that the participants? lan-
guage diverges over a six-week period, 
and that divergence is not mediated by 
demographic variables such as leadership 
status or gender.  This divergence may 
represent the introduction of more unique 
words over time, and is influenced by a 
continual change in subtopics over time, 
as well as community-wide historical 
events that introduce new vocabulary at 
later time periods. Our results highlight 
both the possibilities and shortcomings of 
using document similarity measures to as-
sess convergence in language use. 
1 Introduction 
While document similarity has been a concern in 
computational linguistics for some time, less atten-
tion has been paid to change in similarity across 
time.  And yet, while historical linguists have long 
addressed the issue of divergence or convergence 
among language groups over long periods of time, 
there has also been increasing interest in conver-
gence (also referred to as entrainment, speech ac-
commodation, or alignment) in other areas of 
Linguistics, with the realization that we have little 
understanding of change in very short periods of 
time, such as months, in a particular conversational 
setting, between two people, or in a large group. 
The Internet provides an ideal opportunity to ex-
amine questions of this sort since all texts perse-
vere for later analysis, and the diversity in kinds of 
online communities ensures that the influence of 
social behavior on language can be examined. Yet 
there has been very little work on language similar-
ity in online communities.  
In this paper we compare the use of three sepa-
rate tools to measure document or message similar-
ity in a large data set from an online community of 
over 3,000 participants from 140 different coun-
tries.  Based on a review of related work on corpus 
similarity measures and document comparison 
techniques (Section 2.2), we chose Spearman?s 
Correlation Coefficient, a comparison algorithm 
that utilizes GZIP (which we will refer to as ?Zip-
ping?) and Latent Semantic Analysis. These three 
tools have all been shown effective for document 
comparison or corpus similarity, but never to our 
knowledge have any of them been used for docu-
ment similarity over time, nor have they been 
compared to one another. Even though each of 
these tools is quite different in what it specifically 
measures and how it is used, and each has been 
used by quite different communities of researchers, 
they are all fairly well-understood (Section 4).  
2 Related Work  
In the next sections, we review literature on lan-
guage similarity or convergence.  We also review 
literature on the three computational tools, Spear-
man?s Correlation Coefficient (SCC), Zipping, and 
Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA). 
2.1 Language Similarity in Computer-
mediated Communication 
In dyadic settings, speakers often converge to one 
another?s speech styles, not only matching the 
choice of referring expressions or other words, but 
also structural dimensions such as syntax, sound 
characteristics such as accent, prosody, or phonol-
15
ogy, or even non-verbal behaviors such as gesture 
(Brennan & Clark, 1996; Street & Giles, 1982). 
Some scholars suggest that this convergence or 
entrainment is based on a conscious need to ac-
commodate to one?s conversational partner, or as a 
strategy to maximize communication effectiveness 
(Street & Giles, 1982). Others suggest that the 
alignment is an automatic response, in which 
echoic aspects of speech, gesture and facial expres-
sions are unconscious reactions (Garrod & Ander-
son, 1987; Lakin, Jefferies, Cheng, & Chartrand, 
2003).  In short, conversational partners tend to 
accommodate to each other by imitating or match-
ing the semantic, syntactic and phonological char-
acteristics of their partners (Brennan & Clark, 
1996; Garrod & Pickering, 2004). 
Many studies have concentrated on dyadic inter-
actions, but large-scale communities also demon-
strate language similarity or convergence. In fact, 
speech communities have a strong influence in cre-
ating and maintaining language patterns, including 
word choice or phonological characteristics 
(Labov, 2001). Language use often plays an impor-
tant role in constituting a group or community 
identity (Eckert, 2003).  For example, language 
?norms? in a speech community often result in the 
conformity of new members in terms of accent or 
lexical choice (Milroy, 1980).  This effect has been 
quite clear among non-native speakers, who 
quickly pick up the vernacular and speech patterns 
of their new situation (Chambers, 2001), but the 
opposite is also true, with native speakers picking 
up speech patterns from non-native speakers (Auer 
& Hinskens, 2005) 
Linguistic innovation is particularly salient on 
the Internet, where words and linguistic patterns 
have been manipulated or reconstructed by indi-
viduals and quickly adopted by a critical mass of 
users (Crystal, 2001).  Niederhoffer & Pennebaker 
(2002) found that users of instant messenger tend 
to match each other?s linguistic styles.  A study of 
language socialization in a bilingual chat room 
suggests that participants developed particular lin-
guistic patterns and both native and non-native 
speakers were influenced by the other (Lam, 
2004).  Similar language socialization has been 
found in ethnographic research of large-scale 
online communities as well, in which various ex-
pressions are created and shared by group mem-
bers (Baym, 2000; Cherny, 1999). 
Other research not only confirms the creation of 
new linguistic patterns online, and subsequent 
adoption by users, but suggests that the strength of 
the social ties between participants influences how 
patterns are spread and adopted (Paolillo, 2001).  
However, little research has been devoted to how 
language changes over longer periods of time in 
these online communities. 
2.2 Computational Measures of Language 
Similarity 
The unit of analysis in online communities is the 
(e-mail or chat) message.  Therefore, measuring 
entrainment in online communities relies on as-
sessing whether or not similarity between the mes-
sages of each participant increases over time. Most 
techniques for measuring document similarity rely 
on the analysis of word frequencies and their co-
occurrence in two or more corpora (Kilgarriff, 
2001), so we start with these techniques. 
Spearman?s Rank Correlation Coefficient (SCC) 
is particularly useful because it is easy to compute 
and not dependent on text size. Unlike some other 
statistical approaches (e.g. chi-square), SCC has 
been shown effective on determining similarity 
between corpora of varying sizes, therefore SCC 
will serve as a baseline for comparison in this pa-
per (Kilgarriff, 2001). 
More recently, researchers have experimented 
with data compression algorithms as a measure of 
document complexity and similarity.  This tech-
nique uses compression ratios as an approximation 
of a document?s information entropy (Baronchelli, 
Caglioti, & Loreto, 2005; Benedetto, Caglioti, & 
Loreto, 2002).  Standard Zipping algorithms have 
demonstrated effectiveness in a variety of docu-
ment comparison and classification tasks. Behr et 
al. (2003) found that a document and its translation 
into another language compressed to approxi-
mately the same size. They suggest that this could 
be used as an automatic measure for testing ma-
chine translation quality. Kaltchenko (2004) argues 
that using compression algorithms to compute rela-
tive entropy is more relevant than using distances 
based on Kolmogorov complexity. Lastly, Ben-
detto et al (2002) present some basic findings us-
ing GZIP for authorship attribution, determining 
the language of a document, and building a tree of 
language families from a text written in different 
languages.  Although Zipping may be a conten-
16
tious technique, these results present intriguing 
reasons to continue exploration of its applications. 
Latent Semantic Analysis is another technique 
used for measuring document similarity.  LSA em-
ploys a vector-based model to capture the seman-
tics of words by applying Singular Value 
Decomposition on a term-document matrix 
(Landauer, Foltz, & Laham, 1998).  LSA has been 
successfully applied to tasks such as measuring 
semantic similarity among corpora of texts 
(Coccaro & Jurafsky, 1998), measuring cohesion 
(Foltz, Kintsch, & Landauer, 1998 ), assessing cor-
rectness of answers in tutoring systems (Wiemer-
Hastings & Graesser, 2000) and dialogue act clas-
sification (Serafin & Di Eugenio, 2004). 
To our knowledge, statistical measures like 
SCC, Zipping compression algorithms, or LSA 
have never been used to measure similarity of mes-
sages over time, nor have they been applied to 
online communities. However, it is not obvious 
how we would verify their performance, and given 
the nature of the task ? similarity in over 15,000 e-
mail messages ? it is impossible to compare the 
computational methods to hand-coding. As a pre-
liminary approach, we therefore decided to apply 
all three methods in turn to the messages in an 
online community to examine change in linguistic 
similarity over time, and to compare their results. 
Through the combination of lexical, phrasal and 
semantic similarity metrics, we hope to gain in-
sight into the questions of whether entrainment 
occurs in online communities, and of what compu-
tational measures can be used to measure it. 
2.3 The Junior Summit  
The Junior Summit launched in 1998 as a closed 
online community for young people to discuss how 
to use technology to make the world better.  3000 
children ages 10 to 16 participated in 1000 teams 
(some as individuals and some with friends).  Par-
ticipants came from 139 different countries, and 
could choose to write in any of 5 languages.  After 
2 weeks online, the young people divided into 20 
topic groups of their own choosing.  Each of these 
topic groups functioned as a smaller community 
within the community of the Junior Summit; after 
another 6 weeks, each topic group elected 5 dele-
gates to come to the US for an in-person forum.  
The dataset from the Junior Summit comprises 
more than 40,000 e-mail messages; however, in the 
current paper we look at only a sub-set of these 
data ? messages written in English during the 6-
week topic group period.  For complete details, 
please refer to Cassell & Tversky (2005).  
3 The Current Study 
In this paper, we examine entrainment among 419 
of the 1000 user groups (the ones who wrote in 
English) and among the 15366 messages they 
wrote over a six-week period (with participants 
divided into 20 topic groups, with an average of 
20.95 English writers per group).  We ask whether 
the young people?s language converges over time 
in an online community. Is similarity between the 
texts that are produced by the young people greater 
between adjacent weeks than between the less 
proximally-related weeks? Furthermore, what 
computational tools can effectively measure trends 
in similarity over time? 
3.1 Hypotheses 
In order to address these questions, we chose to 
examine change in similarity scores along two di-
mensions: (1) at the level of the individual; and (2) 
across the group as a whole. More specifically, we 
examine similarity between all pairs of individuals 
in a given topic group over time.  We also com-
pared similarity across the entire group at different 
time periods.  
As depicted below, we first look at pairwise 
comparisons between the messages of participants 
in a particular topic group within a given time pe-
riod, Tk (one week). For every pair of participants 
in a group, we calculated the similarity between 
two documents, each comprising all messages for a 
participant in the pair.  Then we averaged the 
scores computed for all topic groups within a time 
period Tk and produced PTk, the average, pairwise 
similarity score for Tk.  Our first hypothesis is that 
the average, pairwise similarity will increase over 
time, such that: 
 
PT1 < PT2 < PT3 < PT4 < PT5 < PT6 
 
For our second set of tests, we compared all 
messages from a single time period to all messages 
of a previous time period within a single topic 
group. Our hypothesis was that temporal proximity 
would correlate with mean similarity, such that the 
messages of two adjacent time periods would ex-
hibit more similarity than those of more distant 
17
time periods.  In order to examine this, we perform 
two individual hypothesis tests, where Mk is the 
document containing all the messages produced in 
time period Tk, and S(X,Y) is the similarity score 
for the two documents X and Y. 
 
a) S(Mk, Mk-1) > S(Mk, Mk-2) 
b) S(Mk, Mk-1) > S(Mk, M1) 
 
Finally, we posit that SCC, Zipping and LSA 
will yield similar results for these tests. 
4 Method  
To prepare the data, we wrote a script to remove 
the parts of messages that could interfere with 
computing their similarity, in particular quoted 
messages and binary attachments, which are com-
mon in a corpus of email-like messages.  We also 
removed punctuation and special characters. 
4.1 Spearman?s Correlation Coefficient 
SCC is calculated as in Kilgarriff (2001). First, we 
compile a list of the common words between the 
two documents. The statistic can be calculated on 
the n most common words, or on all common 
words (i.e. n = total number of common words). 
We applied the latter approach, using all the words 
in common for each document pair. For each docu-
ment, the n common words are ranked by fre-
quency, with the lowest frequency word ranked 1 
and the highest ranked n. For each common word, 
d is the difference in rank orders for the word in 
each document. SCC a normalized sum of the 
squared differences:  
 
The sum is taken over the n most frequent common 
words.  In the case of ties in rank, where more than 
one word in a document occurs with the same fre-
quency, the average of the ranks is assigned to the 
tying words. (For example, if words w1, w2 and w3 
are ranked 5th, 6th and 7th then all three words 
would be assigned the same rank of 5 6 73
+ + = 6). 
4.2 Zipping 
When compressing a document, the resulting com-
pression ratio provides an estimate of the docu-
ment's entropy. Many compression algorithms 
generate a dictionary of sequences based on fre-
quency that is used to compress the document. 
Likewise, one can leverage this technique to de-
termine the similarity between two documents by 
assessing how optimal the dictionary generated 
when compressing one document is when applied 
to another document. We used GZIP for compres-
sion, which employs a combination of the LZ77 
algorithm and Huffman coding.  We based our ap-
proach on the algorithm used by (Benedetto, 
Caglioti, & Loreto, 2002), where the cross-entropy 
per character is defined as:  
Here, A and B are documents; A B+  is docu-
ment B appended to document A; zip(A) is the 
zipped document; and length(A) is the length of the 
document. It is important to note that the test 
document (B) needs to be small enough that it 
doesn't cause the dictionary to adapt to the ap-
pended piece. (Benedetto, Caglioti, & Loreto, 
2002) refer to this threshold as the crossover 
length. The more similar the appended portion is, 
the more it will compress, and vice versa.  We ex-
tended the basic algorithm to handle the extremely 
varied document sizes found in our data. Our algo-
rithm does two one-way comparisons and returns 
the mean score. Each one-way comparison be-
tween two documents, A and B, is computed by 
splitting B into 300 character chunks. Then for 
each chunk, we calculated the cross entropy per 
character when appending the chunk onto A. Each 
one-way comparison returns the mean calculation 
for every chunk.  
We fine-tuned the window size with a small, 
hand-built corpus of news articles.  The differences 
are slightly more pronounced with larger window 
sizes, but that trend starts to taper off between 
window sizes of 300 and 500 characters.  In the 
end we chose 300 as our window size, because it 
provided sufficient contrast and yet still gave a few 
samples from even the smallest documents in our 
primary corpus. 
4.3 Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) 
For a third approach, we used LSA to analyze the 
semantic similarity between messages across dif-
ferent periods of time. We explored three imple-
length(zip( )) length(zip( ))
length( ) 
A B A
B
+ ?
2
2
6
1
( 1)
d
n n
? = ? ?
?
18
mentations of LSA: (a) the traditional algorithm 
described by Foltz et al(1998 )  with one semantic 
space per topic group, (b) the same algorithm but 
with one semantic space for all topic groups and 
(c) an implementation based on Word Space 
(Schutze, 1993) called Infomap. All three were 
tested with several settings such as variations in the 
number of dimensions and levels of control for 
stop words, and all three demonstrated similar re-
sults.  For this paper, we present the Infomap re-
sults due to its wide acceptance among scholars as 
a successful implementation of LSA.  
To account for nuances of the lexicon used in 
the Junior Summit data, we built a semantic space 
from a subset of this data comprised of 7000 small 
messages (under one kb) and 100 dimensions with-
out removing stop words. We then built vectors for 
each document and compared them using cosine 
similarity (Landauer, Foltz, & Laham, 1998).  
5 Results 
The tools we employ approach document similarity 
quite differently; we therefore compare findings as 
a way of triangulating on the nature of entrainment 
in the Junior Summit online community.  
5.1 Pairwise Comparisons over Time 
First, we hypothesized that messages between in-
dividuals in a given topic group would demonstrate 
more similarity over time.  Our findings did not 
support this claim; in fact, they show the opposite.  
All three tests show slight convergence between 
time period one and two, some variation, and then 
divergence between time periods four, five and six. 
Spearman?s Correlation Coefficient demon-
strates a steady decline in similarity.  As shown in 
Figure 1, the differences between time periods 
were all significant, F(5,1375) = 21.475, p<.001, 
where N=1381 (N represents user pairs across all 
six time periods).  
Zipping also shows a significant difference be-
tween each time period, F(5,1190) = 39.027, p<.001, 
N=1196, demonstrating a similar decline in simi-
larity, although not as unwavering.  See Figure 2. 
LSA demonstrates the same divergent trend over 
time, F(5,1410) = 27.139, p<.001, N=1416, with a 
slight spike at T4 and T5.  While the dip at time 3 is 
more pronounced than SCC and Zipping, it is still 
consistent with the overall findings of the other 
measures. See Figure 3. 
 
0.495
0.505
0.515
0.525
0.535
0.545
0.555
0.565
0.575
T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T6
Time Period  
Figure 1. Spearman's Correlation Coefficient Simi-
larity Scores for all Pairwise comparisons, T1 ?   T6 
 
0.535
0.54
0.545
0.55
0.555
0.56
0.565
0.57
0.575
0.58
T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T6
Time Period  
Figure 2. Zipping Similarity Scores for all Pairwise 
comparisons, T1 ? T6 
 
0.82
0.83
0.84
0.85
0.86
0.87
0.88
0.89
0.9
0.91
T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T6
Time Period  
Figure 3. LSA Similarity Scores for all Pairwise 
comparisons, T1 ? T6. 
 
Because of these surprising findings, we exam-
ined the influence of demographic variables, such 
as leadership (those chosen as delegates from each 
topic group to the in-person forum), gender, and 
the particular topic groups the individuals were a 
part of. We divided delegate pairs into (a) pairs 
where both individuals are delegates; (b) pairs 
where both individuals are non-delegates; and (c) 
mixed pairs of delegates and non-delegates.  Simi-
larly, gender pairs were divided into same-sex 
(e.g., male-male, female-female) and mixed-sex 
19
pairs.  For topic groups, we re-ran our analyses on 
each of the 20 topic groups separately. 
Overall, both leaders and gender pairs demon-
strate the same divergent trends as the group as a 
whole.  However, not all tests showed significant 
differences when comparing these pairs. 
For instance, Spearman?s Correlation Coeffi-
cient found a significant difference in similarity 
between three groups, where F(2,273) = 6.804, 
p<.001, n=276, such that delegate-delegate pairs 
demonstrate higher similarity scores than non-
delegate pairs and mixed pairs.  LSA found the 
same result, F(2,280) = 11.122,  p<.001 n=283. By 
contrast, Zipping did not find this to be the case, 
where F(2,226) = 2.568, p=.079, n=229. 
In terms of the potential effect of gender on 
similarity scores, Zipping showed a significant dif-
ference between the three groups, F(2,236) = 3.546, 
p<.05, n=239, such that female-female pairs and 
mixed-sex pairs demonstrate more similarity than 
male-male pairs. LSA found the same relationship, 
F(2,280) = 4.79, p<.005 n=283.  By contrast, Spear-
man?s Correlation Coefficient does not show a sig-
nificant between-groups difference, F(2,273) = .699, 
p=.498, n=276.  
In terms of differences among the topic groups, 
we did indeed find differences such that some topic 
groups demonstrated the fairly linear slope with 
decreasingly similarity shown above, while others 
demonstrated dips and rises resulting in a level of 
similarity at T6 quite similar to T1.  There is no 
neat way to statistically measure the differences in 
these slopes, but it does indicate that future analy-
ses need to take topic group into account.  
In sum, we did not find leadership or gender to 
mediate language similarity in this community.  
Topic group, on the other hand, did play a role, 
however no topic groups showed increasing simi-
larity across time. 
5.2 Similarity and Temporal Proximity 
Our second hypothesis concerned the gradual 
change of language over time such that temporal 
proximity of time periods would correlate with 
mean similarity.  In other words, we expect that 
messages in close time periods (e.g., adjacent 
weeks) should be more similar than messages from 
more distant time periods.  In order to examine 
this, we performed two individual tests, in which 
our predictions can be described as follows: (a) the 
similarity between texts in one time period and 
texts in the neighboring time period is greater than 
texts in one time period, and texts that came two 
periods previously, S(Mk, Mk-1) > S(Mk, Mk-2); and 
(b) the similarity between texts in one time period 
and texts in the neighboring time period is greater 
than the similarity between texts in one time pe-
riod, and texts in the very first time period, S(Mk, 
Mk-1) > S(Mk, M1). 
As shown in Table 1, SCC and Zipping tests 
confirm these hypotheses, while none of the LSA 
tests revealed significant differences.  
 
Table 1. Temporal Proximity Similarities SCC, 
Zipping, and LSA, n=20 topic groups 
 S(Mk,Mk-1)  
> S(Mk ,Mk-2) 
S(Mk,Mk-1)  
> S(Mk ,M1) 
S(Mk,Mk-2)  
> S(Mk ,M1) 
SCC .665 > .653? .665 > .639? .653 > .639? 
ZIP .628 > .608? .628 > .605? .608 > .605? 
LSA 9.74 > .971 9.74 > .971 .97166 < .97168 
Note: *p<.05, ?p<.01, ?p<.001, ?p = .0525, one-tailed 
6 Discussion 
This work presents several novel contributions 
to the analysis of text-based messages in online 
communities. Using three separate tools, Spear-
man?s Correlation Coefficient, Zipping and Latent 
Semantic Analysis measures, we found that across 
time, members of an online community diverge in 
the language they use.  More specifically, a com-
parison of the words contributed by any pair of 
users in a particular topic group shows increasing 
dissimilarity over the six-week period. 
This finding seems counter-intuitive given work 
in linguistics and psychology, which shows that 
dyads and communities converge, entrain and echo 
each other?s lexical choices and communication 
styles.  Similarly, our own temporal proximity re-
sults appear to indicate convergence, since closer 
time periods are more similar than more distant 
ones.  Finally, previous hand-coding of these data 
revealed convergence, for example between boys 
and girls on the use of emotion words, between 
older and younger children on talk about the future 
(Cassell & Tversky, 2005).  So we ask, why do our 
tools demonstrate this divergent trend? 
We believe that one answer comes from the fact 
that, while the young people may be discussing a 
more restricted range of topics, they are contribut-
ing a wider variety of vocabulary.  In order to ex-
amine whether indeed there were more unique 
20
words over time, we first simply manually com-
pared the frequency of words over time and found 
that, on the contrary, there are consistently fewer 
unique words by T6, which suggests convergence.  
However, there are also fewer and fewer total 
words by the end of the forum.  This is due to the 
number of participants who left the forum after 
they were not elected to go to Boston.  If we divide 
the unique words by the total words, we find that 
the ratio of unique words consistently increases 
over time (see Figure 4).  It is likely that this ratio 
contributes to our results of divergence. 
0.03
0.035
0.04
0.045
0.05
0.055
0.06
0.065
0.07
0.075
1 2 3 4 5 6
Time Period  
Figure 4. Ratio of Unique to Total Words, T1 ? T6 
 
In order to further examine the role of increasing 
vocabulary in the Junior Summit as a whole, we 
also created several control groups comprised of 
random pairs of users (i.e., users that had never 
written to each other), and measured their pairwise 
similarity across time.  The results were similar to 
the experimental groups, demonstrating a slope 
with roughly the same shape.  This argues for con-
vergence and divergence being affected by some-
thing at a broader, community-level such as an 
increase in vocabulary.   
This result is interesting for an additional rea-
son.  Some users ? perhaps particularly non-native 
speakers or younger adolescents, may be learning 
new vocabulary from other speakers, which they 
begin to introduce at later time periods.  An in-
creasingly diversified vocabulary could conceiva-
bly result in differences in word frequency among 
speakers.  This leads us to some key questions: to 
what extent does the language of individuals 
change over time? Is individual language influ-
enced by the language of the community?  This is 
heart of entrainment. 
In conclusion, we have shown that SCC, Zip-
ping and LSA can be used to assess message simi-
larity over time, although they may be somewhat 
blunt instruments for our purposes. In addition, 
while Zipping is somewhat contentious and not as 
widely-accepted as SCC or LSA is, we found that 
the three tools provide very similar results. This is 
particularly interesting given that, while all three 
methods take into account word or word-sequence 
frequencies, LSA is designed to also take into ac-
count aspects of semantics beyond the surface 
level of lexical form.  
All in all, these tools not only contribute to ways 
of measuring similarity across documents, but can 
be utilized in measuring smaller texts, such as 
online messages or emails.  Most importantly, 
these tools remind us how complex and dynamic 
everyday language really is, and how much this 
complexity must be taken into account when build-
ing computational tools for the analysis of text and 
conversation. 
6.1 Future Directions 
In future work, we intend to find ways to compare 
the results obtained from different topic groups and 
also to examine differences among individual us-
ers, including re-running our analyses after remov-
ing outliers.  We also hope to explore the interplay 
between individuals and the community and 
changes in language similarity.  In other words, 
can we find those individuals who may be acquir-
ing new vocabulary? Are there ?language leaders? 
responsible for language change online?   
We also plan to analyze words in terms of their 
local contexts, to see if this changes over time and 
how it impacts our results.  Furthermore, we intend 
to go beyond word frequency to classify topic 
changes over time to get a better understanding of 
the dynamics of the groups (Kaufmann, 1999). 
Finally, as we have done in the past with our 
analyses of this dataset, we would like to perform a 
percentage of hand-coded, human content analysis 
to check reliability of these statistical methods. 
Acknowledgements 
Thanks to members of the Articulab, Stefan Kauf-
mann, Stefan Wuchty, Will Thompson, Debbie 
Zutty and Lauren Olson for invaluable input. This 
research was in part supported by a generous grant 
from the Kellogg Foundation. 
References  
Auer, P., & Hinskens, F. (2005). The role of interper-
sonal accommodation in a theory of language 
change. In P. Auer, F. Hinskens & P. Kerswill 
21
(Eds.), Dialect change: The convergence and 
divergence of dialects in European languages 
(pp. 335-357). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Baronchelli, A., Caglioti, E., & Loreto, V. (2005). Arti-
ficial sequences and complexity measures. 
Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and 
Experiment, P04002, 1-26. 
Baym, N. K. (2000). Tune in, log on: Soaps, fandom, 
and online community. New York: Sage Publi-
cations. 
Benedetto, D., Caglioti, E., & Loreto, V. (2002). Lan-
guage trees and zipping. Physical Review Let-
ters, 88(4), 1-4. 
Brennan, S. E., & Clark, H. H. (1996). Conceptual pacts 
and lexical choice in conversation. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, 
and Cognition, 22(6), 1482-1493. 
Cassell, J., & Tversky, D. (2005). The language of 
online intercultural community formation. 
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communica-
tion, 10(2), Article 2. 
Chambers, J. K. (2001). Dynamics of dialect conver-
gence. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 6(1), 117-
130. 
Cherny, L. (1999). Conversation and Community: Chat 
in a Virtual World. Stanford: Center for the 
Study of Language and Information. 
Coccaro, N., & Jurafsky, D. (1998, November 1998). 
Towards better integration of semantic predic-
tors in statistical language modeling. Paper 
presented at the International Conference on 
Spoken Language Processing (ICSLP-98), 
Sidney, Australia. 
Crystal, D. (2001). Language and the Internet. New 
York: Cambridge University Press. 
Eckert, P. (2003). Language and adolescent peer groups. 
Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 
22(1), 112-118. 
Foltz, P. W., Kintsch, W., & Landauer, T. K. (1998 ). 
The measurement of textual Coherence with 
Latent Semantic Analysis. Discourse Proc-
esses, 25, 285-307. 
Garrod, S., & Anderson, A. (1987). Saying what you 
mean in dialogue: A study in conceptual and 
semantic coordination. Cognition, 27, 181-218. 
Garrod, S., & Pickering, M. J. (2004). Why is conversa-
tion so easy? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 
8(1), 8-11. 
Kalthchenko, A. (2004, May 2-5, 2004). Algorithms for 
estimation of information distance with appli-
cation to bioinformatics and linguistics. Paper 
presented at the Canadian Conference on Elec-
trical and Computer Engineering (CCECE 
2004), Niagara Falls, Ontario, Canada. 
Kaufmann, S. (1999). Cohesion and collocation: Using 
context vectors in text segmentation. Paper pre-
sented at the 37th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, College 
Park, MD. 
Kilgarriff, A. (2001). Comparing corpora. International 
Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 6(1), 97-133. 
Labov, W. (2001). Principles of linguistic change (Vol. 
2: Social Factors). Oxford: Blackwell Publish-
ers. 
Lakin, J. L., Jefferies, V. E., Cheng, C. M., & Char-
trand, T. L. (2003). The chameleon effect as 
social glue: Evidence for the evolutionary sig-
nificance of nonconscious mimicry. Journal of 
Nonverbal Behavior, 27(3), 145-162. 
Lam, W. S. E. (2004). Second language socialization in 
a bilingual chat room: Global and local consid-
erations. Language Learning & Technology, 
8(3), 44-65. 
Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (1998). In-
troduction to latent semantic analysis. Dis-
course Processes, 25, 259-284. 
Milroy, L. (1980). Language and social networks. Ox-
ford: Blackwell Publishers. 
Niederhoffer, K. G., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2002). Lin-
guistic style matching in social interaction. 
Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 
21(4), 337-360. 
Paolillo, J. (2001). Language variation on internet relay 
chat: A social network approach. Journal of 
Sociolinguistics, 5(2), 180-213. 
Schutze, H. (1993). Word space. In S. J. Hanson, J. D. 
Cowan & C. L. Giles (Eds.), Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems 5. San 
Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. 
Serafin, R., & Di Eugenio, B. (2004, July 21-26, 2004). 
FLSA: Extending latent semantic analysis with 
features for dialogue act classification. Paper 
presented at the 42nd Annual Meeting for the 
Association of Computational Linguistics 
(ACL04), Barcelona, Spain. 
Street, R. L., & Giles, H. (1982). Speech accommoda-
tion theory. In M. E. Roloff & C. R. Berger 
(Eds.), Social cognition and communication 
(pp. 193-226). London: Sage Publications. 
Wiemer-Hastings, P., & Graesser, A. C. (2000). Select-
a-Kibitzer: A computer tool that gives mean-
ingful feedback on student compositions. 
Interactive Learning Environments, 8(2), 149?
169. 
 
 
 
22
Proceedings of the Workshop on Embodied Language Processing, pages 41?50,
Prague, Czech Republic, June 28, 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Coordination in Conversation and Rapport 
Justine Cassell, Alastair J. Gill and Paul A. Tepper 
Center for Technology & Social Behavior 
Northwestern University 
2240 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208 
{justine, alastair, ptepper}@northwestern.edu 
 
Abstract 
We investigate the role of increasing 
friendship in dialogue, and propose a first 
step towards a computational model of the 
role of long-term relationships in language 
use between humans and embodied conver-
sational agents. Data came from a study of 
friends and strangers, who either could or 
could not see one another, and who were 
asked to give directions to one-another, 
three subsequent times. Analysis focused 
on differences in the use of dialogue acts 
and non-verbal behaviors, as well as co-
occurrences of dialogue acts, eye gaze and 
head nods, and found a pattern of verbal 
and nonverbal behavior that differentiates 
the dialogue of friends from that of strang-
ers, and differentiates early acquaintances 
from those who have worked together be-
fore. Based on these results, we present a 
model of deepening rapport which would 
enable an ECA to begin to model patterns 
of human relationships. 
1 Introduction 
 What characterizes the language of people who 
have known one another for a long time? In the US 
one thinks of groups of friends, leaning in towards 
one another, laughing, telling jokes at one an-
other?s expense, and interrupting one another in 
their eagerness to contribute to the conversation.  
The details may differ from culture to culture, but 
the fact of differences between groups of friends 
and groups of strangers are probably universal. 
Which characteristics, if any, reliably differentiates 
friends and strangers? Which can make a new 
friend feel welcome? An old friend feel appreci-
ated? Advances in natural language are ensuring 
that embodied conversational agents (ECAs) are 
increasingly scintillating, emotionally and socially 
expressive, and personality-rich. However, for the 
most part, those same ECAs demonstrate amnesia, 
beginning every conversation with a user as if it is 
their first, and never getting past the stage of intro-
ductory remarks. 
As the field of ECAs matures, and these systems 
are found on an increasing number of platforms, 
for an increasing number of applications, we feel 
that it is time to ensure that ECAs be able to en-
gage in deepening relationships that make their 
collaboration with humans productive and satisfy-
ing over long periods of time. To this end, in this 
paper we examine the verbal and nonverbal corre-
lates of friendship in an empirical study, and then 
take first steps towards a model of deepening 
friendship and rapport in ECAs. The current study 
is a part of a larger research program into linguistic 
and social coordination devices from the utterance 
level to the relationship level ? how they work in 
humans, how they can be modeled in virtual hu-
mans, and how virtual humans can be used to teach 
people who wish to learn these skills.  
2 Background & Theory 
As people become closer, their conversational 
style changes. They may raise more topics in the 
course of a conversation, refer more to themselves 
as a single unit than as two people, and be more 
responsive to one another?s talk (Cassell & Tver-
sky, 2005; Hornstein, 1982). They also are likely 
to sustain eye contact longer, smile more, and lean 
more towards one another (Grahe & Bernieri, 
1999; Richmond & McCroskey, 1995). In addition, 
friends appear to have fewer difficulties with lexi-
cal search, perhaps because they can rely on 
greater shared knowledge, and are more likely to 
talk at the same time, and to negotiate turn-taking 
in a less rigid manner, both through gaze and ges-
41
ture (Welji & Duncan, 2005). Tickle-Degnen & 
Rosenthal (1990) propose a model of deepening 
rapport over time based on the relationship among 
three components: positivity, mutual attention and 
coordination. As shown in Figure 1, as friendship 
deepens, the importance of positivity decreases, 
while the importance of coordination increases. 
Attention to the conversational partner, however, is 
hypothesized to remain constant. That is, strangers 
are more likely to be polite and uniformly positive 
in their talk, but also more likely to be awkward 
and badly coordinated with their interlocutors.   
As a relationship progresses and impressions 
have been formed and accepted, disagreement be-
comes acceptable and important. This may entail 
an increase in face-threatening issues and behav-
iors (cf. Brown & Levinson, 1987) accompanied 
by a decrease in the need to mediate these threats. 
At this stage in the relationship, coordination be-
comes highly important, so that the conversation 
will be less awkward and there is less likelihood of 
misunderstanding. Attention to one another, how-
ever, does not change. Tickle-Degnen & Rosenthal 
point out that these features are as likely to be ex-
pressed nonverbally (through smiles, nods, and 
posture shifts, for example) as verbally.  
One criticism of Tickle-Degnen & Rosenthal, 
and similar work, is that positive feelings for, and 
knowledge about, the other person are not distin-
guished (Cappella, 1990). That is, what might be 
perceived as lack of rapport could actually be a 
lack of familiarity with a partner?s behavioral cues 
for indicating misunderstanding or requesting in-
formation.  
This conflation may come from the fact that the 
word rapport is used both to refer to the phenome-
non of instant responsiveness (?we just clicked?) 
and that of deepening interdependence over time. 
ECA research has been divided between a focus on 
instant rapport (Gratch et al, 2006; Maatman, 
Gratch, & Marsella, 2005) and a focus on estab-
lishing and maintaining relationships over time 
(Bickmore & Picard, 2005; Cassell & Bickmore, 
2002; Stronks, Nijholt, van der Vet, & Heylen, 
2002). Perhaps due to difficulties with analyzing 
dyadic interdependent processes, and modeling 
them in computational systems, much of the work 
in both traditions still takes a signaling approach, 
whereby particular signals (such as nodding or 
small talk) demonstrate the responsiveness, extro-
version, or rapport-readiness of the agent, but are 
decontextualized from the actions of the dyad 
(Duncan, 1990). Although this approach is well 
paired to current technological constraints, it may 
not adequately account for the contingency of in-
terpersonal interaction and conversation. In addi-
tion, in none of these previous studies was there a 
focus on how verbal and nonverbal devices actu-
ally change over the course of a relationship, and 
how those devices are interdependent between 
speaker and listener. An instant rapport approach is 
useful for building systems that are initially attrac-
tive to users; but a system that signals increasing 
familiarity and intimacy through its linguistic and 
nonverbal behaviors may encourage users to stay 
with the system over a longer period of time. 
In the current work, we concentrate how dis-
course and nonverbal behavior changes over time, 
and across the dyad, as this perspective allows us 
to highlight the similarities between interpersonal 
coordination and knowledge coordination of the 
kind that has been studied in both conversational 
analysis and psycholinguistics.  
Work on conversational analysis demonstrates 
the importance of knowledge coordination compo-
nents such as turn-taking and adjacency pairs 
(e.g.Goodwin, 1981; Schegloff & Sacks, 1973). 
Inspired by this approach, work by Clark and col-
laborators on grounding and conversation as joint 
action has made demonstrated coordination and 
cooperation as defining characteristics of conversa-
tion (Clark, 1996; Clark & Brennan, 1991; Clark & 
Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986). This work has in turn, re-
ceived a significant amount of attention in compu-
tational linguistics, specifically in the study of dia-
logue (Matheson, Poesio, & Traum, 2000; Nakano, 
Reinstein, Stocky, & Cassell, 2003; Traum, 1994; 
Traum & Dillenbourg, 1998). To develop a model 
of nonverbal grounding, Nakano et al (2003) stud-
Early Late
Time of Interaction
Im
p
o
rt
a
n
ce
 f
o
r 
R
a
p
p
o
rt
Mutual Attention
Positivity
Coordination
Figure 1. Three component model of rapport 
(from Tickle-Degen & Rosenthal, 1990). 
42
ied people giving directions with respect to a map 
placed in between them. In that study, we observed 
that when a direction-receiver looked up from the 
map while the direction-giver was still giving di-
rections, the giver would initiate grounding behav-
ior such as a repeat or a rephrase.  
The literature reviewed above leads us to believe 
that there is an integral relationship between social 
and knowledge coordination. In this paper, we at-
tempt to draw conclusions about the changes in 
social and linguistic coordination over the short- 
and long-term in a way that illuminates that poten-
tial relationship, and that is also computationally 
viable. In order to do this, we replicate the task we 
used in our earlier grounding study (Nakano et al, 
2003); that is we use a direction-giving task, where 
half the subjects can see one another, and half are 
divided by a screen. Here, however, half of the 
subjects in each visibility condition are friends and 
half are strangers. And to study the potential de-
velopment of rapport across the experimental pe-
riod, each pair performs three subsequent direc-
tion-giving tasks.  
In the next section, we discuss the experimental 
procedure further. In section 4, we introduce first 
steps towards a new computational model of rap-
port that incorporates conversational coordination 
and grounding, based on our empirical findings. 
3 The Experiment 
3.1 Method 
Participants We collected eight task-based con-
versations (N = 16): in each dyad, one participant 
was accompanied by the experimenter and fol-
lowed a specific route from one place in the rococo 
university building where the experiment was run 
to another place in the building. S/he gave the 
other participant directions on how to reach that 
location, without the use of maps or other props. 
The direction-receiver (Receiver) was instructed to 
ask the direction-giver (Giver) as many questions 
as needed to understand the directions. After the 
conversation, the Receiver had to find the location. 
During recruitment the Giver was always selected 
as someone familiar with the building, while the 
Receiver was unfamiliar. All subjects were under-
graduate students, and were motivated by surprise 
gifts hidden at the target location. 
Design. We manipulated long-term rapport, visi-
bility, and subsequent route in a 2 ? 2 ? 3 design. 
We operationalized long-term rapport as a binary, 
between-subjects variable, with conditions Friends 
(self-reported as friends for at least one year) and 
Strangers. To study the effect of non-verbal behav-
ior, we manipulated visibility as a second between-
subject variable. To do this, half of the participants 
could see each other, and half were separated by a 
dividing panel. To study the effect of acquaintance 
across the experimental period, each dyad com-
pleted the task three consecutive times, going to 
three different locations. 
Data Coding All dyads were videotaped using a 
six-camera array, capturing the participants? body 
movements from the front, side, and above, along 
with close-up views of their faces. From each 
dyad, we made time-aligned transcriptions (using 
Praat). Non-verbal behavior was coded using An-
vil. From the transcripts, the following 9 DAMSL 
Dialogue Acts (Core & Allen, 1997) were coded: 
Acknowledgments, Answers, Assert, Completion, 
Influence, Information Request, Reassert, Repeat-
Rephrase, and Signal Non Understanding. Non-
verbal behavior in giver and receiver was coded 
using the following categories, based on Nakano, 
et al (2003): 
? Look at Speaker ? looking at the speaker?s 
eyes, eye region or face. 
? Look at Hearer ? looking at the hearer?s eyes, 
eye region or face. 
? Head nod [speaker or hearer] ? Head moves 
up and down in a single continuous movement 
on a vertical axis, but eyes do not go above 
the horizontal axis. 
3.2 Results 
We first provide basic statistics on the experimen-
tal manipulations and then examine the role of 
friendship and visibility on verbal and non-verbal 
behavior. 
Basic Statistics: Overall, we find that Friend dy-
ads use a significantly greater number of turns per 
minute than Strangers (t(6)= 2.45, p<.05, two tail), 
however, there is no difference in the mean num-
ber of seconds it took for dyads to complete the 
task. This lack of significance may have been due 
to variance among the dyads, since the mean 
length was 847 seconds for friends and 1049 for 
43
strangers. Given the instructional nature of the 
task, this means that Friends were more likely to 
intervene in the direction-giving than were Strang-
ers, even though ? for most of the dyads ? friends 
appear to take less time to finish. No difference 
was found in turns per minute for Visible and Non-
visible dyads; nor is there a difference in length in 
seconds. For routes, there is no difference in turns 
per minute, however for the length of the route in 
seconds there is a difference (F(2,21)=10.66; 
p<.006) such that the mean length of Route 1 is 
165 seconds; Route 2 is 395 seconds; Route 3 is 
387. For this reason, all statistics below are nor-
malized as a function of the length of that dyad?s 
data in seconds, and graphs are plotted to show 
least squares mean. 
Verbal and Nonverbal behavior: We examine 
the relationship between friendship and visibility 
of both Giver and Receiver across the three route 
tasks. Each of the DAMSL dialogue act variables 
and Non-verbal behavior variables was entered as 
the dependent variable in building mixed method  
models using the JMP statistical package (Version 
6, SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, 1989-2005); 
Speaker (direction-giver or receiver), Visibility, 
Friendship and Route were entered as predictor 
variables; experimental dialogue number was also 
entered as a source of random variance. We report 
the results in Tables 1 and 2 (for DAMSL and 
Non-verbal behavior variables respectively). 
Verbal Behavior: In terms of overall variance ex-
plained, we find that Acknowledgments is best 
accounted for by the model (Adjusted R Square of 
0.91), whilst Completion is least well accounted 
for (Adjusted R2 of 0.06).  
Turning first to main effects, for Visibility, 
Visible-Givers use Acknowledgements, Assert, 
Influence, and Reassert dialogue acts more fre-
quently than Non-visible Givers (post-hoc t tests at 
p <.05) 
Visible-Receivers use Acknowledgement, Re-
peat-rephrase, Signal Non Understanding these 
features more frequently than Non-visible Receiv-
ers. (post-hoc t tests at p <.05) 
For Friendship, no differences were found for 
production of DAMSL acts by givers. For receiv-
ers, receiver-strangers use more acknowledge-
ments than receiver friends.  
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Nonvisible Visible
L
e
a
st
 S
q
 M
e
a
n
s 
fo
r 
N
o
rm
A
ck
n
o
w
le
d
g
m
e
n
t
Friends Strangers  
Figure 2: Giver Acknowledgment by condition 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Nonvisible Visible
L
e
a
st
 S
q
 M
e
a
n
s 
fo
r 
N
o
rm
A
ck
n
o
w
le
d
g
e
m
e
n
t
Friends Strangers  
Figure 3: Receiver Acknowledgment by condition 
 
These main effects are mediated by an interac-
tion between Visibility?Friendship for Acknowl-
edgements. Here, as shown in Figure 2 and 3 we 
see that in the nonvisibility condition, there is no 
difference in the use of acknowledgements per 
second between friends and strangers; on the other 
hand, strangers use more acknowledgements in the 
visible condition (p<.05). A very similar interac-
tion was found for Signal Non Understanding (at 
the trend level of p<.08). 
Route is only a main effect predictor of Signal 
Non Understanding as used by receivers, who pro-
duce it significantly more frequently during the 
third route task than the first. Since signaling one?s 
lack of understanding is potentially face-
DV  Source DF DF Total F Ratio 
ACK  V*F 1 20 10.64** 
COMP  V*F 1 4 9.78* 
 V*F 1 20 3.31? SNU 
 Rte 2 20 3.38* 
Note: ?p<0.08; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01;  
Table 1: Verbal behavior 
 
Abbreviation: ACK=Acknowledgment; COMP=Completion; 
SNU=Signal Non Understanding; Sources abbreviated as: F 
= Friendship; V = Visibility; Rte = Route 
44
threatening, this result may indicate that both 
friends and strangers become more comfortable 
with one another by the third route. 
Nonverbal Behavior: Variance explained by the 
non-verbal models is the greatest for Look At 
Speaker (Adjusted R2 0.83) and least for Speaker 
Nod (0.38). With respect to the main effects result-
ing from the analysis of the non-verbal behaviors, 
we find the following.  
Visibility: Givers nod more in the visible condi-
tion when the receiver is speaking than they do in 
the Non-visible condition.  
Route: For both givers and receivers, there is an 
increase in use of Look At Speaker and Look At 
Hearer, over time; in both cases significantly 
greater instances of these variables occurred during 
Route task 2 and 3, compared to Route 1. Once 
again, these results may indicate increasing coor-
dination in conversational behavior for both 
Friends and Strangers. 
In fact, in the case of head nods, we note an in-
teresting pattern of coordination between speaker 
and hearer head-nods across the routes that differs 
for friends and strangers. For friends, both Re-
ceiver and Giver head nods in response to Receiver 
talk reduce in frequency between the first and sec-
ond routes (Giver t(8)=-2.36; p<0.05; Receiver 
t(8)=-2.28; p<0.05). For strangers, no such ac-
commodation over time occurs. Conversely, for 
friends when the Giver is speaking, both giver and 
receiver head nods increase over the three routes 
(significant only for Receiver t(8)=2.38; p<0.05). 
For strangers, however, head nods decrease (Giver 
t(8)=-2.80; p<0.05, Receiver t(8)=3.92; p<0.01). 
This means that speaker and hearer are increas-
ingly coordinated across the routes, particularly 
when they are friends. 
Interaction of verbal and nonverbal behavior  
So far we have concentrated on how individual 
verbal and nonverbal behaviors differ across con-
ditions. However, this does not take account of the 
interactive nature of the task and the focus of this 
paper. We therefore examine how specific respon-
sive nonverbal behaviors (looking at 
speaker/hearer and head nods) co-occur before, 
during, or after the DAMSL variables. Examina-
tion of the residuals of chi square analysis was 
used to identify co-occurrence of DAMSL dia-
logue acts with nonverbal behavior for each 
Speaker (Giver or Receiver) and condition 
(Friend/Stranger, Visible /Nonvisible). Significant 
over-use or underuse of these verbal/nonverbal co-
occurrences was then compared using the log-
likelihood statistic (Rayson, 2003) to dialogues in 
the other conditions (e.g., Giver-Friend-Visible 
with Giver-Friend-Nonvisible, and Giver-Stranger-
Visible for Head-nods, and just Friends with 
Strangers for the Gaze data). This technique, which 
we used in our earlier grounding experiment 
(Nakano et al, 2003) allows us insight into the 
probable causality of the behaviors of speaker and 
hearer, across verbal and nonverbal behavior.  
When direction-givers are speaking 
Head-nods. Givers did not nod significantly more 
or less frequently across Friends/Strangers condi-
tions when they were speaking. 
Gaze. More than in friendship dialogues, when 
strangers are speaking, and the direction-giver is 
acknowledging, the direction-receiver is likely to 
look at the Giver (G2=17.14; p<0.0001). 
More than in friendship dialogues, in Stranger 
dialogues, both before and after the direction-giver 
asserts something, the Receiver is likely to look at 
the Giver (G2=5.09; p<0.05, and G2=4.16, p<0.05, 
respectively). 
More than in friendship dialogues, both before 
and during the Giver?s use of Repeat-Rephrase 
utterances, the Receiver is likely to look at the 
Giver (G2=35.02; p<0.0001, and G2=60.74; 
p<0.0001, respectively). 
More than in friendship dialogues, both before 
and during the Giver?s use of Info-Request dia-
logue acts, the Receiver is likely to look at the 
Giver (G2=39.01; p<0.0001, and G2=9.60; p<0.01, 
respectively).  
This means that right after a direction receiver 
looks at the direction-giver, the giver produces an 
Assertion, a Repeat-Rephrase, or an Information 
DV  Source DF DF Total F Ratio 
Look At  
Speaker 
 Rte 2 10 18.03*** 
Hearer 
Nod 
 SPKR*F*Rte 2 20 5.14* 
Speaker  
Nod 
 SPKR*F*Rte 2 20 4.21* 
*p<0.05;**p<0.01; ***p<0.001 
Table 2. Non Verbal Behaviors.  
Sources abbreviated as: SPKR = Speaker; F = Friend-
ship; V = Visibility; Rte = Route,  
45
Request. As with Nakano et al, the stranger?s gaze 
towards the direction-giver can be seen as a signal 
of non-understanding and, in these contexts, it 
evokes one of these three grounding responses 
from the direction-giver.  
For friends, on the other hand, gaze towards the 
speaker evokes the next segment of the directions, 
and is therefore functioning as a signal of under-
standing. That is, more than in stranger dialogues, 
both before and during the Giver?s use of Influence 
dialogue acts (utterances such as ?turn right?), Re-
ceivers are more to look at the Giver (G2=4.77; 
p<0.05, and G2=31.92; p<0.0001, respectively). 
When direction-receivers are speaking 
Head-nods. As shown in Figure 4, Strangers used 
more head nods than Friends during their use of 
Acknowledgment dialogue acts in the visible con-
dition (G2 = 10.48, p<.01), however they do not 
differ from friends in the nonvisible condition (G2 
= 0.01, ns).  
89.52
70
41.46
71.43
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Visible NonvisibleR
el
at
iv
e 
F
re
q
u
en
cy
 o
f R
ec
ei
ve
r N
o
d
s 
D
u
ri
n
g
 T
h
ei
r 
U
se
 o
f A
ck
n
o
w
le
d
g
m
en
t
Strangers Friends  
Figure 4: Receiver nods during Acknowledgment 
 
0
2.5
23.08
0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Visible Nonvisible
R
el
at
iv
e 
F
re
q
u
en
cy
 o
f R
ec
ei
ve
r 
N
o
d
s 
D
u
ri
n
g
 T
h
ei
r 
u
se
 o
f I
n
fo
-R
eq
u
es
t
Strangers Friends  
Figure 5: Receiver nods during Info Request 
Conversely, as shown in Figure 5, when receiv-
ers are making an Info-Request in the visible con-
dition (G2 =14.13, p<.001), Friends nod much more 
often than Strangers; but do not differ from Strang-
ers in the nonvisible condition (G2 = 1.44, ns). 
Once again, here the friends are marking their un-
derstanding, by nodding, even while they request 
further information. 
Gaze. Before the Receiver?s use of Acknowl-
edgment dialogue acts in Stranger dialogues, the 
Giver is more likely to look at the Receiver 
(G2=10.79; p<0.01). After the Receiver has used an 
Acknowledgment in a Stranger dialogue, s/he is 
more likely to look at the Giver a (G2=14.79; 
p<0.001). This means that among strangers the 
giver and receiver are likely to engage in mutual 
gaze around the acknowledgement dialogue act. 
During and after a Repeat-Rephrase dialogue act 
in Friends dialogues, the Receiver is more likely to 
look at the Giver (G2=10.37; p<0.01 and G2=6.72; 
p<0.01, respectively). Before the Receiver uses a 
Repeat-Rephrase dialogue act in a Friends dia-
logues, the Giver is more likely to look at the Re-
ceiver (G2=9.08; p<0.01). This means that among 
friends, giver and receiver engage in mutual gaze 
around the repeat and rephrase dialogue act. 
3.3 Discussion 
Our analysis of verbal and non-verbal behaviors 
reveals consistent differences across the short term, 
comparing subsequent direction-giving tasks, and 
across the long term, comparing strangers to 
friends.  
Strangers ? Knowledge coordination 
With respect to the co-ordination of verbal and 
nonverbal behavior, it is apparent that, among 
strangers, the Receiver?s use of Acknowledgments 
is strongly associated with characteristic gaze pat-
terns of signaling non-understanding. In these 
Stranger dyads, the Giver looks at the Receiver to 
signal the need for feedback. The Receiver then 
nods to emphasize comprehension while uttering 
the Acknowledgment (e.g., ?okay?), and then looks 
back at the Giver. This pattern is very specific to 
Strangers, and in the case of the Receiver?s use of 
head nod, specific to the visible condition. Simi-
larly, among strangers, when the Giver acknowl-
edges the receiver?s correct understanding, the Re-
ceiver looks at the Giver. This pattern of gaze re-
quest, and grounding response, happens repeatedly 
and often (Acknowledgements being used more 
frequently by strangers), ensuring coordination 
among strangers, but at the cost of frequent explicit 
requests. Of course, since Acknowledgements are 
generally backchannel utterances, used to indicate 
46
mutual understanding, one explanation for the 
higher frequency of acknowledgements, head nods 
and eye gaze by strangers, especially in the earlier 
tasks, is over-generation aimed at showing atten-
tion. Although over-generation could achieve these 
goals, it can also result in creating a false impres-
sion of mutual understanding and it is notable that 
these behaviors decrease over time. 
We also find that in the Strangers condition, Re-
ceivers are more likely to look at the Giver before 
and during the Giver?s use of Repeat-Rephrase 
(i.e., repeating back to the Receiver some earlier 
information), and also before and during the 
Giver?s use of Info-Request acts (that is the Giver 
asking the Receiver a question such as ?do you get 
that??). 
From the frequent and repeated use of Acknowl-
edgments and gaze (implying something like 
?okay? are you sure you?re okay? really??), to 
the Receiver?s gaze-anticipation of the Giver?s Re-
peat-Rephrase and Info-Request, we infer a much 
more effortful interaction for Strangers, and one 
that, in fact, for most dyads, takes longer.  
In line with Welji and Duncan (2005), we found 
evidence that the task may demand additional cog-
nitive resources for Strangers, with the Receiver in 
the Strangers dialogues breaking gaze at the Giver 
to apparently consult some internal representation 
of the space just described by the Givers Assert 
(e.g., ?you?ll find some blue couches?), before re-
turning attention, and gaze, once again to the 
Giver. 
We also note a greater use overall of Acknowl-
edgment and Completions by Strangers and in 
visible situations; Receivers in the visible situa-
tions also use more Signal Non Understanding. 
Taken together, these findings indicate that coordi-
nation and achieving mutual understanding is more 
effortful for Strangers: Friends use fewer dialogue 
acts such as Acknowledgment, Completion, and 
Signal Non Understanding, indicating that there is 
less need to negotiate understanding, and that they 
are more likely to have some kind of shared repre-
sentation. Because of this, the Friends dialogues 
and task performance would appear to be more 
efficient, with less grounding required and less mu-
tual gaze around their use of Acknowledgments, 
Info-Requests and Repeat-Rephrase.  
The fact that Friends are better able to calibrate 
the task than Strangers is also demonstrated by the 
results found for Route. Both Friend and Stranger 
dyads increase their gaze towards one another from 
Route 1 to Route 2. But Friends shift the way they 
use head nods over the course of the three routes. 
They begin in Route 1 by producing them in con-
junction with Receiver talk (acknowledgment, re-
quest for further information, repeating directions 
back). However, by Route 2, the friends are nod-
ding when the direction-giver speaks, marking that 
they don?t need further information but have un-
derstood on the first try. On the contrary, Strangers 
continue to nod just as much with receiver talk, 
and decrease their nods with giver talk; perhaps 
since by Route 2, it is clear that Strangers don?t 
understand on the first try. 
Tickle-Degnen and Rosenthal (1990) predict 
greater coordination as a relationship progresses. 
We found better coordination, but that was re-
vealed, paradoxically, through fewer coordination 
devices and fewer dialogue acts in each turn, both 
comparing from Route 1 to Route 3, and compar-
ing Strangers to Friends.  
Friends ? Positivity 
In the Friends dialogues, we find a notable col-
location of non-verbal behavior and the Receiver?s 
use of Repeat-Rephrase utterance (i.e., repeating 
the Giver?s utterance back to ensure correct inter-
pretation). This is in contrast to the findings for 
Stranger dyads which found nonverbal behaviors 
found in conjunction with the Giver?s reactive use 
of Repeat-Rephrase ? i.e., the Giver?s questioning 
of the Receiver?s understanding ? perhaps after a 
breakdown in mutual understanding. In the Friend 
dyads, it is the Receiver who proactively checks 
correct understanding of the Giver?s utterance be-
fore the interaction continues.  
Tickle-Degnen & Rosenthal predict a reduction 
in the importance of positivity as rapport increases 
over time in a relationship. We found some evi-
dence to support this, since such questioning of the 
Giver in itself may be viewed as face-threatening 
behavior. However, in the Friends dialogues, this 
Repeat-Rephrase appears anticipated ? or sanc-
tioned ? by the Giver who looks at the Receiver 
prior to the utterance. Further, during and after the 
Receivers? use of the Repeat-Rephrase utterance, 
they also look at the Giver, which again would be 
expected to be viewed as a threat to face.  
Similarly, the Receiver gazes at the Giver before 
and during the Giver?s use of Influence dialogue 
acts (explicit commands, such as ?turn left?). Such 
47
direct gaze, along with a reduced number of medi-
ating dialogue acts such as Acknowledgments, ap-
pears to indicate that Friends dialogues are less 
concerned with avoiding face-threatening behav-
ior, and as such would appear less concerned with 
maintaining positivity during the interaction.  
Note that, almost paradoxically, Friends demon-
strate their increased ability to coordinate their in-
teraction through a diminished use of explicit co-
ordination devices. This speeds up the interaction, 
and reduces the number of overall dialogue acts. 
And, finally, differences between Friends and 
Strangers are vastly diminished when the interlocu-
tors cannot see one another. This leads us to be-
lieve that nonverbal behaviors in addition to gaze 
and head nods may be playing a role in how 
Friends coordinate with one another; an advantage 
which is taken away when they can only hear one 
another?s voices.  
4 Towards a Computational Model 
In the short-term context of conversation, mainte-
nance of mutual attention and incremental coordi-
nation of beliefs are requisites for grounding and 
turn-taking. In prior computational systems, 
grounding has been achieved by marking the status 
of conversational contributions as provisional (un-
grounded) or shared (grounded). Conversational 
actions by either the user or the system can trigger 
updates that change provisional information to 
shared. Acknowledgements, for example, are ex-
plicit ways of achieving grounding, but moving on 
to the next stage of the task is equally effective, as 
it presupposes that prior utterances have been 
taken up (Traum, 1994). In a model such as this, 
grounding occurs at the turn level. In order to han-
dle the multimodal phenomena that participate in 
grounding in face-to-face conversation, as Nakano 
et al (Nakano et al, 2003) have shown, a model of 
knowledge coordination needs to have more fre-
quently updated access to potential grounding 
events. In that implementation, we continuously 
polled for inputs, so as to capture the updates in 
grounding that occur between typical linguistic 
segments. We believe that the focus on time and 
process that allowed us to look at events of a 
smaller granularity in our earlier work on nonver-
bal grounding behavior will also allow us to extend 
up to events of a larger granularity, such as stages 
in a relationship. That is, we believe that the results 
described in earlier sections of this paper can be 
taken into account in a computational system by 
maintaining a model of the state of shared and pri-
vate information across several interactions (sev-
eral years, if possible). In this way, the shared his-
tory of two interlocutors (the user and the system) 
can be translated into patterns of linguistic behav-
ior, such as reduced use of acknowledgements, and 
reduced positivity, with increased interruption and 
information requests. This is similar to Cheng, 
Cavedon & Dale (2004)?s approach to direction-
giving. In this approach, the system maintains a 
history of places it has given directions to before. 
Using this task history, it is able to generate shorter 
directions at later stages in the dialogue. In our im-
plementation, however, the very style of the inter-
action is modified by the shared history of the user 
and the system. In the sense that we are modifying 
the linguistic style of the dialogue based on psy-
chological attributes, our approach is similar to 
work by Mairesse & Walker (2007) and Isard et al 
(2006). In both cases, a broad set of natural lan-
guage generation parameters is employed to gener-
ate language that differs along a personality di-
mension, based on a number of previous empirical 
studies. In the current approach, however, the fea-
tures that are modified derive from the interde-
Figure 6. Proposed architecture for modeling coordination within and across conversation 
48
pendence of the system with a particular user.  
Some of the features that are present in the con-
versations of friends, such as interjections and 
completion of one another?s utterances, are still 
beyond current computational abilities, as they 
would require online, real-time processing and un-
derstanding of utterances with incremental plan-
ning and generation of responses. We are inter-
ested in pursuing this feature of the system as dia-
logue technologies improve. 
5 Conclusion 
In this paper, we have compared direction-
giving between friends and strangers, and within 
these two groups we have compared three subse-
quent direction-giving episodes. In order to deter-
mine the effect played specifically by nonverbal 
behavior in short- and long-term rapport, half of 
our participants could see one another, while the 
other half were divided by a screen. Our experi-
mental and analytic methodology drew from both 
the social psychological, conversational analysis, 
and conversation as joint action traditions. Conse-
quently, our results were able to demonstrate the 
ways in which the verbal and nonverbal devices 
that index rapport relate to the role those same de-
vices play in knowledge coordination. Based on 
this commonality, we proposed a computationally 
viable model of deepening friendship within and 
across subsequent tasks that extends our previous 
work on grounding in face-to-face interaction. The 
work we have presented here therefore differs sub-
stantially from previous work on rapport and rela-
tionship building in embodied conversational 
agents. We did not start out with a definition of 
rapport but instead investigated those behaviors 
that characterize dyads who have self-identified as 
friends or strangers. And rather than looking at 
rapid assessment of rapport (the feeling of ?click-
ing?) we looked at the long-term version: acquiring 
a sense of mutual interdependence. Finally, rather 
than looking at how to get ECAs to engage users 
into establishing a relationship, or into letting 
down their guard, we examined those behaviors 
that characterize the dyadic interaction at each 
stage.  
All of these topics, however, are clearly inter-
related, and future research will benefit from tak-
ing a greater number of them into account in both 
data analysis, and the implementation of ECAs. 
Future research in our own lab will also have to be 
more explicit about how to implement the compu-
tational model that we have started to lay out here. 
Additional subjects in a similar experiment will no 
doubt facilitate that task. 
As we increasingly understand better how con-
versation changes when people come to know one 
another, we expect to apply these results to our 
ongoing research on virtual peers that can teach 
children with autism how to sustain interpersonal 
relationships (Tartaro & Cassell, 2006) and to our 
work on building the survey interviewers of the 
future, who can both engage their survey-takers 
and keep them honest (Cassell & Miller, in press). 
More generally, however, we hope to increasingly 
implement ECAs who will stick around for the 
long haul. 
Acknowledgments 
Thanks to Kristina Striegnitz , Will Thompson, Tara 
Latta and Nate Cantelmo for their help, and Darren 
Gergle for his superior statistical knowledge. We are 
grateful to Motorola for funding that supported some of 
the research reported here. 
References 
Bickmore, T., & Picard, R. (2005). Establishing and 
Maintaining Long-Term Human-Computer 
Relationships. ACM Transactions on Computer 
Human Interaction (ToCHI), 12(2), 293-327. 
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. (1987). Politeness: Some 
Universals in Language Usage. Studies in 
International Sociolinguistics. New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Cappella, J. N. (1990). On Defining Conversational 
Coordination and Rapport. Psychological Inquiry, 
1(4), 303-305. 
Cassell, J., & Bickmore, T. (2002). Negotiated 
Collusion: Modeling Social Language and its 
Relationship Effects in Intelligent Agents. User 
Modeling and Adaptive Interfaces, 12, 1-44. 
Cassell, J., & Miller, P. (in press). Is it Self-
Administration if the Computer Gives you 
Encouraging Looks? In F. G. Conrad & M. F. 
Schober (Eds.), Envisioning the Survey Interview of 
the Future. New York: John Wiley & Sons. 
Cassell, J., & Tversky, D. (2005). The Language of 
Online Intercultural Community Formation. Journal 
of Computer-Mediated Communication, 10(2), 
article 2. 
Cheng, H., Cavedon, L., & Dale, R. (2004, 28th-29th 
August). Generating Navigation Information Based 
49
on the Driver's Route Knowledge. Paper presented 
at the COLING 2004 Workshop on Robust and 
Adaptive Information Processing for Mobile Speech 
Interfaces. Geneva,Switzerland. 
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in 
communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine & S. 
D. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared 
cognition (pp. 127-149). Washington DC: American 
Psychological Association. 
Clark, H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a 
collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1-39. 
Core, M., & Allen, J. (1997). Coding Dialogue with the 
DAMSL Annotation Scheme. Proceedings of the 
AAAI Fall Symposium on Communicative Action in 
Humans and Machines. Boston, MA. 
Duncan, S., Jr. (1990). Measuring Rapport. 
Psychological Inquiry, 1(4), 310-312. 
Goodwin, C. (1981). Conversational Organization: 
Interaction between speakers and hearers. New 
York: Academic Press. 
Grahe, J. E., & Bernieri, F. J. (1999, Win). The 
importance of nonverbal cues in judging rapport. 
Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 23(4), 253-269. 
http://www.springeronline.com  
Gratch, J., Okhmatovskaia, A., Lamothe, F., Marsella, 
S., Morales, M., van der Werf, R. J., et al (2006). 
Virtual Rapport. Proceedings of the 5th 
International Conference on Interactive Virtual 
Agents (IVA). Marina del Rey, CA. 
Hornstein, G. A. (1982). Variations in conversational 
style as a function of the degree of intimacy between 
members of a dyad. Unpublished Doctoral, Clark 
University. 
Isard, A., Brockmann, C., & Oberlander, J. (2006). 
Individuality and alignment in generated dialogues. 
Proceedings of the 4th International Natural 
Language Generation Conference (pp. 22-29). 
Sydney, Australia. 
Maatman, M., Gratch, J., & Marsella, S. (2005). Natural 
Behavior of a Listening Agent. Paper presented at 
the 5th International Conference on Interactive 
Virtual Agents (IVA). Kos, Greece. 
Mairesse, F., & Walker, M. (2007). PERSONAGE: 
Personality generation for dialogue. Proceedings of 
the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics (ACL). Prague. 
Matheson, C., Poesio, M., & Traum, D. (2000). 
Modelling Grounding and Discourse Obligations 
Using Update Rules. Proceedings of the 1st Annual 
Meeting of the North American Association for 
Computational Linguistics (NAACL2000). Seattle, 
WA. 
Nakano, Y. I., Reinstein, G., Stocky, T., & Cassell, J. 
(2003, July 7-12). Towards a Model of Face-to-Face 
Grounding. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics (p. 
553?561). Sapporo, Japan: Association for 
Computational Linguistics  
Rayson, P. (2003). Matrix: A statistical method and 
software tool for linguistic analysis through corpus 
comparison. Unpublished doctoral thesis, Lancaster 
University, Lancaster. 
Richmond, V. P., & McCroskey, J. C. (1995). 
Immediacy. In Nonverbal Behavior in Interpersonal 
Relations (pp. 195-217). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 
Schegloff, E. A., & Sacks, H. (1973). Opening up 
closings. Semiotica, 8, 289-327. 
Stronks, B., Nijholt, A., van der Vet, P., & Heylen, D. 
(2002). Designing for friendship: Becoming friends 
with your ECA. Proceedings of the Embodied 
conversational agents - let's specify and evaluate 
them! (pp. 91-97). Bologna, Italy: ACM Press. 
Tartaro, A., & Cassell, J. (2006, August 28 - September 
1). Authorable virtual peers for autism spectrum 
disorders. Proceedings of the Combined workshop 
on Language-Enabled Educational Technology and 
Development and Evaluation for Robust Spoken 
Dialogue Systems at the 17th European Conference 
on Artificial Intellegence. Riva Del Garda, Italy. 
Tickle-Degnen, L., & Rosenthal, R. (1990). The nature 
of rapport and its nonverbal correlates. 
Psychological Inquiry, 1(4), 285-293. 
Traum, D. R. (1994). A Computational Theory of 
Grounding in Natural Language Conversation. 
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY. 
Traum, D. R., & Dillenbourg, P. (1998). Towards a 
Normative Model of Grounding in Collaboration. 
Proceedings of the ESSLLI-98 workshop on Mutual 
Knowledge, Common Ground and Public 
Information. Saarbrucken, Germany. 
Welji, H., & Duncan, S. (2005). Collaboration and 
Narration: The role of shared knowledge in the 
speech and gesture production of friends and 
strangers. Paper presented at the International 
Society of Gesture Studies Conference. Lyon, France. 
50
