Towards an Intelligent Multilingual Keyboard System
Tanapong Potipiti, Virach Sornlertlamvanich, Kanokwut Thanadkran
National Electronics and Computer Technology Center,
National Science and Technology Development Agency,
 Ministry of Science and Technology Environment,
22nd Floor Gypsum Metropolitan Tower 539/2 Sriayudhya Rd. Rajthevi Bangkok 10400 Thailand
Email: tanapong@nectec.or.th, virach@nectec.or.th, kanokwutt@notes.nectec.or.th
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes a practical approach employing n-gram
models and error-correction rules for Thai key prediction and
Thai-English language identification. The paper also proposes
rule-reduction algorithm applying mutual information to reduce
the error-correction rules. Our algorithm reported more than
99% accuracy in both language identification and key
prediction.
1 INTRODUCTION
For Thai users, there are always two annoyances while typing
Thai-English bilingual documents, which are usual for Thais.
The first is when the users want to switch from typing Thai to
English, they have to input a special key to tell the operating
system to change the language mode. Further, if the language-
switching key is ignored, they have to delete the token just typed
and re-type that token after language switching. The second is
that Thai has more than 100 alphabets, to input about half of all
Thai characters, the user has to use combinations of two keys
(shift key + another key) to input them. Some of the other Asian
users also have the same problem.
It will be wonderful, if there is a intelligent keyboard
system that is able to perform these two tasks ?switching
language and shifting key? automatically. This paper proposes a
practical solution for these disturbances by applying trigram
character probabilistic model and error-correction rules. To
optimize number of the generated error-correction rules, we
propose a rule reduction approach using mutual information.
More than 99 percent of key prediction accuracy results are
reported.
2 RELATED WORKS
There is only one related work on inputting Chinese words
through 0-9 numpad keys. [8] applied lexical trees and Chinese
word n-grams to word prediction for inputting Chinese
sentences by using digit keys. They reported 94.4% prediction
accuracy. However, they did not deal with automatic language
identification process. The lexical trees they employed required
a large amount of space. Their algorithm is required some
improvement for a practical use.
3 THE APPROACH
3.1 Overview
In the traditional Thai keyboard input system, a key button with
the help of language-switching key and the shift key can output
4 different characters. For example, in the Thai keyboard the ?a?-
key button can represent 4 different characters in different
modes as shown in Table 1.
Table 1: A key button can represent different characters in
different modes.
English Mode
without Shift
English Mode
with Shift
Thai Mode
without Shift
Thai Mode
with Shift
?a? ?A? ??? ???
However, using NLP technique, the Thai-English
keyboard system which can predict the key users intend to type
without the language-selection key and the shift key, should be
efficiently implemented. We propose an intelligent keyboard
system to solve this problem and have implemented with
successful result.
To solve this problem, there are basically two steps:
language identification and Thai key prediction. Figure 1 shows
how the system works.
                     Figure 1: How the System Works
3.2 Language Identification
The following example illustrates the disturbance of language
switching. In the Thai input mode, typing a word ?language?
will result ???g????. It is certain that the user has to delete
sequence ???g???? and then switches to the English mode before
retyping the key sequence to get the correct result of ?language?.
Language
Identification
Key Input
Thai Key
Prediction
O utput
Eng
Yes
Thai
Therefore an intelligent system to perform language switching
automatically is helpful in eliminating the annoyance.
In general, different languages are not typed
connectedly without spaces between them. The language-
identification process starts when a non-space character is typed
after a space. Many works in language identification, [3] and [5],
have claimed that the n-gram model gives a high accuracy on
language identification. After trying both trigrams and bigrams,
we found that bigrams were superior.  We then compare the
following bigram probability of each language.
Tprob = 





?
=
+
P
L
LL7
..S
Eprob = 





?
=
+
P
L
LL(
..S
where

7
S is the probability of the bi-gram key buttons
 considered in Thai texts.
 K is the key button considered.

(
S is the probability of the bi-gram key buttons
considered in English texts.
Tprob is the probability of the considered key-button
 sequence to be Thai.
Eprob is the probability of the considered key-button
sequence to be English.
m is the number of the leftmost characters of the token
considered. (See more details in the experiment.)
The language being inputted is identified by
comparing the key sequence probability. The language will be
identified as Thai if Tprob > Eprob and vice versa.
3.3 Key Prediction without Using Shift Key
for Thai Input
3.3.1 Trigram Key Prediction
The trigram model is selected to apply for the Thai key
prediction. The problem of the Thai key prediction can be
defined as:
__PD[DUJ



LLLLL
Q
L
FFF
F.SFFFS
Q
=
?=?
where
? is the sequence of characters that maximizes the
    character string  sequence  probability,
c is the possible input character for the key button
   K,
 K is the key button,
n is the length of the token considered.
3.3.2 Error Correction for Thai Key Prediction
In some cases of Thai character sequence, the trigram model
fails to predict the correct key. To correct these errors, the error-
correction rules proposed by [1] and [2] is employed.
3.3.2.1 Error-correction Rule Extraction
After applying trigram prediction to the training corpus are
considered to prepare the error correction rule. The left and right
three keys input around each error character and the correct
pattern corresponding with the error will be collected as an
error-correction pattern. For example, if the input key sequence
?glik[lkl9in? is predicted as ???????????r?, where the correct
prediction is ???????????r?. The string ?ik[lkl9? is then collected as
an error sequence and ???????? is collected as the correct pattern
to amend the error.
3.3.2.2 Rule Reduction
In the process of collecting the patterns, there are a lot of
redundant patterns collected. For example, patterns no.1-3 in
Table 2 should be reduced to pattern 4. To reduce the number of
rules, left mutual information and right mutual information ([7])
are employed. When all patterns are shortened, the duplicate
patterns are then eliminated in the final.
Table 2: Error-Correction Rule Reduction
Pattern
No.
Error Key Sequences Correct Patterns
1. k[lkl9
??????
2. mpklkl9
???????
3. kkklkl9
???????
4. lkl9
????
Left mutual information (Lm) and right mutual
information (Rm) are the statistics used to shorten the patterns.
Lm and right Rm are defined as follows.
)()(
)()(
zpxp
zxp
zxLm
y
yy = ,
)()(
)()(
zpxp
zxp
zxRm
y
yy = ,
where
xyz is the pattern being considered,
x is the leftmost character of xyz,
y is the middle substring of xyz,
z is the rightmost character of xyz,
p( ) is the probability function.
Training Corpus
Trigram Prediction Model
Errors from Trigram
Prediction
Error-Correction Rules
Figure 2: Error-Correction Rule Extraction
The pattern-shortening rules are as follows.
1) If the Rm(xyz) is  less than 1.20 then pattern xyz is reduced
to xy.
2) Similarly, If the Lm(xyz) is  less than 1.20 then pattern xyz
is reduced to yz.
3) Rules 1 and 2 are applied recursively until the considered
pattern cannot be shortened anymore.
After all patterns are shortened, the following rules are applied
to eliminate the redundant patterns.
1) All duplicate rules are unified.
2) The rules that contribute less 0.2 per cent of error corrections
are eliminated.
3.3.3 Applying Error-correction Rules
There are three steps in applying the error-correction rules:
1) Search the error patterns in the text being typed.
2) Replace the error patterns with the correct patterns.
3) If there are more than one pattern matched, the longest
pattern will be selected.
In order to optimize the speed of error-correction processing and
correct the error in the real time, the finite-automata pattern
matching ([4] and [6]) is applied to search error sequences.  We
constructed an automaton for each pattern, then merge these
automata into one as illustrated in Figure 3.
4. EXPERIMENTS
4.1 Language Identification
To create an artificial corpus to test the automatic
language switching, 10,000 random words from an English
dictionary and 10,000 random words from a Thai dictionary are
selected to build a corpus for language identification experiment.
All characters in the test corpus are converted to their mapping
characters of the same key button in normal mode (no shift key
applied) without applying the language-switching key. For
example, character ???, ??? and ?a? will be converted to ?a?. For
the language identification, we employ the key-button bi-grams
extracted As a conclusion the first 6 characters of the token are
enough to yield a high accuracy on English-Thai language
identification.
Table 3: The Accuracy of Thai-English Language
Identification
m (the number of the first
characters to be considered)
Identification Accuracy
(%)
3
4
5
6
7
94.27
97.06
98.16
99.10
99.11
4.2 Thai Key Prediction
4.2.1 Corpus Information
The sizes of training and test sets applied to our key prediction
algorithm are 25 MB and 5 MB respectively. The table below
shows the percentage of shift and unshift alphabets used in the
corpora.
Table 4: Information on Alphabets Used in Corpus
Training Corpus
(%)
Test Corpus
(%)
Unshift Alphabets 88.63 88.95
Shift Alphabets 11.37 11.05
Figure 3: The Example of Constructing and
Merging Automata
0 1 2 3
G
N L
(i) The automaton for patterntGNLu
0 1 2 3
L
N G
(ii) The automaton for patterntLNGu
(iii) Merging automata (I) and (ii)
G
1 2 3
L
N
0
G
4 5 6
N L
N
N
Figure 4: The Error-Correction Process
Key Input
F in ite Autom ata
term inal s tate?
Correction
N
Y
4.2.2 Thai Key Prediction with Trigram
Because the Thai language has no word boundary, we trained
the trigram model from a 25-MB Thai corpus instead of a word
list from a dictionary as in the language identification. The
trigram model was tested on another 5-MB corpus (the test set).
Similarly, a typing situation without applying shift key was
simulated for the test. The result is shown in Table 4.
    Table 5: Thai Key Prediction Using Trigram Model
Training Corpus Test Corpus
93.11 92.21
4.2.3 Error-correction Rules
From the errors of trigram key prediction when applied to the
training corpus, about 12,000 error-correction rules are extracted
and then reduced to 1,500. These error-correction rules are
applied to the result of key prediction. The results are shown in
the table below.
Table 6: The Accuracy of Key Prediction Using Trigram
Model and Applying Error-correction Rules
Prediction
Accuracy from
Training Corpus
(%)
Prediction Accuracy
from Test Corpus
(%)
Trigram Prediction 93.11 92.21
Trigram Prediction
+ Error Correction
99.53 99.42
5 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have applied trigram model and error-
correction rules for intelligent Thai key prediction and English-
Thai language identification. The result of the experiment shows
the high accuracy of more than 99 percent accuracy, which is
very impressive.  Through this system typing is much more
easier and enjoyable for Thais. This technique is expected to be
able to apply to other Asian languages. Our future work is to
apply the algorithm to mobile phones, handheld devices and
multilingual input systems.
REFERENCES
[1] Brill, E. (1997) Automatic Rule Acquisition for Spelling
 Correction. ICML.
[2] Brill, E. (1993) A Corpus-Based Approach to Language
Learning. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.
[3] Cavnar, W. (1994) N-gram Based Text Categorization.
 Proceedings of the Third Annual
 Symposium on Document Analysis and Information
 Retrieval, pp.161-169.
[4] Cormen, T., Leiserson, C. and Rivest, R. (1990)
 Introduction to Algorithms, MIT Press
[5] Kikui, G. (1998) Identifying the Coding System and
 Language of On-line Documents on the Internet.
 Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on
 Computational Linguistics, pp. 652-657.
[6] Knuth, D., Morris J., and Pratt V. (1977) Fast pattern
matching in strings. SIAM Journal on Computing.  6(2),
pp.323-350.
[7] Sornlertlamvanich, V., Potipiti, T., and Charoenporn, T.
 (2000) Automatic Corpus-Based Thai Word Extraction with
 the C4.5 Machine Learning Algorithm. The Proceedings of
 the 18th International Conference on Computational
 Linguistics,  pp. 802-807.
[8] Zheng, F., Wu, J. and Wu, W. (2000) Input Chinese
 Sentences Using Digits. The Proceedings of the
 6th International Conference on Spoken Language
 Processing, vol. 3, pp. 127-130.
