Automatic Extraction of Semantic Relations from Specialized Corpora 
Ar i s tomenis  Thanopou los ,  N ikos  Fakotak is  and  George  Kokk inak is  
Wire Communications Laboratory 
Electrical & Computer Engineering Dept., University of  Patras 
26500 Rion, Patras, Greece 
aristom@wcl, ee. upatras.gr 
Abstract 
In this paper we address the problem of 
discovering word semantic similarities via 
statistical processing of text corpora. We 
propose a knowledge-poor method that 
exploits the sentencial context of words for 
extracting similarity relations between them 
as well as semantic in nature word clusters. 
The approach aims at full portability across 
domains and languages and therefore is 
based on minimal resources. 
1 Motivation 
Providing digital computers with the capability to 
acquire conceptual relations between lexical items 
by processing real-life text corpora is not only an 
exciting research activity but also a significant 
task in the framework of many NLP systems. 
Specifically: 
1. State-of-the-art Language Modeling techniques 
(McMahon and Smith., 1996) require lexical 
intbrmation about word classes. 
2. Thesauri creation in a (semi-) automatic manner 
in any domain and language with minimal 
dependence on specialized tools and resources 
is very important. Most thematic domains 
today in most of the languages lack semantic 
resources. Adopting a knowledge-poor corpus- 
based method not only much less labor is 
necessary in construction of conceptual 
structures but also domain-dependent semantic 
relations are obtained. New resources can be 
readily created in new domains or existing 
thesauri can be enlarged or refined by re- 
training on larger corpora as soon as they 
become available. 
3. Many currently implemented, both spoken and 
written, NLP systems operate in a specific 
domain and usually utilize a constrained 
vocabulary related directly to their task 
domain. Therefore semantic domain-dependent 
knowledge can be acquired directly from 
relevant corpora. 
4. Autonomous computational intelligence should 
rely mainly on processing of tree flow 
electronic texts for acquiring new semantic and 
world knowledge. 
The present approach aims at corpus-based 
automatic extraction of domain-dependent 
semantic similarity relations between lexical items 
and the formation of corresponding semantic 
clusters. For this purpose, the usage of readily 
available domain-specific text corpora is 
imperative. The guideline of our approach was the 
adaptation to the special characteristics of this 
type of corpora (specialization, restricted size) 
without imposing the need for other domain- 
dependent resources and obtaining portability 
across languages. 
2 Related work 
Three main approaches have been proposed for 
the automatic extraction of lexical semantics 
knowledge: syntax-based, n-gram-based and 
window-based. Syntax-based methods (referred 
also as knowledge-rich in contrast to the others -
knowledge-poor methods) (Pereira and Thishby, 
1992; Grefenstette, 1993; Li and Abe, 1997) 
represent the words under consideration asvectors 
containing statistic values of their syntactic 
properties in relation to a given set of words (e.g. 
statistics of object syntax relations referring to a 
set of verbs) and cluster the considered words 
according to similarity of the corresponding 
vectors. Methods that use bigrams (Brown et al, 
1992) or trigrams (Martin et al, 1998) cluster 
words considering as a word's context he one or 
two immediately adjacent words and employ as 
clustering criteria the minimal loss of average 
836 
nmtual information and the perplexity 
improvement respectively. Such methods are 
oriented to language modeling and aim primarily 
at rough but fast clustering of large vocabularies. 
Brown et al (1992) also proposed a window 
method introducing the concept of "semantic 
stickiness" of two words as the relatively frequent 
close occurrence between them (less than 500 
words distance). Although this is an efficient and 
entirely knowledge-poor method tbr extracting 
both semantic relations and clusters, the extracted 
relations are not restricted to semantic similarity 
but extend on thematic roles. Moreover its 
applicability to small and specialized corpora is 
uncertain. 
3 A knowledge-poor approach 
In order to achieve portability we approach the 
issue from a knowledge-poor perspective. Syntax- 
based methods employ partial parsers which 
require highly language-dependent resources 
(morphological/grammatical analysis), and/or 
properly tagged training corpus in order to detect 
syntactic relations between sentence constituents. 
On the other hand, n-gram methods operate on 
large corpora and, in order to reduce 
computational resources, consider as context 
words only the immediately adjacent ones. 
Medium-distance word context is not exploited. 
Since large corpora are available only for few 
domains we aimed at developing a method for 
processing small or medium sized corpora 
exploiting the most of contextual information, that 
is, the tifll sentential context of words. Our 
approach was driven by the observation that in 
domain-constrained corpora, unlike fiction or 
general journalese, the vocabulary is limited, the 
syntactic structures are not complex and that 
medium-distance lexical patterns are frequently 
used to express imilar facts. 
Specifically we have developed two different 
algorithms in respect o the context consideration 
they employ: Word-based and Pattern-based. The 
former acquires word-based contextual data 
(extended up to sentence boundaries), according to 
the distributional similarity of which, word 
similarity relations are extracted. The latter detects 
common patterns throughout he corpus that 
indicate possible word similarities. For example, 
consider the sentence fragments: 
"...while the S&I' index inched up 0.3%." 
"The DAX #Mex inched up O. 70 point to close..." 
Although their syntactic structures are different, 
the common contextual pattern (appearing beyond 
immediately adjacent words) indicates a possible 
similarity between the tokens 'S&P' and 'DAX'. 
Word pairs that persistently appear such context 
similarity throughout the corpus (frequently 
observed in technical texts) are confidently 
indicated as semantically similar. Our method 
captures such context similarity and extracts a 
proportionate measure about semantic similarity 
between lexical items. 
Most approaches (Brown et al, 1992; Li & Abe, 
1997) inherently extract semantic knowledge in 
the abstracted form of semantic clusters. Our 
method produces emantic similarity relations as 
an intermediate (and information-richer) 
semantics representation formalism, from which 
cluster hierarchies can be generated. Of great 
importance is that soft clustering methods can also 
be applied to this set of relations and cluster 
polysemous words to more than one classes. 
Stock lnarket-financial news and Modem Greek, 
were used as domain and language test case 
respectively, ltowever demonstrative xamples 
taken from the WSJ corpus have been used 
throughout the paper as well. 
4 Context Similarity Estimation 
The main idea supporting context-based word 
clustering is that two words that can substitute one 
another in several different contexts always 
providing meaningful word sequences are 
probably semantically similar. Present n-gram 
based methods utilize this assumption considering 
as a context of a focus word only the one or two 
immediately adjacent parameter words. 
In the present work, we consider as word context 
the whole sentence in which the examined word 
appears, excluding only the semantically empty 
(i.e. functional) words such as articles, 
conjunctions, particles, auxiliaries. Adopting this 
word context notion we proceed to tile ibllowing 
analysis: 
Let us consider a text corpus Tc with vocabulary 
Vc and Vs _c Vc the set of words that are of interest 
in extracting semantic similarity relations between 
them. Vx comprises the non-functional words of 
837 
Vc appearing in Tc with a frequency higher than a 
threshold (set to 20 in the presented experiments) 
in order to acquire sufficient data for every focus 
word. Let Vr_~ Vc be the set of words that will be 
used as context parameters. Ideally, any word 
appearing at least twice in the corpus could be 
used as context parameter. However we specified 
this word frequency threshold to 10 in order to 
diminish computational time. Consider a sentence 
of Tc: 
Sm= WI,W2,..-,Wj-I,Wj,Wj+I,...,Wk 
We define as sentential context o fw~ in S,,, the set 
of the pairs of the sentence words which are 
members of Vp, accompanied by their 
corresponding distance from wj: 
Cs.,(wi)= {( i - j ,w~), i=l . .k,( i  ~j),  Vw~ e VI, } 
Equation (1): Sentential context of wi in S,,, 
More formally, Cs,.(wi) can be represented as a 
binary-valued matrix defined over the set 
~t =Sxo)  where 8={ -l,l,-2,2,...,-Lm,Lm}, Lm 
being the maximum word distance we regard that 
carries useful contextual information (for full 
sentence distance Lm=Lma~-I where L,,,x the 
maximum sentence length in Tc), and o~ the 
ordered set Vs: 
Cs,,, (wi) = {ci,,, (d, w)}, where: 
de&wE~ 
cj,,.(d,w)=J'l, w=wj ,w i cco, d=i - j  (2) 
0, otherwise 
Summing over all corpus sentences we obtain the 
contextual data matrices for every wj c V s : 
(w/) : {cj (d, w)} = C,,, (w j) (s) 
de6, we0) m 
The word semantic similarity estimation has been 
reduced to matrices similarity estimation. The 
obtained contextual matrices are compared using a 
weighted Tanimoto measure (Chamiak, 1993) and 
a word similarity measure S,.(wl,wj) is obtained: 
ZE\ [h (d) "  ci(d,w)" cj(d,w)l 
d w 
Sm(wi,wj) = ZEmax{c i  (d,w), cj(d,w)} (4) 
d w 
The weight function h(d) defines the desired 
influence that the distance between words should 
have to context similarity estimation. In this 
experiment we set: h(d)=l/ld I. In order to reduce 
computational time the denominator was set to 
ZEc i (d ,w)+ZZc j (d ,w) ,  a modification 
d w d w 
that has minimal effect on the final result. 
Experimental results of this method (Word-based 
Context Similarity Es t imat ion -  WCSE), are 
shown in Table 1. Note that, since the Cfc,(wj) 
matrix is sparse, (l) was used as data storing 
formula instead of (2), in order to diminish 
computational cost. 
The previously described algorithm is handling all 
contextual data in a uniform way. However, study 
of the results showed that preference should be 
given to hits derived from many different similar 
contexts instead of few ones appearing many 
tilnes. This would clearly give better esults since 
the latter case may be due to often-used 
stereotyped expressions or repeated ~3cts. In order 
to achieve this we modified (4) to: 
ZZ\ [h (d) "  log2 \[ci (d,w) ? cj (d,w)~ 
d w 
d w d w 
Indeed the experimental results of this variation 
(Variant WCSE - VWCSE) show a significant 
improvement (see Table 1 ). 
5 Dynamic pattern detection for 
context similarity estimation 
In the previously described method the notion of 
word context is based on independent intra- 
sentential word co-occurrences. Itowever 
similarity of contextual patterns is much more 
reliable word similarity criterion than word-based 
context similarity. That is, if the sentential 
contexts Cs,,,(w~) and Cs,(w/) have at least two 
common elements, we count this as a much more 
confident hit regarding the wi and w.i similarity. A 
measure expressing the weight of the common 
pattern is obtained. Since the patterns under 
detection vary across languages and domains we 
need a method that extracts them dynamically, 
regardless of the text genre, domain or language. 
For this purpose we propose an algorithm that 
performs a sentence-by-sentence comparison 
along the corpus. This comparison is based on the 
838 
cross-correlation concept as it is used in digital 
signal processing. A sentence can be considered as 
a digital signal where every semantic token 
corresponds to a signal sample. In order to detect 
words with common contexts every sentence is 
checked on matching every other one partially (i.e. 
matching the semantic ategory of one or more 
tokens) on every possible relative position 
between the two sentences. Wherever colnmon 
patterns of semantic tokens are lbund the 
neighboring respective tokens on the two 
sentences are stored as candidate semantic 
relatives. 
During this process contextual data are not 
maintained in memory; instead the detection of a 
common pattern in both sentences results to the 
storage of several hits (i.e. candidate silnilar word 
pairs) or to the increase of their corresponding 
similarity measure according to the pattern 
similarity ot'their contexts. 
Let Sm and S, be two sentences that undergo the 
cross-correlation procedure. If 8~={dx, x=l..xl, 
xl>l }, is the set of word distances that satisfy the 
equality: ci,,, , (d, ,  Wy) = c./.,, (d,-, Wy ) = 1, then the 
pair (wi,wi) is stored as a hit accompanied by the 
l'ollowing context similarity measure: 
.v 1 .v 1 
Keeping only the first term we obtain the same 
result as in the WCSE method with weight 
function h(d) =l/\]d\[. The second term augments the 
score in proportion to the cohesion and the size o1' 
the: detected pattern depending on the position of 
wi (or, equivalently, wi). I)ividing (6) by the total 
length of S,,, and S. (i.e. 1~.,,, =L,c?I.,, ) we obtain a 
normalized measure of the cross-correlation f the 
two sentences: 
1,,,,,, (lv,, w.i ) 
F ",,,,,, (u,,, ~,j) : (7) 
L 
I I I l l  
The total similarity measure is obtained from: 
(8) 
m n~n 
applied throughout the corpus. 
In order to reduce search thne and required 
memory during the whole process a pruning 
mechanism is applied at regular time intervals to 
eliminate word pairs with a relatively very low 
semantic similarity score. 
Dividing (8) by the product of the word 
probabilities P(wi)-P(wi) we obtain the normalized 
similarity measure FN(Wl,Wj). 
in order to constrain the degradation of our results 
due to sparse data regarding less frequent words, 
we multiply (8) by Pc, a data sufficiency measure 
function of P(wi) and P(wi) , obtaining Fu, a more 
reliable measure, ltere we employed: 
. r ,  J' < 
1' c(P, 1')= -1~ ' 1~. ./ (9) 
C 1 , otherwise 
where we used PTI,=30/ITcl, ITcl being the size of 
the corpus. 
Finally, sorting the resulting pairs by Fu and 
keeping the N-best scoring pairs, we obtain the 
preponderant semantically related candidates. 
6 Preprocessing 
In order to apply the above described algorithms 
some preprocessing is necessalT: 
1. A trainable sentence splitter and a rule-based 
chunker are applied. Sentence boundaries confine 
the scope of context while phrase boundaries 
determine the nmximunl extent of semantic tokens 
(see below). 
2. The next step of the preprocessing is what we 
call "xemantic lokenizalion". We try to reduce 
context parameters and simultaneously to 
incerease the volulne of contextual data either by 
reducing the volume of both the focus and 
parameter word set or by discaring or merging 
lexical items resulting in reduction of the distance 
between semantic tokens. Words or word 
sequences are thus classified in common semantic 
categories employing syntactical, morphological 
and coltocational intbrmation: 
a.Functionals (auxiliaries, determiners) are 
discarded since they do not modit) semantically 
their head words. Words of indeterminable 
semantic content (pronouns, low fi'equency 
words) are treated as empty tokens. 
b.Known domain-independent lexical patterns 
incorporating arithmetic and temporal 
839 
expressions (e.g. dates, numbers, amounts, etc.) 
are regarded as a single semantic token and 
tagged accordingly. Their information content is 
indifferent o semantic kmowledge acquisition; 
therefore we preserve only class information. 
c.Frequently appearing lexical patterns which 
represent single semantic entities in the specific 
domain are treated as a single (albeit composite) 
"semantic token". Their detection is based on 
the following algorithm (cf. Smadja, 1993): 
1. Extract "significant bigrams" confined inside 
noun phrases i.e. immediately adjacent words 
that contain a relatively high amount of 
nmtual information: 
I ......... ; (w. ,w2)= log 2 P(w 'w2) (10) 
P(w t )P(w 2 ) 
2. Combine significant bigrams together to 
obtain "significant n-grams" found in the 
corpus and confined inside noun phrases as 
well. Discard subsumed m-grams (re<n) only 
if they do not occur indepentently in the 
corpus. 
3. Tag throughout the corpus the significant n- 
grams as single semantic tokens, starting 
from the higher-order ones. 
Semantic entities that are lexically represented 
as sticky word chains may be either standard - 
in the framework of the information extraction 
task - named entities, such as "Latin America" 
(location), "Russian president Boris Yeltsin" 
(person), "Tpdne~a Mct~c6ovk%-Qpdmlg" 
("Bank of Macedonia and Thrace"; 
organization) or representations of donmin- 
specific typical events ("Gt6~qm 1 tm'coztKo6 
Keq)c0~cdon" = rise of equity capital), abstract 
concepts ("Dow Jones industrials"), etc. To 
ensure that the detected "sticky" phrases actually 
represent semantic entities, human inspection is 
necessary for discarding the spurious ones, since 
repeated word sequences that do not constitute 
always single semantic entities often appear in 
specialized texts. 
From the above it is apparent that we use the term 
"semantic token" to refer to a recognized semantic 
pattern (e.g. <date>), a rigid word chain (e.g. 
"Dow Jones industrials') or a single content 
word. The context similarity estimation algorithms 
were run using vocabularies of focus and 
parameter words derived from the extracted set of 
semantic tokens. 
7 Incorporating heuristics 
From the study of the erroneously extracted 
semantic relations certain systematic errors were 
detected. For example, adjectives, adverbs or 
adjunctive nouns that occur interpolating in 
otherwise similar contexts lead to the extraction of 
spurious pairs. Consider ~br example the phrases: 
"11 c~6~qml "nlg ztgl\]g "Cllg J~v~ixrll~" (= the increase 
of the benzine price) and "11 c~6~qcn 1 zqg "cqa\]g 
~d0~31mlg zqg \[~cv~iwl?' (=the increase of the 
di,sposal benzine price). Every algorithm based on 
word adjacency data outputs as erroneous hits the 
pairs {benzine-disposal} nd { increase-disposal}. 
A rule that was applied to deal with this problem 
is: 
If wiGS m and wjGSn have s imi lar  
contexts,  count the pair (wi,w j) as 
a hit on ly  if wi~wj+3 and wj~wi+1. 
Such contextual rules can be applied only using 
the cross-correlation method for the context 
similarity estimation (either pattern-based or 
word-based). 
8 Word Clustering 
Although the obtained semantically related N-best 
pair list constitutes already a thesaurus-like and 
information-rich form of semantic knowledge 
representation, many NLP applications (e.g. 
language modeling) require word clusters instead 
of word relations. However, since a word 
similarity measure has been extracted, the 
formation of clusters is a rather trivial problem, 
although more complex for "soft clustering" (i.e. a 
word can be classified in more than one classes). 
In order to construct word classes we applied the 
unsupervised agglomerative hard clustering 
algorithn3 shown in Figure 1 over the set of 
senmntic relations. Each distinct lexical item is 
initially assigned to a cluster and then clusters are 
merged into larger ones according to the average 
linkage measure. Merging of clusters tops when 
the distance between the more proximate clusters 
exceeds a threshold proportional to the average 
distance between words. Tracking the successive 
merges we obtain sub-cluster hierarchies, uch as 
the one shown in l<igure 2. 
840 
Repeat until mJn(AvgDis tance  (C / ,C  I ) ) > k . . . .  
for every  c lus ter  C:~ 
for  every  c lus ter  Ca@CT 
ca lcu la te  AvgDJs tance(C ; ,C \ [  ) : : -  
merge C',, Arg Inin (AvgDis tall c'e(C'.i,(\]l)) 
C,/ 
1 Z distance(w i, w j) 
Ivsl 2 v,,,,.,,,,~,, 
1 . Z distance(w ,wj) 
Figure 1 : Unsupervised Itard Clustering Algorithm 
9 Experimental Results 
The reported experinaents have been carried out on 
a 220.000 words corpus, comprised o1' financial 
news of 1998, which was constructed in the 
framework of a currently carried out R&D project 
for Information Extraction from raw text ~. 
The methods and their variations described in 
sections 4 and 5 for obtaining lexical senmntic 
relations were tested and their accuracy per 
nurnber of best hits was measured by hunmn 
inspection. The VWCSE method was tested using 
only the previous and next word as context 
parameters (N&P method), to sketch a method 
baseline lbr the particular corpus. Using a 
Morphological Analyzer & Part-of Speech tagger 
to restrict semantic relations only between words 
of the same Part-of-Speech (PoS) we obtain 
apparently higher accuracy, though we loose some 
interesting verb - noun pairs referring to the same 
action or condition, e.g. (mOiOqKc (=increased) 
and dvogo.q (=increment). The results indicate that 
the norlnalization factors indeed iinprove the 
accuracy of the methods and that context 
similarity detection based on dynamic pattern- 
matching yields significantly more reliable results 
than the word-based method. This demonstrates 
the importance of the cross-correlation algorithm, 
which is the only suitable tbr pattern-based 
context similarity detection. 
Regarding the clustering procedure, a set of 1300 
words was clustered to 84 hierarchically 
structured clusters. Considering an interested 
cluster formed (Figure 2) we note that from the 18 
lexical entities (words or rigid phrases) that 
constitute the cluster all but two refer to money 
1 Project "M1TOS" of the Greek General Sec|'etariat lbr 
Reseach and Technology 
investment o1' profit. Froln the vocabulary subject 
to clustering 4 words belonging to the same class 
were not detected; therefore accuracy and recall 
for the specific cluster were found at 88.9% and 
80% respectively. 
Although comparision with other knowledge-poor 
methods would be very useful it was not realized, 
nminly because our method produces semantic 
relations while other methods produce semantic 
clusters and our clustering process is not yet 
elaborated enough to yield quality results. 
Lexical ltem English TransL 
Kox'~o)d0)v outlays/g 
capilals 
_ w~ot6tl m l\] ui d i t ) , /~___  
cxcx'66ocl~ investments 
cn~:x'~ocn 1 investment 
*xpoTpd\[qtct'ro ~ program/g 
~kLmv &ltmo\[oo state stocks/g 
oltoLd,/(0v income bonds/g 
c.wdwo)v_yptqt\[tat\[ow time notes/g 
~q\[tt?~ losses 
K{;p& 1 profits 
KfvmO~:oclc; deposils 
~q~u(ov losses/g 
a(0Lqcmt~ purchases 
co680w incomes/g 
~c~o&t incomes 
m)vcO, Lfty?~ dealings 
*o6\[t~ctoq contract 
Figure 2: A derived sample hierarchial cluster of 
lexieal entities ('/g' denotes genitive case) 
841 
METHOD 
N&P 
WCSE 
VWCSE 
CCPM 
CCPM-N 
CCPM-N-F 
CCPM-N-F-Pc 
PoS & 
VWCSE 
CCPM 
CCPM-N 
CCPM-N-F 
CCPM-N-F-Pc 
Precision (%) per number of 
best hits 
100 1200 1300 1400 
64 61 57.7 54.75 
72 65.5 61.7 57 
81 7O 66 62.5 
74 59 54 50.5 
89 81.5 70.3 63 
90 80.5 72.7 67.25 
93 82 71.3 66.75 
86 80 75 67.5 
86 77.5 68 59.5 
93 88 79 74 
95 88.5 83 77 
97 89 82.7 77 
N&P: Context = next and previous word 
WCSE: every word into the sentence is
taken as context parameter venly - Eq.(4) 
VWCSE: contextual similarity variance 
is favored - Eq.(5) 
CCPM: Dynamic Pattern-Matching 
based on Cross-Correlation - Eq. (6)&(8) 
CCPM-N: normalized by L ..... (7)&(8) 
CCPM-N-F: normalized by P(wi)' P(wj) 
CCPM-N-F-Pc: normalized by Pc, Eq.(9) 
Table I: Comparative Results and Explanation Memo 
10 Conclusion 
Initiating from the conception of word similarity 
estimation in terms of context similarity we have 
proposed an approach with several variations for 
extracting semantic similarity relations 
betweenlexical entities by processing word 
adjacency data obtained from small or medium 
sized corpora. The described cross-correlation 
procedure, offers the possibility to dynamically 
detect pattern context similarities offering strong 
evidence for semantic similarity. The presented 
algorithm featureslanguage and domain 
portability and the ability to classify keywords 
irrespective of their grammatical characteristics. 
The implementation of the soft clustering 
algorithm, the test of the method to a different 
domain and language and the quantified 
comparison with other kamwledge-poor methods 
are quite interesting matters belonging to future 
work. 
References 
Brown P.F., DellaPietra V.J., DeSouza P.V., Lai 
J.C., Mercer R.L.: Class-Based n-gram Models 
of Natural Language. Computational 
Linguistics, 18(4): pp. 467-479, 1992. 
Chamiak E.: Statistical Language Learning. The 
M1T Press, 1993. 
Grefenstette, G.: SEXTANT." Extracting 
Semantics fromRaw Text: Implementation 
Details. The Journal of Knowledge Engineering, 
1993. 
Li H., Abe N.: Clustering Words with the MDL 
Principle. Journal of Natural Language 
Processing v.4, n.2, 1997. 
Martin S., Liermann J., Ney i1.: Algorithms for 
bigram and trigram word clustering. Speech 
Communication 24, pp. 19-37, 1998. 
McMahon J.G., Smith F.J.: Improving Statistical 
Language Model Pelformance with 
Automatically Generated Word Ilierarchies. 
Computational Linguistics, 22(2) 1996. 
Pereira F., Tishby N.: Distributional SimilariO~, 
Phrase Transitions and Itierarchical Clustering. 
In Working Notes, Fall Symposium Series. 
AAAI pp.108-112, 1992. 
Smadja F.: Retrieving Collocations from text: 
Xtract. Computational Linguistics, 19(1): pp. 
143-177, 1993. 
842 
