Cluster Stopping Rules for Word Sense Discrimination 
Guergana Savova, Terry Therneau and Christopher Chute, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA 
[Savova.Guergana;therneau;chute]@mayo.edu
Abstract
As text data becomes plentiful, unsuper-
vised methods for Word Sense Disam-
biguation (WSD) become more viable. A 
problem encountered in applying WSD 
methods is finding the exact number of 
senses an ambiguity has in a training cor-
pus collected in an automated manner. 
That number is not known a priori; rather 
it needs to be determined based on the 
data itself. We address that problem us-
ing cluster stopping methods. Such tech-
niques have not previously applied to 
WSD. We implement the methods of 
Calinski and Harabasz (1975) and Harti-
gan (1975) and our adaptation of the Gap 
statistic (Tibshirani, Walter and Hastie, 
2001). For evaluation, we use the WSD 
Test Set from the National Library of 
Medicine, whose sense inventory is the 
Unified Medical Language System. The 
best accuracy for selecting the correct 
number of clusters is 0.60 with the C&H 
method. Our error analysis shows that the 
cluster stopping methods make finer-
grained sense distinctions by creating ad-
ditional clusters. The highest F-scores 
(82.89), indicative of the quality of clus-
ter membership assignment, are compa-
rable to the baseline majority sense 
(82.63) and point to a path towards accu-
racy improvement via additional cluster 
pruning. The importance and significance 
of the current work is in applying cluster 
stopping rules to WSD. 
1 Introduction 
The dominant approach in word sense disam-
biguation (WSD) is based on supervised learning 
from manually sense-tagged text. While this is 
effective, it is quite difficult to get a sufficient 
number of manually sense-tagged examples to 
train a system. Mihalcea (2003) estimates that 
80-person years of annotation would be needed 
to create training corpora for 20,000 ambiguous 
English words, given 500 instances per word. 
For that reason, we are developing unsupervised 
knowledge-lean methods that avoid the bottle-
necks created by sense-tagged text. Unsupervised 
clustering methods utilize only raw corpora as 
their source of information, and there are grow-
ing amounts of general and specialized domain 
corpora available, e.g. biomedical domain cor-
pora.
Improvements in WSD methods would be of 
immediate value in indexing and retrievals of 
biomedical text given the explosion of biomedi-
cal literature as well as the rapid deployment of 
electronic medical records. Semantic/conceptual 
indexing and retrieval in that domain is often 
done in regard to the Unified Medical Language 
System (UMLS) developed at the National Li-
brary of Medicine (NLM) at the United States 
National Institutes of Health (NIH)1. It is impor-
tant to understand that the UMLS is significantly 
different than a dictionary, which is often the 
source of the sense inventory. Rather, the UMLS 
integrates more than 100 medical domain con-
trolled vocabularies such as SNOMED-CT2 and 
the International Classification of Diseases 
(ICD)3. UMLS has three main components. The 
first component, the Metathesaurus, includes all 
terms from the controlled vocabularies and is 
organized by concept, which is a cluster of terms 
representing the same meaning. Each concept is 
assigned a concept unique identifier (CUI), 
which is inherited by each term in the cluster. 
UMLS-based semantic indexing is based on CUI 
assignments. The second component, the Seman-
tic Network, groups the concepts into 134 types 
of categories and indicates the relationships be-
tween them. The Semantic Network is a coarse 
ontology of the concepts. The third component, 
the SPECIALIST lexicon, contains syntactic in-
formation for the Metathesaurus terms. 
1 http://www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/factsheets/umls.html
2 http://www.snomed.org/ 
3 http://www.who.int/classifications/help/icdfaq/en/
9
MeSH, an ontology within UMLS, is heavily 
used for indexing biomedical scientific publica-
tions, e.g. Medline4. Hospitals, medical practices 
and biomedical research increasingly rely on the 
UMLS, or a subset ontology within it, to index 
and retrieve relevant information. It is estimated 
that approximately 7400 UMLS terms map to 
multiple concepts which creates ambiguity 
(Weeber, Mork and Aronson., 2001). Term am-
biguity has been pointed out to be one of the ma-
jor challenges for UMLS-based semantic index-
ing and retrieval (Weeber et al, 2001). For ex-
ample, ?cold? has the following six UMLS 
meanings, each with its own UMLS CUI: cold 
temperature, common cold, cold sensation, cold 
therapy, chronic obstructive lung disease 
(COLD), and Cold brand of chlorpheniramine-
phenylpropanolamine.  
The problem we are addressing in this paper is 
discovering the number of senses an ambiguous 
word has in a given corpus, which is a compo-
nent within a completely unsupervised WSD sys-
tem. For example, if a corpus of 1000 instances 
containing the word ?cold? has been compiled 
from patients medical records, how many ?cold? 
senses are in that corpus? This is a challenge any 
NLP system implementing WSD faces. To ad-
dress this problem, we apply cluster stopping 
rules in an automated way. 
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
overviews the related work on cluster stopping 
rules. Section 3 outlines our methods, tools, fea-
tures selection, test set and evaluation metrics. 
Section 4 presents the results and discusses them. 
Section 5 is the conclusions. 
2 Background and Related Work 
Our work is based on cluster analysis. Cluster 
analysis is often performed to discover the 
groups that the data naturally fall into. The num-
ber of groups is not known a priori; rather, it 
needs to be determined based on the data itself. 
Such methods or ?cluster stopping rules? usually 
rely on within-cluster dissimilarity/error (W(k))
metrics which in general exhibit a decline when 
the number of clusters increases. Splitting a natu-
ral group into subgroups reduces the criterion 
less than when well-separated clusters are dis-
covered. In those cases, the W(k) will not have a 
sharp decline as the instances are close. This 
phenomenon has been described in statistical 
literature as the ?elbow? effect as illustrated in 
4 http://www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/factsheets/medline.html
Figure 1. Methods for locating the ?elbow have 
been the goal of many research studies (Hartigan, 
1975; Calinski and Harabasz, 1975; Milligan and 
Cooper, 1987; Tibshirani, Walter and Hastie, 
2001 among many). 
Milligan and Cooper (1985) offer the most 
comprehensive comparative study of the per-
formance of 30 stopping rules. They carry out 
their study on ?mildly truncated data from multi-
variate normal distributions, and one would not 
expect their ranking of the set of stopping rules 
to be reproduced exactly if a different cluster-
generating strategy were adopted.? (Gordon, 
1999, p. 61). The five rules which were the top 
performance in the Milligan and Cooper study  
are Calinski and Harabasz (1974) a.k.a. C&H, 
Goodman and Kruskal (1954), C index (Hubert 
and Schultz, 1976), Duda and Hart (1973) and 
Beale (1969). Tibshirani et al (2001) introduce 
the Gap statistic and compare its performance to 
the methods of Calinski and Harabasz (1974), 
Krzanowski and Lai (1985), Hartigan (1975), 
and the Silhouette method (Kaufman and 
Rousseeuw, 1990). On the simulated and DNA 
microarray data Tibshirani and colleagues used 
for their experiments, the Gap statistic yields the 
best result. 
In general, stopping rules fall into two catego-
ries ? global and local (Gordon, 1999; Tibshirani 
et al, 2001). Global rules take into account a 
combination of within-cluster and between-
cluster similarity measures over the entire data. 
Global rules choose such k where that combined 
metric is optimal. Global rules, however, in most 
cases do not work for k=1, that is they do not 
make predictions of when the data should not be 
partitioned at all. Global rules look at the entire 
data over k number of clusters. Local rules, on 
the other hand, are based only on a given k solu-
tion or individual pairs of clusters and test 
whether they should be grouped together. They 
need a threshold value or a significance level, 
which depends on the specific data and in most 
cases have to be empirically determined. 
3 Methodology
3.1 Overview
In this study, we explore three cluster stopping 
methods as applied to unsupervised WSD ? Har-
tigan (1975), Calinski and Harabasz (1974), and 
the Gap statistic (Tibshirani et al, 2001). The 
data to be clustered is instances of context sur-
rounding each ambiguity. Each instance is con-
verted into a feature vector where the features are 
10
ngrams (unigrams or bigrams) and each cell is 
the frequency of occurrence of a unigram or bi-
gram or the log-likelihood of a bigram occurring
in that particular instance after applying a feature
selection method. The clustering algorithm for 
this set of experiments is agglomerative cluster-
ing (see Section 3.5 for a more detailed descrip-
tion).
Our goal is to group contexts into separate
clusters based on the underlying sense of the am-
biguous word. Thus, the observations are con-
texts and the features are the identified lexical 
features (i.e. significant word(s)) that represent
the contexts. Our observed data matrix generally
shows the following characteristics ?
1) it is discrete
2) it is high dimensional/multivariate
3) it can be real valued or integer, or binary
4) it is sparse; while the number of features
can be in few hundreds, contexts have a length 
limit (ignoring the commonly occurring ?closed
class words? like ?the?, ?an?, ?on? etc.) 
5) it represents a distribution of contexts that
is generally skewed.
Following is our motivation for choosing the 
three cluster stopping rules. Hartigan (1975) and
Calinski and Harabasz (1974) have been consis-
tently used as baselines in a number of studies, 
e.g. Tibshirani et al (2001). The Hartigan
method is computationally simple and efficient
and unlike C&H, it is defined for k=1. The C&H 
method was ranked the top among 30 stopping
rules in the comprehensive study conducted by
Milligan and Cooper (1975). The Gap statistic 
(Tibshirani et al, 2001) is a fairly recent method
that has gained popularity by showing excellent
results when applied to the bio domain, e.g. clus-
tering DNA mircoarray data. None of the meth-
ods, however, have been applied or adapted to
WSD.
3.2 Calinski and Harabasz (1975) Method
The C&H method is reported to perform the best 
among 30 stopping rules (Milligan and Cooper, 
1985). C&H is a global method. The Variance
Ratio Criteria C&H uses is 
kn
kWGSS
k
kBGSS
kVRC

 )(1
)(
)(
where BGSS (between group sum of squares) is
the sum of the dispersions between the k cluster
centroids and the general centroid; WGSS
(within-group sum of squares) is the sum of each
cluster?s dispersion of its cluster members
(measured by the sum of squared distances be-
tween each member and the cluster centroid) 
weighed by the number of cluster members; k is 
the number of clusters and n is the number of 
instances. The distance used is the Euclidean dis-
tance. As Calinski and Harabasz point out, VRC
?is analogous to the F-statistic in univariate 
analysis? (Calinski and Harabasz, 1975, p. 10).
C&H seeks to maximize VRC.
3.3 Hartigan (1975) Method 
Hartigan (1975) proposes a cluster stopping rule: 
)1(1
)1(
)()( ??
???
?  knkWGSS
kWGSSkH
where n is the total number of instances to be 
clustered, k is the number of clusters and
WGSS(k) is the total sum of squared distances of
cluster members from their cluster centroid in all 
clusters when clustered in k clusters. 
H(k) is used to decide when k+1 clusters are
needed rather than k clusters. Its distribution ap-
proximates the F distribution. A large value of 
H(k) would indicate that the addition of a cluster 
is warranted. Hartigan suggests that as a crude 
rule of thumb, values exceeding 10 justify in-
creasing the number of clusters from k to k+1 
(Hartigan, 1975, p. 91). Thus, a solution is the 
smallest k ? 1 such that H(k) ? 10. The method
can return 1 cluster as the optimal solution. Har-
tigan (1975) is a local method.
3.4 Gap Statistic Method 
In general, the ?gap? method compares the dif-
ference/gap between the within-cluster disper-
sion measure for the observed distribution and
that for an appropriate null distribution of the
data. Tibshirani and colleagues (Tibshirani et al, 
2001) start with the assumption of a single clus-
ter null model which is to be rejected in favor of 
a k-component model (k>1) if the observed data 
supports it. Tibshirani and colleagues use a uni-
form distribution as the null distribution of the
data to standardize the comparison between all
the W(k) over the various values of k where W(k)
is the pooled within cluster sum of squares 
around the cluster means (distance is squared 
Euclidean distance).  The uniform distribution is
the least favorable distribution and the most
likely to produce spurious clusters. However,
11
Tibshirani and colleagues also point out that the 
choice of an appropriate null distribution de-
pends on the data. Tibshirani and colleagues
compare the curve of log(W(k)) to the log(W*(k))
curve obtained from the reference uniformly dis-
tributed over the data. The estimated optimal
number of clusters is the k value where the gap 
between the two curves is the largest. Figure 1 is
an example of log(W(k)) to the log(W*(k)) curves
used in the computation of the Gap statistic. 
The two main advantages of the Gap statistic 
over various previously proposed ?stopping
rules? are its ability to work with data created by
almost any type of clustering and its ability to 
accurately estimate the optimal number of clus-
ters even for data that naturally falls into just one 
cluster. The Gap statistic is an application of pa-
rametric bootstrap methods to the clustering
problem. Unlike non-parametric methods, para-
metric techniques represent the observed data 
distribution. The basic strategy is to create multi-
ple random data sets over the observed distribu-
tion for which there are no clusters, apply the 
chosen clustering method to them, and tabulate 
the apparent decrease in within-cluster variation 
that ensues.  This gives a measure of optimism
with which to compare the clustering of the ob-
served data. 
The complete methodology can be broadly
classified into two important components namely
the reference distribution and the algorithm
which uses the reference distribution. We de-
scribe each of the two components below.
Figure 1: The functions log(W(k)) (observed) 
and log(W*(k)) (reference) used for computing 
the Gap statistic 
Reference Distribution Generation for an 
NLP Task
Here, we describe how we extend the generation
of the reference distribution over the observed
data to retain the characteristics mentioned at end
of section 3.1. We will use the observed data
shown in Table 1 as a running example. To simu-
late the structure of the observed data, the fol-
lowing features are to be emulated:
(a) Context length is the number of features 
that can occur in a context. Contexts can be sen-
tences, paragraphs, entire documents or just any
specified window size. In general, the number of
available features will be at least in the hundreds,
however, only a few might occur in a given con-
text, especially if the context is limited to the 
sentence the target ambiguity occurs in. Addi-
tionally, context length is influenced by the fea-
ture selection method ? if only very frequent 
lexical units are retained as features, then only 
those units will represent the context. Thus, a
context length could be very small compared to
the size of the feature set. In the example from
Table 1, context length is captured by the row 
marginals, e.g. the context length for Context1 is 
3, which means that overall there are only three
features for that context. 
(b) Sparsity is a consequence of relatively
small context length. Currently, our assumption
is that contexts are derived from small discourse 
units (sentences or abstracts at the most). For 
bigger discourse units, e.g. several paragraphs or
entire documents, our proposed generation of the 
reference distribution should be modified to re-
flect feature occurrences over those units. In the 
example from Table 1, for instance in Context1, 
there are 3 features that are present ? Feature1,
Feature4 and Feature5 ? the rest are absent.
Sparsity can be viewed as the number of ab-
sent/zero-valued features for each row. 
(c) Feature distribution is the frequency of oc-
currence of each feature across all contexts. It is 
captured by the column marginals of the ob-
served data matrix. For example, in Table 1 Fea-
ture1 occurs twice over the entire data; similarly
Feature2 occurs twice and so on. Feature distri-
bution can be viewed as the number of occur-
rences of each feature in the entire corpus. 
Now we describe how we do the reference
generation to stay faithful to the characteristics
described above. We use the uniform and the 
proportional methods. The uniform method gen-
erates data that realizes (a) and (b) characteristics
of the data and is the used originally in Tibshi-
rani et al (2001). The proportional method cap-
tures (a), (b), and (c) and is our adaptation of the 
Gap method.
The data is constructed as follows. To retain
the context lengths of the observed data in the
12
Feature1 Feature2 Feature3 Feature4 Feature5 ?FeatureP Total number of
non-zero value cells
Context1 1 0 0 1 1 ??? 3
Context2 0 1 1 0 1 ??? 3
Context3 1 0 0 0 1 ??? 2
Context4 0 1 1 1 1 ??? 4
?ContextN ??? ??? ??? ??? ??? ??? ???
2 2 2 2 4 ??? 12
Table 1: Observed data (sample)
reference data, the row marginals of the refer-
ence data are fixed to be equal to those of the 
observed data. In Table 1, the row marginals for 
the reference data will be {3, 3, 2, 4}. Carrying
the observed marginals to the reference data ap-
plies to both the uniform and proportional meth-
ods. Note that currently we fix only the row mar-
ginals. Due to the current assumption of binary
feature frequency, the generated reference data is 
binary too and this is true for both methods.
The main difference between the uniform
and proportional methods lies in whether the fea-
ture distribution is maintained in the simulation.
The uniform method does not weigh the features; 
rather, all features are given equal probability of 
occurring in the generated data. A uniform ran-
dom number r over the range [1, featureSetSize]
is drawn. The cell corresponding to the rth col-
umn (i.e. feature) in the current row under con-
sideration (i.e. context) is assigned ?1?. For ex-
ample, in our running example let?s say we are 
generating reference data for the 3rd row from
Table 1. We first generate a random number over 
the range [1, p]. Let?s assume that the generated
number is 4. Then, the cell [3, 4] is assigned
value ?1?. This procedure is repeated twice since
the row marginal for this row of the reference
data is 2. The proportional method factors in the
distribution of the column marginals of the ob-
served data while generating the random data. 
Unlike the uniform method, it takes into account 
the weight of each feature. In other words, the 
features by their frequency assign themselves a
range. For example, the features in the Table 1
will be assigned the following ranges: Feature1 -
[1, 2]; Feature2 - [3, 4]; Feature3 ? [5, 6]; Fea-
ture4 ? [7, 8]; Feature5 ? [9, 12]. A random
number is generated over the range [1, total
number of feature occurrences]. For the data in
Table 1, a random number is generated over the 
range [1, 12]. The feature corresponding to the 
range in which the random number falls is as-
signed ?1?. For example, if we are generating the 
reference for Context3 and the generated random
number over the range [1, 12] is 5, then a look-
up determines that 5 falls in the range for Fea-
ture3. Hence, the cell in Context3 corresponding
to Feature3 is assigned ?1?. Similar to the uni-
form method we would repeat this procedure 
twice to achieve the row marginal total of 2. 
Currently we proceed with the binary refer-
ence data created by the procedure described
above. Note that this binary reference matrix can 
be converted to a strength-of-association matrix
by multiplying it with a diagonal matrix that con-
tains the strength-of-association scores, e.g. log 
likelihood ratio, Mutual Information, Pointwise
mutual information, Chi-squared to name a few. 
Algorithm
The complete algorithm of the Gap Statistics 
which the reference distribution is a part of is: 
1.Cluster the observed data, varying the total 
number of clusters from k = 1, 2, ?., K, giving
within dispersion measures W(k), k = 1, 2, 
?.K.
2.Generate B reference datasets using the uni-
form or the proportional methods as described
above, and cluster each one giving within dis-
persion measures W*(kb), b = 1, 2, ? B, k = 
1, 2,? K. Compute the estimated Gap statistic:
))(log())(*log()/1()( kWkbWBkGap
b
6 
3. Let ? 
B
kbWBl ))(*log()/1( , compute the stan-
dard deviation
2/12]))(*(log()/1[()( lkbWBksd
B
 ?  and define
Bksdks /11)()(  . Finally choose the number of
clusters via 
)1()1()(_? t kskGapkGapuchThatsmallestKsk
The final step is the criterion for selecting the 
optimal k value. It says to choose the smallest k
value for which the gap is greater than the gap
for the earlier k value by the significance test of
?one standard error?. The ?one standard error?
calculations are modified to account for the
simulation error. Tibshirani and colleagues also
advise to use a multiplier to the s(k) for better 
rejection of the null hypothesis.
13
3.5 Tools, Feature Selection and Method
Parameters
rus strings (Weeber et al, 2001). Each ambiguity
has 100 manually sense-tagged instances. All
instances were randomly chosen from Medline 
abstracts. Each ambiguity instance is provided
with the sentence it occurred in and the Medline 
abstract text it was derived from. The senses for
every ambiguity are the UMLS senses plus a
?none of the above? category which captures all 
instances not fitting the available UMLS senses. 
For feature representation, selection, context rep-
resentation and clustering, we used Sense-
Clusters0.69 (http://senseclusters.sourceforge.net). It 
offers a variety of lexical features (ngrams, col-
locations, etc.) and feature selection methods 
(frequency, log likelihood, etc.). The contexts 
can then be represented with those features in
vector space using first or second order vectors 
which are then clustered. A detailed description
can be found in Purandare and Pedersen (2004)
and http://www.d.umn.edu/~tpederse/senseclusters.html.
SenseClusters links to CLUTO for the clustering
part (http://www-users.cs.umn.edu/~karypis/
cluto/download.html). CLUTO implements in a
fast and efficient way the main clustering algo-
rithms ? agglomerative, partitional and repeated
bisections.
For the current study, we modified the NLM
WSD by excluding instances sense-tagged with 
the ?none of the above? category. This is moti-
vated by the fact that that category is a catch-all
category for all senses that do not fit the current
UMLS inventory. First, we excluded words 
whose majority category was ?none of the 
above?. Secondly, from the instances of the re-
maining words, we removed those marked with 
?none of the above?. That subset of the original 
NLM WSD set we refer to as the ?modified
NLM WSD set? (Table 2).We chose the following methods for featurerepresentation and selection. Method1 uses bi-
grams as features, average link clustering in 
similarity space and the abstract as the context to 
derive the features from. The method is de-
scribed in Purandare and Pedersen (2004). It is 
based on first order context vectors, which repre-
sent features that occur in that context. A similar-
ity matrix is clustered using the average link ag-
glomerative method. Purandare and Pedersen
(2004) report that this method generally per-
formed better where there was a reasonably large
amount of data available (i.e., several thousand 
contexts). The application of that method to the 
biomedical domain is described in a technical
report (Savova, Pedersen, Kulkarni and Puran-
dare, 2005). Method2 uses unigrams which occur 
at least 5 times in the corpus. The context is the 
abstract. The choice of those features is moti-
vated by Joshi, Pedersen and Maclin (2005)
study which achieves best results with unigram
features.
3.7 Evaluation
Our evaluation of the performance of the cluster
stopping rules is two-fold. Accuracy is a direct
evaluation measuring the correctly recognized
number of senses:
words with correctly predicted number of senses
    all words 
Accuracy evaluates how well the methods dis-
cover the exact number of senses in the test cor-
pus. The F-score of the WSD is an indirect
evaluation for the quality of the cluster assign-
ment:
callecision?
callecision)(?scoreF
RePr2
RePr12_

 
Precision is the number of correctly clustered
instances divided by the number of clustered in-
stances; Recall is the number of correctly clus-
tered instances divided by all instances. There
may be some number of contexts that the cluster-
ing algorithm declines to process, which leads to 
the difference in precision and recall. 
For the Hartigan cluster stopping method, the
threshold is set to 10 which is the recommenda-
tion in the original algorithm. For the Gap cluster 
stopping method, we experiment with B=100, 
and the uniform and proportional reference gen-
eration methods. Our baseline is a simple clustering algorithm that
assigns all instances of a target word to a single
cluster.
3.6 Test Set
Our test set is the NLM WSD5 set which com-
prises 5000 disambiguated instances for 50 
highly frequent ambiguous UMLS Metathesau-
4 Results and Discussion
Table 3 presents the results for the three methods
5http://wsd.nlm.nih.gov/Restricted/Reviewed_Results/index.
shtml
14
Word, instances, senses after removal 
of ?none of the above? sense 
Word, instances, senses after removal 
of ?none of the above? sense 
Word, instances, senses after re-
moval of ?none of the above? sense 
Adjustment, 93, 3 Frequency, 94, 1 Radiation, 98, 2 
Blood pressure, 100, 3 Growth, 100, 2 Repair, 68, 2 
Cold, 95, 4 Immunosuppression, 100, 2 Scale, 65, 1 
Condition, 92, 2 Implantation, 98, 2 Secretion, 100, 1 
Culture, 100, 2 Inhibition, 99, 2 Sex, 100, 3 
Degree, 65, 2 Japanese, 79, 2 Single, 100, 2 
Depression, 85, 1 Ganglion, 100, 2 Strains, 93, 2 
Determination, 79, 1 Glucose, 100, 2 Surgery, 100, 2 
Discharge, 75, 2 Man, 92, 4 Transient, 100, 2 
Energy, 100, 2 Mole, 84, 2 Transport, 94, 2 
Evaluation, 100, 2 Mosaic, 97, 2 Ultrasound, 100, 2 
Extraction, 87, 2 Nutrition, 89, 4 Variation, 100, 2 
Fat, 73, 2 Pathology, 99, 2 White, 90, 2 
Fluid, 100, 1 Pressure, 96, 1 
Table 2: Modified NLM WSD set 
In terms of accuracy (Table 3, column 3), the 
C&H method has the best results (p<0.01 with t-
test). Note that the modified NLM WSD set con-
tains seven words with one sense ? depression, 
pressure, determination, fluid, frequency, scale, 
secretion ? for which the C&H method is at a 
disadvantage as it cannot return one cluster solu-
tion.
In terms of predicted number of senses (Table 
3, column 5), the Hartigan method tends to un-
derestimate the number of senses (overcluster), 
thus making coarser sense distinctions. The 
adapted Gap and C&H methods tend to overes-
timate them (undercluster), thus making finer 
grained sense distinctions. 
In terms of cluster member assignment as 
demonstrated by the F-scores (Table 3, column 
4), our adapted Gap method and the Hartigan 
method perform better than the C&H method 
(p<0.05 with t-test). The Hartigan method F-
scores  along with Gap uniform with Method 1 
feature selection are not significantly different 
from the baseline (p>0.05 with t-test); the rest 
are significantly lower than the majority sense 
baseline (p<0.05 with t-test). 
The high F-scores point to a path for improv-
ing accuracy results. Singleton clusters could be 
pruned as they could be insignificant to sense 
discrimination. As it was pointed out, the best 
performing algorithms (C&H and Gap propor-
tional) tend to create too many clusters (Table 3, 
column 5). Another way of dealing with single-
ton or smaller clusters is to present them for hu-
man review as they might represent new sense 
distinctions not included in the sense inventory. 
One explanation for the performance of the 
stopping rules (overclustering in particular) 
might be that some senses are very similar, e.g. 
?cold temperature? and ?cold sensation? for the 
?cold? ambiguity in instances like ?Her feet are 
cold.? Another explanation is that the stopping 
rules rely on the clustering algorithm used. In our 
current study, the experiments were run with 
only agglomerative clustering as implemented in 
CLUTO. The distance measure that we used is 
Euclidean distance, which is only one of many 
choices. Yet another explanation is in the feature 
sets we experimented with. They performed very 
similarly on both the accuracy and F-scores. Fu-
ture work we plan to do is aimed at experiment-
ing with different features, clustering algorithms, 
distance measures as well as applying Singular 
Value Decomposition (SVD) to the reference 
distribution matrix for our adapted Gap method. 
We are actively pursuing reference generation 
with fixed column and row marginals. The work 
of Pedersen, Kayaalp and Bruce (1996) uses this 
technique to find significant lexical relationships. 
They use the CoCo (Badsberg, 1995) package 
which implements the Patefield (1981) algorithm 
for I x J tables. Another venue is in the combina-
tion of several stopping rules which will take 
advantage of each rule?s strengths. Yet another 
component that needs to be addressed towards 
the path of completely automated WSD is cluster 
labeling.
5 Conclusions
In this work, we explored the problem of discov-
ering the number of the senses in a given target 
ambiguity corpus by studying three cluster stop-
ping rules. We implemented the original algo-
rithms of Calinski and Harabasz (1975) and Har-
tigan (1975) and adapted the reference genera-
tion of the Gap algorithm (Tibshirani et al, 
2001) to our task. The best accuracy for selecting 
the correct number of clusters is 0.60 with the
15
Feature 
Selection 
Stopping Rule Accuracy F-score                                  
(baseline majority sense = 82.63) 
Average number of senses (true 
average number of senses = 2.19) 
Method1 C&H 0.49 80.71 2.90 (overestimates) 
Hartigan 0.10 82.15 1.27 (underestimates) 
Gap (uniform) 0.02 82.00 1.49 (underestimates)     
Gap (proportional) 0.24 81.31 2.51 (overestimates) 
Method2 C&H 0.60 80.27 3.36 (overestimates) 
Hartigan 0.02 82.89 1.10 (underestimates) 
Gap (uniform) 0.05 81.63 2.44 (overestimates) 
Gap (proportional) 0.12 81.15 2.59 (overestimates) 
Table 3: Results ? accuracy, F-score and predicted average number of sense 
C&H method. Our error analysis shows that the 
cluster stopping methods make finer-grained 
sense distinctions by creating additional single-
ton clusters. The F-scores, indicative of the qual-
ity of cluster membership assignment, are in the 
80?s and point to a path towards accuracy im-
provement via additional cluster pruning. 
Acknowledgements 
The Perl modules of our implementations of the 
algorithms can be downloaded from 
http://search.cpan.org/dist/Statistics-CalinskiHarabasz/,
http://search.cpan.org/dist/Statistics-Hartigan/,
http://search.cpan.org/dist/Statistics-Gap/. We are 
greatly indebted to Anagha Kulkarni and Ted 
Pedersen for their participation in this research. 
We would also like to thank Patrick Duffy, 
James Buntrock and Philip Ogren for their sup-
port and collegial feedback, and the Mayo Clinic 
for funding the work.  
References 
A. D. Gordon. 1999. Classification (Second Edition). 
Chapman & Hall, London 
A. Purandare and T. Pedersen. 2004. Word Sense 
Discrimination by Clustering Contexts in Vector 
and Similarity Spaces. Proceedings of the Confer-
ence on Computational Natural Language Learning 
(CoNLL): 41-48, May 6-7, 2004, Boston, MA 
E. M.L. Beale.  1969. Euclidean cluster analysis. Bul-
letin of the International Statistical Institute:92?94, 
1969 
G. Savova, T. Pedersen, A. Kulkarni and A. Puran-
dare. 2005. Resolving Ambiguities in the Biomedi-
cal Domain. Technical Report. Minnesota Super-
computing Institute. 
G. W. Milligan and M.C. Cooper. 1985. An examina-
tion of procedures for determining the number of 
clusters in a data set. Psychometrika 50:159-179. 
J. H. Badsberg. 1995. An environment for graphical 
models. PhD dissertation, Aalborg University. 
J. Hartigan. 1975. Clustering Algorithms, Wiley, New 
York. 
L. A. Goodman and W.H. Kruskal. 1954. Measures of 
association for cross classifications. J. of Amer. 
Stat. Assoc., 49:732--764, 1954.
L. Hubert and J. Schultz. 1976. Quadratic assignment 
as a general data-analysis strategy. British Journal 
of Mathematical and Statistical Psychologie. 
29:190-241 
L. Kaufman and P. Rowsseeuw. 1990. Finding groups 
in data: an introduction to cluster analysis. New 
York. Wiley. 
M. Joshi, T. Pedersen and R. Maclin. 2005. A com-
parative study of support vector machines applied 
to the supervised word sense disambiguation prob-
lem in the medical domain. IICAI. India. 
M. Weeber, J. Mork and A. Aronson. 2001. Develop-
ing a test collection for biomedical word sense dis-
ambiguation. Proc. AMIA 
R. B. Calinski and J. Harabasz. 1974. A dendrite 
method for cluster analysis. Communications in 
statistics 3:1-27. 
R. Mihalcea. 2003. The role of non-ambiguous words 
in natural language disambiguation. RANLP-2003, 
Borovetz, Bulgaria 
R. O. Duda and P. E. Hart. 1973. Pattern Classifica-
tion and Scene Analysis. Wiley, New York, 1973
R. Tibshirani, G. Walther and T. Hastie. 2001. Esti-
mating the number of clusters in a dataset via the 
Gap statistic. Journal of the Royal Statistics Soci-
ety (Series B). 
T. Pedersen, M. Kayaalp and R. Bruce. 1996. Signifi-
cant lexical relationships. Proc. of the 13th National 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, August 1996, 
Portland, Oregon. 
W. J. Krzanowski and Y. T. Lai. 1985. A criterion for 
determining the number of groups in a data set us-
ing the sum of squares clustering. Biometrics 
44:23-34. 
W. Patefield. 1981. An efficient method of generating 
random R x C tables with given row and column 
totals. Applied Statistics 30:91-97. 
16
