Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Building and Using Parallel Texts, pages 129?132,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?Association for Computational Linguistics, 2005
PORTAGE: A Phrase-based Machine Translation System 
 
Fatiha Sadat+, Howard Johnson++, Akakpo Agbago+, George Foster+,               
Roland Kuhn+, Joel Martin++ and Aaron Tikuisis?
 
+ NRC Institute for Information 
Technology 
101 St-Jean-Bosco Street  
Gatineau, QC K1A 0R6, Canada 
++ NRC Institute for Information 
Technology 
1200 Montreal Road  
Ottawa, ON K1A 0R6, Canada 
?University of Waterloo 
200 University Avenue W., 
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada 
 
firstname.lastname@cnrc-nrc.gc.ca aptikuis@uwaterloo.ca  
 
Abstract 
This paper describes the participation of 
the Portage team at NRC Canada in the 
shared task1 of ACL 2005 Workshop on 
Building and Using Parallel Texts. We dis-
cuss Portage, a statistical phrase-based 
machine translation system, and present 
experimental results on the four language 
pairs of the shared task. First, we focus on 
the French-English task using multiple re-
sources and techniques. Then we describe 
our contribution on the Finnish-English, 
Spanish-English and German-English lan-
guage pairs using the provided data for the 
shared task.  
1 Introduction 
The rapid growth of the Internet has led to a rapid 
growth in the need for information exchange among 
different languages. Machine Translation (MT) and 
related technologies have become essential to the 
information flow between speakers of different lan-
guages on the Internet. Statistical Machine Transla-
tion (SMT), a data-driven approach to producing 
translation systems, is becoming a practical solution 
to the longstanding goal of cheap natural language 
processing.  
In this paper, we describe Portage, a statistical 
phrase-based machine translation system, which we 
evaluated on all different language pairs that were 
provided for the shared task.  As Portage is a very 
                                                           
1 http://www.statmt.org/wpt05/mt-shared-task/ 
new system, our main goal in participating in the 
workshop was to test it out on different language 
pairs, and to establish baseline performance for the 
purpose of comparison against other systems and 
against future improvements.  To do this, we used a 
fairly standard configuration for phrase-based SMT, 
described in the next section. 
Of the language pairs in the shared task, French-
English is particularly interesting to us in light of 
Canada?s demographics and policy of official bilin-
gualism. We therefore divided our participation into 
two parts: one stream for French-English and an-
other for Finnish-, German-, and Spanish-English. 
For the French-English stream, we tested the use of 
additional data resources along with hand-coded 
rules for translating numbers and dates. For the 
other streams, we used only the provided resources 
in a purely statistical framework (although we also 
investigated several automatic methods of coping 
with Finnish morphology). 
The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-
lows. Section 2 describes the architecture of the 
Portage system, including its hand-coded rules for 
French-English.  Experimental results for the four 
pairs of languages are reported in Section 3. Section 
4 concludes and gives pointers to future work. 
2 Portage  
Portage operates in three main phases: preprocess-
ing of raw data into tokens, with translation sugges-
tions for some words or phrases generated by rules; 
decoding to produce one or more translation hy-
potheses; and error-driven rescoring to choose the 
best final hypothesis. (A fourth postprocessing 
phase was not needed for the shared task.) 
129
2.1 Preprocessing 
Preprocessing is a necessary first step in order to 
convert raw texts in both source and target lan-
guages into a format suitable for both model train-
ing and decoding (Foster et al, 2003).  For the 
supplied Europarl corpora, we relied on the existing 
segmentation and tokenization, except for French, 
which we manipulated slightly to bring into line 
with our existing conventions (e.g., converting l ? 
an  into l? an).  For the Hansard corpus used to 
supplement our French-English resources (de-
scribed in section 3 below), we used our own 
alignment based on Moore?s algorithm (Moore, 
2002), segmentation, and tokenization procedures. 
Languages with rich morphology are often prob-
lematic for statistical machine translation because 
the available data lacks instances of all possible 
forms of a word to efficiently train a translation sys-
tem. In a language like German, new words can be 
formed by compounding (writing two or more 
words together without a space or a hyphen in be-
tween). Segmentation is a crucial step in preproc-
essing languages such as German and Finnish texts.
In addition to these simple operations, we also 
developed a rule-based component to detect num-
bers and dates in the source text and identify their 
translation in the target text. This component was 
developed on the Hansard corpus, and applied to the 
French-English texts (i.e. Europarl and Hansard), on 
the development data in both languages, and on the 
test data. 
2.2 Decoding 
Decoding is the central phase in SMT, involving a 
search for the hypotheses t that have highest prob-
abilities of being translations of the current source 
sentence s according to a model for P(t|s). Our 
model for P(t|s) is a log-linear combination of four 
main components: one or more trigram language 
models, one or more phrase translation models, a 
distortion model, and a word-length feature. The 
trigram language model is implemented in the 
SRILM toolkit (Stolcke, 2002). The phrase-based 
translation model is similar to the one described in 
(Koehn, 2004), and relies on symmetrized IBM 
model 2 word-alignments for phrase pair induction. 
The distortion model is also very similar to 
Koehn?s, with the exception of a final cost to ac-
count for sentence endings.  
s
To set weights on the components of the log-
linear model, we implemented Och?s algorithm 
(Och, 2003).  This essentially involves generating, 
in an iterative process, a set of nbest translation hy-
potheses that are representative of the entire search 
space for a given set of source sentences. Once this 
is accomplished, a variant of Powell?s algorithm is 
used to find weights that optimize BLEU score 
(Papineni et al 2002) over these hypotheses, com-
pared to reference translations. Unfortunately, our 
implementation of this algorithm converged only 
very slowly to a satisfactory final nbest list, so we 
used two different ad hoc strategies for setting 
weights: choosing the best values encountered dur-
ing
, with the exception of a 
ch as the ability to decode either 
w ards.  
 transla-
 
rent language pairs of the 
sha d t
hared t
- 
 the iterations of Och?s algorithm (French-
English), and a grid search (all other languages).  
To perform the actual translation, we used our 
decoder, Canoe, which implements a dynamic-
programming beam search algorithm based on that 
of Pharaoh (Koehn, 2004). Canoe is input-output 
compatible with Pharaoh
few extensions su
back ards or forw
2.3 Rescoring 
To improve raw output from Canoe, we used a 
rescoring strategy: have Canoe generate a list of 
nbest translations rather than just one, then reorder 
the list using a model trained with Och?s method to 
optimize BLEU score. This is identical to the final 
pass of the algorithm described in the previous sec-
tion, except for the use of a more powerful log-
linear model than would have been feasible to use 
inside the decoder. In addition to the four basic fea-
tures of the initial model, our rescoring model in-
cluded IBM2 model probabilities in both directions 
(i.e., P(s|t) and P(t|s)); and an IBM1-based feature 
designed to detect whether any words in one lan-
guage seemed to be left without satisfactory
tions in the other language. This missing-word
feature was also applied in both directions. 
3 Experiments on the Shared Task 
We conducted experiments and evaluations on 
Portage using the diffe
re ask. The training data was provided for the 
ask as follows:  
Training data of 688,031 sentences in 
French and English. A similarly sized cor-
130
pus is provided for Finnish, Spanish and 
German with matched English translations. 
orpus was used to generate both 
lan
e translations into English, was 
 
 Portage for a comparative study ex-
ploiting and combining different resources and 
tec
 
3. arl corpus 
4. 
rd corpora as training data and 
 
t  mod est  
p icipation at th h-English tas 9.53. 
od D  Decoding+Rescoring
- Development test data of 2,000 sentences in 
the four languages.  
In addition to the provided data, a set of 
6,056,014 sentences extracted from Hansard corpus, 
the official record of Canada?s parliamentary de-
bates, was used in both French and English lan-
guages. This c
guage and translation models for use in decoding 
and rescoring. 
The development test data was split into two 
parts: The first part that includes 1,000 sentences in 
each language with reference translations into Eng-
lish served in the optimization of weights for both 
the decoding and rescoring models. In this study, 
number of n-best lists was set to 1,000. The second 
part, which includes 1,000 sentences in each lan-
guage with referenc
used in the evaluation of the performance of the
translation models. 
3.1 Experiments on the French-English Task 
Our goal for this language pair was to conduct ex-
periments on
hniques:  
1. Method E is based on the Europarl corpus 
as training data, 
2. Method E-H is based on both Europarl and 
Hansard corpora as training data, 
Method E-p is based on the Europ
as training data and parsing numbers and 
dates in the preprocessing phase, 
Method E-H-p is based on both Europarl 
and Hansa
parsing numbers and date in the preprocess-
ing phase. 
Results are shown in Table 1 for the French-
English task. The first column of Table 1 indicates 
the method, the second column gives results for 
decoding with Canoe only, and the third column for 
decoding and rescoring with Canoe. For comparison 
between the four methods, there was an improve-
ment in terms of BLEU scores when using two lan-
guage models and two translation models generated 
from Europarl and Hansard corpora; however, pars-
ing numbers and dates had a negative impact on the
ranslation els. The b  BLEU score for our
art e Frenc k was 2
Meth ecoding
E 27.71 29.22 
E-H 28.71 29.53 
E-p 26.45 28.21 
E-H-p 28.29 28.56 
Ta
ed 
f 
of increased trade within North 
merica but also functions as a good counterpoint 
for French-English. 
 
ble 1. BLEU scores for the French-English test 
sentences  
 
A noteworthy feature of these results is that the 
improvement given by the out-of-domain Hansard 
corpus was very slight. Although we suspect that 
somewhat better performance could have been 
achieved by better weight optimization, this result 
clearly underscores the importance of matching 
training and test domains. A related point is that our 
number and date translation rules actually caused a 
performance drop due to the fact that they were op-
timized for typographical conventions prevalent in 
Hansard, which are quite different from those used 
in Europarl. 
Our best result ranked third in the shared 
WPT05 French-English task , with a difference of 
0.74 in terms of BLEU score from the first rank
participant, and a difference of 0.67 in terms o
BLEU score from the second ranked participant. 
3.2 Experiments on other Pairs of Languages 
The WPT05 workshop provides a good opportunity 
to achieve our benchmarking goals with corpora 
that provide challenging difficulties. German and 
Finnish are languages that make considerable use of 
compounding. Finnish, in addition, has a particu-
larly complex morphology that is organized on 
principles that are quite different from any in Eng-
lish. This results in much longer word forms each of 
which occurs very infrequently. 
Our original intent was to propose a number of pos-
sible statistical approaches to analyzing and split-
ting these word forms and improving our results. 
Since none of these yielded results as good as the 
baseline, we will continue this work until we under-
stand what is really needed. We also care very 
much about translating between French and English 
in Canada and plan to spend a lot of extra effort on 
difficulties that occur in this case. Translation be-
tween Spanish and English is also becoming more 
mportant as a result i
A
131
Language Pair Decoding+Rescoring
Finnish-English 20.95 
German-English 23.21 
Spanish English 29.08 
Ta
and 1.56 in 
m ores, respectively, compared to 
the first ranked participant.   
l 
ation, greater use of morphological 
R
Fr
Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Fr
Statistical Machine Transla-
Ge
id 
Ke
e 
Ki
al Meeting of the Association for Com-
M
ne Trans-
Oc
 of the 40th Annual Meet-
Fr
 Proceedings of 
Ph parl: A multilingual corpusfor 
 P
ation 
Models. In Proceedings of the Association for Ma-
chine Translation in the Americas AMTA 2004. 
ble 2 BLEU scores for the Finnish-English, Ger-
man-English and Spanish-English test sentences  
 
To establish our baseline, the only preprocessing 
we did was lowercasing (using the provided tokeni-
zation). Canoe was run without any special settings, 
although weights for distortion, word penalty, lan-
guage model, and translation model were optimized 
using a grid search, as described above. Rescoring 
was also done, and usually resulted in at least an 
extra BLEU point.  
Our final results are shown in Table 2. Ranks at 
the shared WPT05 Finnish-, German-, and Spanish-
English tasks were assigned as second, third and 
fourth, with differences of 1.06, 1.87 
ter s of BLEU sc
4 Conclusion 
We have reported on our participation in the shared 
task of the ACL 2005 Workshop on Building and 
Using Parallel Texts, conducting evaluations of 
Portage, our statistical machine translation system, 
on all four language pairs. Our best BLEU scores 
for the French-, Finnish-, German-, and Spanish-
English at this stage were 29.5, 20.95, 23.21 and 
29.08, respectively. In total, eleven teams took part 
at the shared task and most of them submitted re-
sults for all pairs of languages.  Our results distin-
guished the NRC team at the third, second, third 
and fourth ranks with slight differences with the 
first ranked participants. 
A major goal of this work was to evaluate Port-
age at its first stage of implementation on different 
pairs of languages. This evaluation has served to 
identify some problems with our system in the areas 
of weight optimization and number and date rules. 
It has also indicated the limits of using out-of-
domain corpora, and the difficulty of morphologi-
cally complex languages like Finnish. 
Current and planned future work includes the 
exploitation of comparable corpora for statistica
machine transl
knowledge, and better features for nbest rescoring. 
eferences 
Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM - an Extensible Language 
Modeling Toolkit. In ICSLP-2002, 901-904. 
anz Josef Och, Hermann Ney. 2000. Improved Statisti-
cal Alignment Models. In Proceedings of the 38th An-
nual 
Linguistics, Hong Kong, China, October 2000, 440-
447. 
anz Josef Och, Daniel Gildea, Sanjeev Khudanpur, 
Anoop Sarkar, Kenji Yamada, Alex Fraser, Shankar 
Kumar, Libin Shen, David Smith, Katherine Eng, 
Viren Jain, Zhen Jin, Dragomir Radev. 2004. A Smor-
gasbord of Features for 
tion. In Proceeding of the HLT/NAACL 2004, 
Boston, MA, May 2004. 
orge Foster, Simona Gandrabur, Philippe Langlais, 
Pierre Plamondon, Graham Russell and Michel Si-
mard. 2003. Statistical Machine Translation: Rap
Development with Limited Resources. In Proceedings 
of MT Summit IX 2003, New Orleans, September.  
vin Knight, Ishwar Chander, Matthew Haines, Va-
sileios Hatzivassiloglou, Eduard Hovy, Masayo Iida, 
Steve K. Luk, Richard Whitney, and Kenji Yamada. 
1995. Filling Knowledge Gaps in a Broad-Coverag
MT System. In Proceedings of the International Joint 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), 1995. 
shore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a Method for Automatic 
Evaluation of Machine Translation. In Proceedings of 
the 40th Annu
putational Linguistics ACL, Philadelphia, July 2002, 
pp. 311-318. 
oore, Robert. 2002. Fast and Accurate Sentence 
Alignment of Bilingual Corpora. In Machine Transla-
tion: From Research to Real Users (Proceedings of the 
5th Conference of the Association for Machi
lation in the Americas, Tiburon, California), Springer-
Verlag, Heidelberg, Germany, pp. 135-244. 
h, F. J. and H. Ney. 2002. Discriminative Training 
and Maximum Entropy Models for Statistical Machine 
Translation. In Proceedings
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 
Philadelphia, pp. 295?302. 
anz Josef Och, 2003. Minimum Error Rate Training 
for Statistical Machine Translation. In
the 41st Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, Sapporo, July. 
ilipp Koehn. 2002. Euro
evaluation of machine translation. Ms., University of 
Southern California. 
hilipp Koehn. 2004. Pharaoh: a Beam Search Decoder 
for Phrase-based Statistical Machine Transl
132
