Using Gene Expression Programming to Construct Sentence Ranking 
Functions for Text Summarization  
Zhuli Xie, Xin Li, Barbara Di Eugenio, 
Peter C. Nelson 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Illinois at Chicago 
Chicago, IL 60607, U.S.A. 
zxie@cs.uic.edu, xli1@cs.uic.edu,  
bdieugen@cs.uic.edu, nelson@cs.uic.edu 
Weimin Xiao, Thomas M. Tirpak 
Physical Realization Research Center of 
Motorola Labs 
Schaumburg, IL 60196, U.S.A. 
awx003@motorola.com, 
T.Tirpak@motorola.com 
  
Abstract 
In this paper, we consider the automatic text 
summarization as a challenging task of ma-
chine learning. We proposed a novel summari-
zation system architecture which employs 
Gene Expression Programming technique as its 
learning mechanism. The preliminary experi-
mental results have shown that our prototype 
system outperforms the baseline systems. 
1 Introduction 
Automatic text summarization has been studied for 
decades (Edmundson 1969) and is still a very active 
area (Salton et al 1994; Kupiec et al 1995; Bran-
dow et al 1995; Lin 1999; Aone et al 1999; Sekine 
and Nobata 2001; Mani 2001; McKeown et al 2001; 
Radev et al 2003). Only a few have tried using ma-
chine learning to accomplish this difficult task (Lin 
1999; Aone et al 1999; Neto et al 2002). Most re-
search falls into combining statistical methods with 
linguistic analysis. We regard the summarization as 
a problem of empowering a machine to learn from 
human-summarized text documents. We employ an 
evolutionary algorithm, Gene Expression Program-
ming (GEP) (Ferreira 2001), as the learning mecha-
nism in our Adaptive Text Summarization (ATS) 
system to learn sentence ranking functions. Even 
though our system generates extractive summaries, 
the sentence ranking function in use differentiates 
ours from that of (Edmundson 1969; Sekine and 
Nobata. 1999; Goldstein et al 1999) who specified it 
to be a linear function of sentence features.  We used 
GEP to generate a sentence ranking function from 
the training data and applied it to the test data, which 
also differs from (Lin 1999) who used decision tree, 
(Aone et al 1999; Kupiec et al 1995) who used 
Bayes?s rule, and (Neto et al 2002) who imple-
mented both Na?ve Bayes and decision tree C4.5. 
This paper presents our approach, details the sys-
tem architecture, and discusses preliminary experi-
mental results. Conclusions and future work are 
outlined at the end. 
2 Background 
2.1 Gene Expression Programming 
Gene Expression Programming (GEP), first intro-
duced by (Ferreira 2001), is an evolutionary algo-
rithm that evolves computer programs and predicts 
mathematical models from experimental data. The 
algorithm is similar to Genetic Programming (GP), 
but uses fixed-length character strings (called chro-
mosomes) to represent computer programs which are 
afterwards expressed as expression trees (ETs). GEP 
begins with a random population of candidate 
solutions in the form of chromosomes. The 
chromosomes are then mapped into ETs, evaluated 
based on a fitness function and selected by fitness to 
reproduce with modification via genetic operations. 
The new generation of solutions goes through the 
same process until the stop condition is satisfied. 
The fittest individual serves as the final solution. 
GEP has been used to solve symbolic regression, 
sequence induction, and classification problems effi-
ciently (Ferreira 2002; Zhou 2003). We utilized GEP 
to find the explicit form of sentence ranking func-
tions for the automatic text summarization. 
2.2 Sentence Features 
In our current system, every sentence s is repre-
sented by five normalized features: 
? Location of the Paragraph (P): 
MYP /=                               (1) 
where M is the total number of paragraphs in a 
document; Y is the index of the paragraph s belongs 
to. 
? Location of the Sentence (S): 
NXS /=                        (2) 
where N is the total number of sentences in the 
paragraph; X is the index of sentence s.   
? Length of the Sentence (L): 
The length of the sentence is the number of words it 
contained, i.e., l(s), normalized by Sigmoid function: 
   
))((
))(()(
,
1
1
slstd
slsl
e
eL
???
? ?=+
?= ?
?
                               (3) 
Where u(l(s)) is the average length of sentences, and 
std(l(s)) is the standard deviation of the sentence 
lengths. 
? Heading Sentence (H): 
H = 1, if s is a title, subtitle or heading, 0 otherwise.   
? Content-word Frequencies (F): 
))((
))(()(,
1
1)(
sCWstd
sCWsCW
e
esF ???
? ?=+
?= ?
?
         (4) 
?
=
??=
k
i
ii swwFreqsCW
1
.)],(log[)(                         (5)                              
where Freq(wi) is the frequency of wi in that docu-
ment; ?(CW(S)) is the mean of all the sentence 
scores, and std(CW(s)) is the standard deviation.  
2.3 Sentence ranking function 
We assume that for a certain type of documents, the 
mechanism to perform summarization would be the 
same. Therefore, we only need to find one algorithm 
that links a collection of documents and their corre-
sponding summaries. We process the text summari-
zation learning task in two stages: training and 
testing.  In the training stage, a set of training docu-
ments with their summaries are provided, and the 
text features are preprocessed using statistical meth-
ods and natural language processing methods as de-
fined in 2.2, then each sentence in a document is 
scored based on a sentence ranking function con-
structed by GEP.  Fitness value of the summariza-
tion task is the similarity between the summary 
produced by the machine and the summarization text 
of training document. The top n ranked sentences1 
                                                          
1 The number of sentences extracted by the GEP module can be 
a variable, which is decided by the required number of words in 
a summary. Or it can be a specified percentage of the total num-
ber of sentences in the document. 
will be returned as the summary of that document 
and presented in their nature order. In the testing 
stage, a different document set is supplied to test the 
similarity between the machine summarized text and 
the human or other system summarized text.   
3 System Architecture 
In addition to the traditional way of extracting the 
highest ranked sentences in a document to compose 
a summary as in (Edmundson 1969; Lin 1999; 
Kupiec et al 1995; Brandow 1995; Zechner 1996), 
we embedded a machine learning mechanism in our 
system. The system architecture is shown in Figure 1 
where the GEP module is highlighted. In the training 
stage, each of the training documents is passed to the 
GEP module after being preprocessed into a set of 
sentence feature vectors. The GEP runs m genera-
tions, and in each generation a population of p sen-
tence scoring functions in the form of chromosomes 
in GEP is generated. Every candidate scoring func-
tion is then applied to sentence feature vectors from 
every training document and produces a score ac-
cordingly.  Then all sentences in the same training 
document are ranked according to their scores, and n 
sentences with top scores are selected as an extract.  
The next step is to measure how similar the extract 
is to the objective summary. As discussed by 
(McLellan et al 2001; Goldstein et al 1999; McKe-
own et al 2001), evaluating the quality of a sum-
mary often requires involvement of human subjects.  
This is almost impractical in a machine learning 
procedure.  Thus we chose an alternative similarity 
measure as the approximation, i.e. a cosine function 
that is often seen in Information Retrieval to calcu-
late the relevance of two documents, to compute the 
similarity between an extract and the objective 
summary. We compute the similarity values for each 
of the obtained extracts and their objective summa-
ries respectively, and feed the results into the Fitness 
Calculation module to get a fitness measure for the 
current candidate sentence ranking function under 
consideration: 
)),(( ii OESimilarityAvgFitness = ,                   (6) 
where Ei is the extract of the i-th document in the 
training set and Oi is its objective summary.  
After the fitness value for every chromosome in 
the current generation is computed, the GEP popula-
tion undergoes all genetic operators to produce the 
next generation. After the specified number of gen-
erations has been reached, the final best chromo-
some is returned as an optimal sentence ranking 
function for the training set and is ready to use in a 
test document to produce an extractive summary.  
4 Experiments 
We randomly selected 60 documents from the 
CMPLG corpus2 for our experiments. The only re-
striction is that each document has an abstract pro-
vided which will serve as the objective summary. 
Among these 60 documents, 50 are used for training 
and the remaining 10 are used for testing. The func-
tion set for the GEP to evolve sentence ranking func-
tions includes (+, -, *, /, power, sqrt, exp, log, min, 
max, and constant 1, 2, 3, 5, 7). The length of the 
chromosome is 128.  Other GEP control parameters 
are set as follows: population, 256; probability of 
crossover, 0.5; probability of mutation, 0.2; prob-
ability of rotation, 0.2; generations, 10,000-50,000 
(in five runs).  Our system has produced a five-
sentence extractive summary for each of the testing 
documents, and calculated the similarity between the 
produced summary and the abstract coming along 
with the document.  
  Ideally, we would like to compare our system with 
other summarizers. However, due to the 
unavailability of other summarization systems to 
perform the same task, we designed three baseline 
methods, namely lead-based, randomly-selected, and 
random-lead-based, to generate summaries for per-
formance comparison, which were also adopted by 
(Brandow et al 1995; Zechner 1996; Radev et al 
2003).  The baseline methods are detailed as 
 
                                                          
2 CMPLG corpus is composed of 183 documents from the Com-
putation and Language (cmp-lg) collection, which has been 
marked up in XML. The documents are scientific papers which 
appeared in association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) 
sponsored conferences. 
follows:  
o The lead-based method selects the first sen-
tences from the first five paragraphs as the 
summary of each of the testing documents.   
o The randomly-selected method chooses five sen-
tences from a document at random to compose a 
summary.  
o The random-lead-based method chooses five 
sentences among the first sentences from all 
paragraphs in the document at random.   
We performed the random selection 1,000 times, 
and calculated the average similarity of the testing 
documents for each of the random-based methods.  
The experimental results are plotted in Figure 2, 
which have demonstrated that our system outper-
forms all three baseline methods.   
Figure 2. Similarity Comparison
0.442
0.279
0.17 0.181
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ATS Lead-based Rand-
selected
Rand-Lead-
based
Syste m
Si
m
ila
ri
ty
 
  One sample sentence scoring function learned by the 
GEP is as follows: 
)3(
7)( +
?=
PF
Ssscore ,                 (7). 
5 Conclusions and Future Work 
In this paper, we have presented a prototype summa-
rization system which employs GEP as its learning 
mechanism for sentence ranking function.  In the 
preliminary experiments for performance testing, 
our system outperforms the baseline methods by 
58%-160% when generating summaries for 10 
documents. However, the value of the average simi-
larity gained by our system is not as high as we 
would like. The reason most likely lies in the fact 
that the styles of the objective summaries written by 
humans vary a lot or even conflict with each other.  
In other words, they do not possess many common 
features that are a must for high value of similarity 
between two texts. Using content-words and the co-
sine function to measure the similarity may not be an 
ideal evaluation metric, neither is it an ideal fitness 
measure in the GEP learning mechanism.  Our future 
           Preprocess
Objective 
Summaries 
Training 
Documents 
GEP 
Generate Scor-
ing Function 
Fitness 
Calculation
Extracts
Test 
Document 
 Post-
process 
Summarizer 
Sentence Scor-
ing Function 
 Extractive  
 Summary 
Figure 1: System Architecture 
research will further study what kinds of similarity 
measure can be obtained from raw texts without in-
volvement of human subjects.  Moreover, we plan to 
cluster collected documents to make every cluster 
contains articles summarized in a similar style. We 
will also explore other sentence features, such as 
sentence cohesion, semantic meaning, and rhetorical 
relations, for an ideal uniform sentence ranking 
function. 
6 Acknowledgements 
Our thanks go to the Physical Realization Research 
Center of Motorola Labs for their support of this 
research project. 
References  
Aone, C., Gorlinsky, J., Larsen, B., and Okurowski, 
M. E. 1999. A Trainable Summarizer with Knowl-
edge Acquried from Robust NLP Techniques, Ad-
vances in Automatic Text Summarization, pages 
71-80. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
Brandow, R., Mitze, K., and Rau, L. F.  1995. 
Automatic condensation of electronic publications 
by sentence selection.  Information Processing 
and Management, 31(5):675-685. 
Edmundson, H. 1969. New methods in automatic 
abstracting. Journal of ACM, 16(2):264-285. 
Ferreira, C. 2001. Gene Expression Programming: A 
New Adaptive Algorithm for solving problems.  
Complex Systems, 13(2):87-129. 
Ferreira, C. 2002. Gene Expression Programming: 
Mathematical Modeling by an Artificial Intelli-
gence. Angra do Heroismo, Portugal 
Goldstein, J., Kantrowitz, M., Mittal, V., and Car-
bonell, J.  1999.  Summarizing Text Documents: 
Sentence Selection and Evaluation Metrics, in 
Proc. SIGIR ?99, pages 121-128.  Berkeley, Cali-
fornia. 
Kupiec, J., Pedersen, J., and Chen, F.  1995. A train-
able document summarizer. In Proc. 18th ACM-
SIGIR Conference, pages 68-73.  Seattle, Wash-
ington. 
Lin, C. 1999. Training a Selection Function for Ex-
traction. In the 8th International Conference on 
Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM 
99), Kansa City, Missouri. 
Mani, I.  2001.  Automatic Summarization, John 
Benjamins Publishing Company, Amster-
dam/Philadelphia. 
McKeown, K. R., Barzilay, R., Evans, D., Hatzivas-
siloglou, V., Kan, M. Y., Schiffman, B., Teufel, S. 
2001.  Columbia Multi-Document Summarization: 
Approach and Evaluation, in Proceedings of the 
Document Understanding Conference (DUC01).  
Edmonton, Canada. 
McLellan, P., Tombros, A., Jose, J., Ounis, I., and 
Whitehead, M. 2001. Evaluating summarisation 
technologies: A task-oriented approach.  In Proc. 
1st International Workshop on New Developments 
in Digital Libraries (NDDL-2001), International 
Conference on Enterprise Information Systems 
(ICEIS 2001), pages 99-112. Setubal, Portugal. 
Neto, J. L., Freitas, A. A., and Kaestner, C. A. A. 
2002. Automatic Text Summarization using a Ma-
chine Learning Approach. In Proc. 16th Brazilian 
Symp. on Artificial Intelligence (SBIA-2002). Lec-
ture Notes in Artificial Intelligence 2507, pp205-
215. Springer-Verlag. 
Radev, D. R., Teufel, S., Saggion, H., Lam, W., 
Blitzer, J., Qi, H., Celebi, A., Liu, D., and Drabek, 
E. 2003. Evaluation challenges in large-scale 
document summarization, in Proc. 41st Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, pages 375-382.  Sapporo, Japan. 
Salton, G., Allan, J., Buckley, C., and Singhal, A.  
1994. Automatic Analysis, Theme Generation, and 
Summarization of Machine-Readable Texts.  Sci-
ence, 264(3):1421-1426. 
Sekine, S. and Nobata, C. 2001. Sentence Extraction 
with Information Extraction technique. In Proc. of 
ACM SIGIR'01 Workshop on Text Summarization. 
New Orleans. 
Zechner, K. 1996. Fast generation of abstracts from 
general domain text corpora by extracting relevant 
sentences. In Proc. COLING-96, pages 986-989. 
Copenhagen, Denmark. 
Zhou, C., Xiao, W., Tirpak, T. M., and Nelson, P. C.  
2003. Evolving Classification Rules with Gene 
Expression Programming.  IEEE Transactions on 
Evolutionary Computation, 7(6):519 ? 531. 
