Adapt ing a synonym database to specif ic domains 
Dav ide  Turcato  Fred Popowich  Jan ine  Toole  
Dan Pass Dev lan  N icho lson  Gordon T i sher  
gavagai Technology Inc. 
P.O. 374, 3495 Ca~abie Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, V5Z 4R3, Canada 
and 
Natural Language Laboratory, School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University 
8888 University Drive, Burnaby, British Columbia, V5A 1S6, Canada 
{turk, popowich ,toole, lass, devl an, gt i sher}@{gavagai, net, as, sfu. ca} 
Abst ract  
This paper describes a method for 
adapting ageneral purpose synonym 
database, like WordNet, to a spe- 
cific domain, where only a sub- 
set of the synonymy relations de- 
fined in the general database hold. 
The method adopts an eliminative 
approach, based on incrementally 
pruning the original database. The 
method is based on a preliminary 
manual pruning phase and an algo- 
rithm for automatically pruning the 
database. This method has been im- 
plemented and used for an Informa- 
tion Retrieval system in the aviation 
domain. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Synonyms can be an important resource for 
Information Retrieval (IR) applications, and 
attempts have been made at using them to 
expand query terms (Voorhees, 1998). In 
expanding query terms, overgeneration is as 
much of a problem as incompleteness or lack 
of synonym resources. Precision can dramat- 
ically drop because of false hits due to in- 
correct synonymy relations. This problem is 
particularly felt when IR is applied to docu- 
ments in specific technical domains. In such 
cases, the synonymy relations that hold in the 
specific domain are only a restricted portion 
of the synonymy relations holding for a given 
language at large. For instance, a set of syn- 
onyms like 
(1) {cocaine, cocain, coke, snow, C} 
valid for English, would be detrimental in a 
specific domain like weather eports, where 
both snow and C (for Celsius) occur very fre- 
quently, but never as synonyms of each other. 
We describe a method for creating a do- 
main specific synonym database from a gen- 
eral purpose one. We use WordNet (Fell- 
baum, 1998) as our initial database, and we 
draw evidence from a domain specific corpus 
about what synonymy relations hold in the 
domain. 
Our task has obvious relations to word 
sense disambiguation (Sanderson, 1997) (Lea- 
cock et al, 1998), since both tasks are based 
on identifying senses of ambiguous words in 
a text. However, the two tasks are quite dis- 
tinct. In word sense disambiguation, a set of 
candidate senses for a given word is checked 
against each occurrence of the relevant word 
in a text, and a single candidate sense is se- 
lected for each occurrence ofthe word. In our 
synonym specialization task a set of candidate 
senses for a given word is checked against an 
entire corpus, and a subset of candidate senses 
is selected. Although the latter task could be 
reduced to the former (by disambiguating all
occurrences of a word in a test and taking 
the union of the selected senses), alternative 
approaches could also be used. In a specific 
domain, where words can be expected to be 
monosemous to a large extent, synonym prun- 
ing can be an effective alternative (or a com- 
plement) to word sense disambiguation. 
From a different perspective, our 
task is also related to the task of as- 
signing Subject Field Codes (SFC) to 
a terminological resource, as done by 
Magnini and Cavagli~ (2000) for WordNet. 
Assuming that a specific domain corresponds 
to a single SFC (or a restricted set of SFCs, 
at most), the difference between SFC as- 
signment and our task is that the former 
assigns one of many possible values to a given 
synset (one of all possible SFCs), while the 
latter assigns one of two possible values (the 
words belongs or does not belong to the SFC 
representing the domain). In other words, 
SFC assignment is a classification task, while 
ours can be seen as either a filtering or 
ranking task. 
Adopting a filtering/ranking perspective 
makes apparent hat the synonym pruning 
task can also be seen as an eliminative pro- 
cess, and as such it can be performed incre- 
mentally. In the following section we will 
show how such characteristics have been ex- 
ploited in performing the task. 
In section 2 we describe the pruning 
methodology, while section 3 provides a prac- 
tical example from a specific domain. Con- 
clusions are offered in section 4. 
2 Methodo logy  
2.1 Out l ine  
The synonym pruning task aims at improv- 
ing both the accuracy and the speed of a syn- 
onym database. In order to set the terms of 
the problem, we find it useful to partition the 
set of synonymy relations defined in WordNet 
into three classes: 
. Relations irrelevant to the specific do- 
main (e.g. relations involving words that 
seldom or never appear in the specific do- 
main) 
. Relations that are relevant but incorrect 
in the specific domain (e.g. the syn- 
onymy of two words that do appear in the 
specific domain, but are only synonyms 
in a sense irrelevant o the specific do- 
main); 
3. Relations that are relevant and correct in 
the specific domain. 
The creation of a domain specific database 
aims at removing relations in the first two 
classes (to improve speed and accuracy, re- 
spectively) and including only relations in the 
third class. 
The overall goal of the described method 
is to inspect all synonymy relations in Word- 
Net and classify each of them into one of the 
three aforementioned classes. We define a 
synonymy relation as a binary relation be- 
tween two synonym terms (with respect to 
? a particular sense). Therefore, a WordNet 
synset containing n terms defines ~11 k syn- 
onym relations. The assignment of a syn- 
onymy relation to a class is based on evidence 
drawn from a domain specific corpus. We use 
a tagged and lemmatized corpus for this pur- 
pose. Accordingly, all frequencies used in the 
rest of the paper are to be intended as fre- 
quencies of ( lemma, tag) pairs. 
The pruning process is carried out in three 
steps: (i) manual pruning; (ii) automatic 
pruning; (iii) optimization. The first two 
steps focus on incrementally eliminating in- 
correct synonyms, while the third step focuses 
on removing irrelevant synonyms. The three 
steps are described in the following sections. 
2.2 Manua l  p run ing  
Different synonymy relations have a different 
impact on the behavior of the application in 
which they are used, depending on how fre- 
quently each synonymy relation is used. Rela- 
tions involving words frequently appearing in 
either queries or corpora have a much higher 
impact (either positive or negative) than re- 
lations involving rarely occurring words. E.g. 
the synonymy between snow and C has a 
higher impact on the weather eport domain 
(or the aviation domain, discussed in this pa- 
per) than the synonymy relation between co- 
caine and coke. Consequently, the precision of 
a synonym database obviously depends much 
more on frequently used relations than on 
rarely used ones. Another important consid- 
eration is that judging the  correctness of a 
given synonymy relation in a given domain is 
often an elusive issue: besides clearcut cases, 
there is a large gray area where judgments 
may not be trivial even for humans evalua- 
tots. E.g. given the following three senses of 
the noun approach 
(2) a. {approach, approach path, glide 
path, glide slope} 
(the final path followed by an air- 
craft as it is landing) 
b. {approach, approach shot} 
(a relatively short golf shot in- 
tended to put the ball onto the 
putting green) 
c. {access, approach} 
(a way of entering or leaving) 
it would be easy to judge the first and second 
senses respectively relevant and irrelevant o 
the aviation domain, but the evaluation of the 
third sense would be fuzzier. 
The combination of the two remarks above 
induced us to consider a manual pruning 
phase for the terms of highest 'weight' as a 
good investment of human effort, in terms of 
rate between the achieved increase in preci- 
sion and the amount of work involved. A 
second reason for performing an initial man- 
ual pruning is that its outcome can be used 
as a reliable test set against which automatic 
pruning algorithms can be tested. 
Based on such considerations, we included a 
manual phase in the pruning process, consist- 
ing of two steps: (i) the ranking of synonymy 
relations in terms of their weight in the spe- 
cific domain; (ii) the actual evaluation of the 
correctness of the top ranking synonymy re- 
lation, by human evaluators. 
2.2.1 Rank ing  of  synonymy re lat ions  
The goal of ranking synonymy relations is 
to associate them with a score that estimates 
how often a synonymy relation is likely to 
be used in the specific domain. The input 
database is sorted by the assigned scores, and 
the top ranking words are checked for manual 
pruning. Only terms appearing in the domain 
specific corpus are considered at this stage. 
In this way the benefit of manual pruning is 
maximized. Ranking is based on three sorting 
criteria, listed below in order of priority. 
Cr i te r ion  1. Since a term that does ap- 
pear in the domain corpus must have at least 
one valid sense in the specific domain, words 
with only one sense are not good candidates 
for pruning (under the assumption of com- 
pleteness of the synonym database). There- 
fore .polysemous terms are prioritized over 
monosemous terms. 
Cr i te r ion  2. The second and third sort- 
ing criteria axe similar, the only difference be- 
ing that the second criterion assumes the ex- 
istence of some inventory of relevant queries 
(a term list, a collection of previous queries, 
etc.), ff such an inventory is not available, the 
second sorting criterion can be omitted. If the 
inventory is available, it is used to check which 
synonymy relations are actually to be used in 
queries to the domain corpus. Given a pair 
(ti,tj) of synonym terms, a score (which we 
name scoreCQ) is assigned to their synonymy 
relation, according to the following formula: 
(3) scoreCQij = 
(fcorpusi * fqueryj) + 
(fcorpusj ? fqueryi) 
where fcorpusn and fqueryn are, respec- 
tively, the frequencies of a term in the domain 
corpus and in the inventory of query terms. 
The above formula aims at estimating how 
often a given synonymy relation is likely to 
be actually used. In particular, each half of 
the formula estimates how often a given term 
in the corpus is likely to be matched as a syn- 
onym of a given term in a query. Consider, 
e.g., the following situation (taken form the 
aviation domain discussed in section 3.1): 
(4) fcorpuSsnow = 3042 
f querysnow = 2 
fcorpusc = 9168 
f queryc = 0 
It is estimated that C would be matched 
18336 times as a synonym for snow (i.e 9168 
* 2), while snow would never be matched as 
a synonym for C, because C never occurs as 
a query term. Therefore scoreCQs,~ow,c is 
18336 (i.e. 18336 + 0). 
Then, for each polysemous term i and 
synset s such that i E s, the following score is 
computed: 
Table 1: Frequencies of sample synset erms. 
j fcorpusj fqueryj 
cocaine 1 0 
cocain 0 0 
coke 8 0 
C 9168 0 
(5) scorePolyCQ i,~ = 
E{scoreCQi,~lj ~ s A i ? j} 
E.g., i f  ,5' is the synset in (1), then 
scorePolyCQs~ow,s is "the sum of 
scoreCQsnow,coc~ine, scoreCQsnow,eocain, 
scoreCQsnow,eoke and scoreCQ,no~o,c. Given 
the data in Table 1 (taken again from our 
aviation domain) the following scoreCQ 
would result: 
(6) scoreCQsnow,cocaine -~2 
scoreCQsnow,cocain = 0 
scoreCQs~ow,cok~ = 16 
scoreCQsno~o,c = 18336 
Therefore, scorePolyCQsnow,s would equal 
18354. 
The final score assigned to each polysemous 
term tl is the highest scorePolyCQi,s. For 
snow, which has the following three senses 
(7) a. {cocaine, cocaine, coke, C, snow} 
(a narcotic (alkaloid) extracted 
from coca leaves) 
b. {snow} 
(a layer of snowflakes (white crys- 
tals of frozen water) covering the 
ground) 
c. {snow, snowfall} 
(precipitation falling from clouds 
in the form of ice crystals) 
the highest score would be the one computed 
above. 
Cr i ter ion 3. The third criterion assigns 
a score in terms of domain corpus frequency 
alone. It is used to further rank terms that 
do not occur in the query term inventory (or 
when no query term inventory is available). It 
is computed in the same way as the previous 
score, with the only difference that a value of 
1 is conventionally assumed for fquery (the 
frequency of a term in the inventory of query 
terms). 
2.2.2 Correctness  evaluat ion 
All the synsets containing the top rank- 
ing terms, according to the hierarchy of crite- 
ria described above, are manuMly checked for 
pruning. For each term, all the synsets con- 
taining the term are clustered together and 
presented to a human operator, who exam- 
ines each (term, synset) pair and answers the 
question: does the term belong to the synset 
in the specific domain? Evidence about the 
answer is drawn from relevant examples auto- 
matically extracted from the domain specific 
corpus. E.g., following up on our example in 
the previous section, the operator would be 
presented with the word snow associated with 
each of the synsets in (7) and would have to 
provide a yes/no answer for each of them. In 
the specific case, the answer would be likely 
to be 'no' for (7a) and 'yes' for (75) and (7c). 
The evaluator is presented with all the 
synsets involving a relevant term (even 
those that did not rank high in terms of 
scorePoIyCQ) in order to apply a contrastive 
approach. It might well be the case that the 
correct sense for a given term is one for which 
the term has no synonyms at all (e.g. 7b in 
the example), therefore all synsets for a given 
term need to be presented to the evaiuator 
in order to make an informed choice. The 
evaluator provides a yes/no answer for all the 
(term, synset) he/she is presented with (with 
some exceptions, as explained in section 3.1). 
2.3 Automat ic  p run ing  
The automatic pruning task is analogous to 
manual pruning in two respects: (i) its in- 
put is the set of synonymy relations involving 
WordNet polysemous words appearing in the 
domain specific orpus; (ii) it is performed by 
examining all (term, synset) input pairs and 
answering the question: does the term belong 
to the synset in the specific domain? How- 
ever, while the manual pruning task was re- 
garded as a filtering task, where a human eval- 
4 
uator assigns a boolean value to each pruning 
candidate, the automatic pruning task can 
be more conveniently regarded as a ranking 
task, where all the pruning candidates are as- 
signed a score, measuring how appropriate a 
given sense is for a given word, in the do- 
main at hand. The actual pruning is left as 
a subsequent step. Different pruning thresh- 
olds can be applied to the ranked list, based 
on different considerations (e.g. depending on 
whether astronger emphasis i  put on the pre- 
cision or the recall of the resulting database). 
The score is based on the frequencies of both 
words in the synset (except the word under 
consideration) and words in the sense gloss. 
We also remove from the gloss all words be- 
longing to a stoplist (a stoplist provided with 
WordNet was used for this purpose). The fol- 
lowing scoring formula is used: 
(8) (average_synset_frequeney/ 
synset_cardinality k) .4- 
(average_gloss_frequency~ 
gloss_cardinality :) 
Note that the synset cardinality does not 
include the word under consideration, reflect- 
ing the fact the word's frequency is not used 
in calculating the score. Therefore a synset 
only containing the word under consideration 
and no synonyms is assigned cardinality 0. 
The goal is to identify (term, sense) pairs 
not pertaining to the domain. For this rea- 
son we tend to assign high scores to candi- 
dates for which we do not have enough evi- 
dence about their inappropriateness. This is 
why average frequencies are divided by some 
factor which is function of the number of av- 
eraged frequencies, in order to increase the 
Scores based on little evidence (i.e. fewer av- 
eraged numbers). In the sample application 
described in section 3 the value of k was set 
to 2. For analogous reasons, we convention- 
ally assign a very high score to candidates for 
which we have no evidence (i.e. no words in 
both the synset and the gloss). If either the 
synset or the gloss is empty, we conventionally 
double the score for the gloss or the synset, 
respectively. We note at this point that our 
final ranking list are sorted in reverse order 
with respect o the assigned scores, since we 
are focusing on removing incorrect items. At 
the top of the list are the items that receive 
the lowest score, i.e. that are more likely to 
be incorrect (term, sense) associations for our 
domain (thus being the best candidates to be 
pruned out). 
Table 2 shows the ranking of the senses 
for the word C in the aviation domain. In 
the table, each term is followed by its corpus 
frequency, separated by a slash. From each 
synset the word C itself has been removed, 
as well as the gloss words found in the stop 
list. Therefore, the table only contains the 
words that contribute to the calculation of the 
sense's core. E.g. the score for the first sense 
in the list is obtained from the following ex- 
pression: 
(9) ((0 + 57)/2/22) + 
( (8+0+0+ 198+9559+0+1298)/7/72 ) 
The third sense in the list exemplifies the 
case of an empty synset (i.e. a synset orig- 
inally containing only the word under con- 
sideration). In this case the score obtained 
from the gloss is doubled. Note that the ob- 
viously incorrect sense of C as a narcotic is 
in the middle of the list. This is due to a tag- 
ging problem, as the word leaves in the gloss 
was tagged as verb instead of noun. Therefore 
it was assigned a very high frequency, as the 
verb leave, unlike the noun leaf, is very com- 
mon in the aviation domain. The last sense 
in the list also requires a brief explanation. 
The original word in the gloss was 10S. How- 
ever, the pre-processor that was used before 
tagging the glosses recognized S as an abbre- 
viation for South and expanded the term ac- 
cordingly. It so happens that both words 10 
and South are very frequent in the aviation 
corpus we used, therefore the sense was as- 
signed a high score. 
2.4 Optimization 
The aim of this phase is to improve the access 
speed to the synonym database, by removing 
all information that is not likely to be used. 
The main idea is to minimize the size of the 
Score 
Table 2: Ranking of synsets containing the word C 
Frequencies 
39.37 
62.75 
224.28 
synset: 
gloss: 
synset: 
gloss: 
synset: 
gloss: 
241.69 synset: 
gloss: 
585.17 synset: 
gloss: 
743.28 synset: 
gloss: 
1053.43 synset: 
gloss: 
ATOMIC_NUMBEK_6/O, CAKBON/57 
ABUNDANT/8, NONMETALLIC/O, TETRAVALENT/O, ELEMENT/198 
0CCUR/9559, ALLOTROPIC/O, FOKM/1298 
AMPEre-SECOND/O, COULOMB/O 
UNIT/3378, ELECTRICAL/2373, CHARGE/523, EQUAL/153 
AMOUNT/1634, CHARGE/523, TKANSFEK/480, CUKKENT/242, 1/37106 
AMPEre/4, 1/37106 
0 
GENEKAL-PUKPOSE/O, PROGRAMING/O, LANGUAGE/445, CLOSELY/841 
ASSOCIATE/543, UNIX/O, OPEKATE/5726, SYSTEM/49863 
COCAIN/O, COCAINE/i, COKE/8, SNOW/3042 
NARCOTIC/i, ALKALOID/O, EXTKACT/31, COCA/I, LEAVE/24220 
LIGHT_SPEED/I, SPEED_OF_LIGHT/O 
SPEED/14665, LIGHT/22481, TRAVEL/f05, VACUUM/192 
DEGREE_CELSIUS/24, DEGREEiENTIGRADE/28 
DEGKEE/43617, CENTIGRADE/34, SCALE/540, TEMPERATURE/2963 
I00/0, CENTRED/O, CENTUKY/31, HUNDRED/O, ONE_C/O 
TEN/Z3, 10/16150, SOUTH/12213 
database in such a way that the database be- 
havior remains unchanged. Two operations 
are performed at the stage: (i) a simple rel- 
evance  tes t  to remove irrelevant erms (i.e. 
terms not pertaining to the domain at hand); 
(ii) a redundancy check, to remove informa- 
tion that, although perhaps relevant, does not 
affect the database behavior. 
2.4.1 Re levance  tes t  
Terms not appearing in the domain cor- 
pus are considered not relevant o the spe- 
cific domain and removed from the synonym 
database. The rationale underlying this step 
is to remove from the synonym database syn- 
onymy relations that are never going to be 
used in the specific domain. In this way the ef- 
ficiency of the module can be increased, by re- 
ducing the size of the database and the num- 
ber of searches performed (synonyms that are 
known to never appear are not searched for), 
without affecting the system's matching at- 
curacy. E.g., the synset in (10a) would be 
reduced to the synset in (10b). 
(10) a. AMPERE-SECOND/O, COULOMB/O, 
C/9168 
b. C/9168 
2.4.2 Redundancy  check 
The final step is the removal of redundant 
synsets, possibly as a consequence of the pre- 
vious pruning steps. Specifically, the follow- 
ing synsets are removed: 
? Synsets containing a single term (al- 
though the associated sense might be a 
valid one for that term, in the specific 
domain). 
? Duplicate synsets, i.e. identical (in terms 
of synset elements) to some other synset 
not being removed (the choice of the only 
synset o be preserved is arbitrary). 
E.g., the synset in (10b) would be finMly 
removed at this stage. 
3 Sample  app l i ca t ion  
The described methodology was applied to 
the aviation domain. We used the Aviation 
Safety Information System (ASRS) corpus 
(h 'e tp : / /as rs .  a rc .nasa .gov / )  as our avia- 
tion specific corpus. The resulting domain- 
specific database is being used in an IR ap- 
plication that retrieves documents relevant 
to user defined queries, expressed as phrase 
patterns, and identifies portions of text that 
are instances of the relevant phrase patterns. 
The application makes use of Natural Lan- 
guage Processing (NLP) techniques (tagging 
and partial parsing) to annotate documents. 
User defined queries are matched against such 
annotated corpora. Synonyms are used to 
expand occurrences of specific words in such 
queries. In the following two sections we de- 
scribe how the pruning process was performed 
and provide some results. 
3.1 Adapt ing  Wordnet  to the  
av iat ion  domain  
A vocabulary of relevant query terms was 
made available by a user of our IR applica- 
tion and was used in our ranking of synonymy 
relations. Manual pruning was performed on 
the 1000 top ranking terms, with which 6565 
synsets were associated overall. The manual 
pruning task was split between two human 
evaluators. The evaluators were programmers 
members of our staff. They were English na- 
tive speakers who had acquaintance with our 
IR application and with the goals of the man- 
ual pruning process, but no specific training 
or background on lexicographic or WordNet- 
related tasks. For each of the 1000 terms, 
the evaluators were provided with a sample 
of 100 (at most) sentences where the rele- 
vant word occurred in the ASRS corpus. 100 
of the 1000 manually checked clusters (i.e. 
groups of synsets referring to the same head 
term) were submitted to both evaluators (576 
synsets overall), in order to check the rate 
of agreement of their evaluations. The eval- 
uators were allowed to leave synsets unan- 
swered, when the synsets only contained the 
head term (and at least one other synset in 
the cluster had been deemed correct). Leav- 
ing out the cases when one or both evalua- 
tors skipped the answer, there remained 418 
synsets for which both answered. There was 
agreement in 315 cases (75%) and disagree- 
ment in 103 cases (25%). A sample of senses 
on which the evaluators disagreed is shown in 
(11). In each case, the term being evaluated 
is the first in the synset. 
(11) a. {about, around} 
(in the area or vicinity) 
b. {accept, admit, take, take on} 
(admit into a group or commu- 
nity) 
c. {accept, consent, go for} 
(give an affirmative reply to) 
d. {accept, swallow} 
(tolerate or accommodate oneself 
to) 
e. {accept, take} 
(be designed to hold or take) 
f. {accomplished, effected, estab- 
lished} 
(settled securely and uncondi- 
tionally) 
g. {acknowledge, know, recognize} 
(discern) 
h. {act, cognitive operation, cogni- 
tive process, operation, process} 
(the performance of some com- 
posite cognitive activity) 
i. {act, act as, play} 
(pretend to have certain qualities 
or state of mind) 
j. {action, activeness, activity} 
(the state of being active) 
k. {action, activity, natural action, 
natural process} 
(a process existing in or produced 
by nature (rather than by the in- 
tent of human beings)) 
It should be noted that the 'yes' and 'no' 
answers were not evenly distributed between 
the evaluators. In 80% of the cases of dis- 
agreement, i  was evaluator A answering 'yes' 
and evaluator B answering 'no'. This seems 
to suggest han one of the reasons for dis- 
agreement was a different degree of strictness 
in evaluating. Since the evaluators matched 
a sense against an entire corpus (represented 
by a sample of occurrences), one common sit- 
uation may have been that a sense did oc- 
cur, but very rarely. Therefore, the evaluators 
may have applied different criteria in judging 
how many occurrences were needed to deem 
a sense correct. This discrepancy, of course, 
may compound with the fact that the differ- 
ences among WordNet senses can sometimes 
be very subtle. 
Automatic pruning was performed on 
the entire WordNet database, regardless of 
whether candidates had already been manu- 
ally checked or not. This was done for test- 
ing purposes, in order to check the results of 
automatic pruning against the test set ob- 
tained from manual pruning. Besides asso- 
ciating ASRS frequencies with all words in 
synsets and glosses, we also computed fre- 
quencies for collocations (i.e. multi-word 
terms) appearing in synsets. The input to 
automatic pruning was constituted by 10352 
polysemous terms appearing at least once in 
ASRS the corpus. Such terms correspond to 
37494 (term, synset) pairs. Therefore, the 
latter was the actual number of pruning can- 
didates that  were ranked. 
The check of WordNet senses against ASRS 
senses was only done unidirectionally, i.e. 
we only checked whether WordNet senses 
were attested in ASRS. Although it would 
be interesting to see how often the appropri- 
ate, domain-specific senses were absent from 
WordNet, no check of this kind was done. We 
took the simplifying assumption that Word- 
Net be complete, thus aiming at assigning at 
least one WordNet sense to each term that 
appeared in both WordNet and ASRS. 
3.2 Resu l ts  
In order to test the automatic pruning per- 
formance, we ran the ranking procedure on 
a test set taken from the manually checked 
files. This file had been set apart and had 
not been used in the preliminary tests on the 
automatic pruning algorithm. The test set 
included 350 clusters, comprising 2300 candi- 
dates. 1643 candidates were actually assigned 
an evaluation during manual pruning. These 
were used for the test. We extracted the 1643 
relevant items from our ranking list, then we 
incrementally computed precision and recall 
in terms of the items that had been manually 
checked by our human evaluators. The re- 
sults are shown in figure 1. As an example of 
how this figure can be interpreted, taking into 
consideration the top 20% of the ranking list 
(along the X axis), an 80% precision (Y axis) 
means that 80% of the items encountered so 
far had been removed in manual pruning; a 
27% recall (Y axis) means that 27% of the 
overall manually removed items have been en- 
countered so far. 
The automatic pruning task was intention- 
ally framed as a ranking problem, in order to 
leave open the issue of what pruning threshold 
would be optimal. This same approach was 
taken in the IR application in which the prun- 
ing procedure was embedded. Users are given 
the option to set their own pruning threshold 
(depending on whether they focus more on 
precision or recall), by setting a value spec- 
ifying what precision they require. Pruning 
is performed on the top section of the rank- 
ing list that guarantees the required precision, 
according to the correlation between precision 
and amount of pruning shown in figure 1. 
A second test was designed to check 
whether there is a correlation between the 
levels of confidence of automatic and man- 
ual pruning. For this purpose we used the 
file that had been manually checked by both 
human evaiuators. We took into account he 
candidates that had been removed by at least 
one evaluator: the candidates that were re- 
moved by both evaluators were deemed to 
have a high level of confidence, while those 
removed by only one evaluator were deemed 
to have a lower level of confidence. Then we 
checked whether the two classes were equally 
distributed in the automatic pruning ranking 
list, or whether higher confidence candidates 
tended to be ranked higher than lower con- 
fidence ones. The results are shown in fig- 
ure 2, where the automatic pruning recall for 
each class is shown. For any given portion 
of the ranking list higher confidence candi- 
dates (solid lines) have a significantly higher 
recall than lower confidence candidates (dot- 
Table 3: WordNet optimization results. 
DB Synsets Word-senses 
Full WN 99,642 174,008 
Reduced WN 9,441 23,368 
ted line). 
Finally, table 3 shows the result of applying 
the described optimization techniques alone, 
i.e. without any prior pruning, with respect 
to the ASRS corpus. The table shows how 
many synsets and how many word-senses are 
contained in the full Wordnet database and in 
its optimized version. Note that such reduc- 
tion does not involve any loss of accuracy. 
4 Conc lus ions  
There is a need for automatically or semi- 
automatically adapting NLP components o 
specific domain, if such components are to be 
effectively used in IR applications without in- 
volving labor-intensive manual adaptation. A 
key part of adapting NLP components ospe- 
cific domains is the adaptation of their lexical 
and terminological resources. It may often be 
the case that a consistent section of a general 
purpose terminological resource is irrelevant 
to a specific domain, thus involving an unnec- 
essary amount of ambiguity that affects both 
the accuracy and efficiency of the overall NLP 
component. In this paper we have proposed 
a method for adapting a general purpose syn- 
onym database to a specific domain. 
Evaluating the performance of the pro- 
posed pruning method is not a straightfor- 
ward task, since there are no other results 
available on a similar task, to the best of our 
knowledge. However, a comparison between 
the results of manual and automatic pruning 
provides ome useful hints. In particular: 
? The discrepancy between the evaluation 
of human operators hows that the task 
is elusive even for humans (the value of 
the agreement evaluation statistic n for 
our human evaluators was 0.5); 
? however, the correlation between the 
level of confidence of human evaluations 
and scores assigned by the automatic 
pruning procedure shows that the auto- 
matic pruning algorithm captures ome 
significant aspect of the problem. 
Although there is probably room for im- 
proving the automatic pruning performance, 
the preliminary results how that the current 
approach is pointing in the right direction. 
Re ferences  
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. Wordnet: An 
Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press Books. 
Claudia Leacock, Martin Chodorow, and 
George A. Miller. 1998. Using corpus tatistics 
and WordNet relations for sense identification. 
Computational Linguistics, 24(1):147-165. 
Bernardo Magnini and Gabriela Cavaglih. 2000. 
Integrating Subject Field Codes into WordNet. 
In Maria Gavrilidou, George Carayannis, Stella 
Markantonatou, Stelios Piperidis, and Gregory 
Stainhaouer, editors, Proceedings of the Sec- 
ond International Conference on Language Re- 
sources and Evaluation (LREC-PO00), pages 
1413-1418, Athens, Greece. 
Mark Sanderson. 1997. Word Sense Disambigua- 
tion and Information Retrieval. Ph.D. thesis, 
Department ofComputing Science at the Uni- 
versity of Glasgow, Glasgow G12. Technical 
Report (TR-1997-7). 
Ellen M. Voorhees. 1998. Using WordNet for text 
retrieval. In Fellbaum (Fellbaum, 1998), chap- 
ter 12, pages 285-303. 
9 
~2 
~9 
100 i I I I 
95 
90 
85 
+? i 
75 
70 
65 
60 
55 
0 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 I I I I 
0 20 40 60 80 100 
Top % of ranking list 
F igure 1: Precision and recall of automat ic  pruning 
10 
~9 
cg 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
I I I I t - - ' - /  
-- _ t / f  j" _ 
-- r l  j --  
/ J _  ; _ 
- - J "  I I I I 
0 20 40 60 80 100 
Top % of ranking list 
Figure 2: A recall comparison for different confidence rates 
11 
