A Divide-and-Conquer Strategy for Shallow Parsing of German 
Free Texts 
Gi in ter  Neumann*  Chr i s t ian  Braun t Jakub  P i skorsk i  ~ 
Abst ract  
We present a divide-and-conquer st ategy based on 
finite state technology for shallow parsing of real- 
world German texts. In a first phase only the topo- 
logical structure of a sentence (i.e., verb groups, 
subclauses) are determined. In a second phase the 
phrasal grammars are applied to the contents of the 
different fields of the main and sub-clauses. Shallow 
parsing is supported by suitably configured prepro- 
cessing, including: morphological and on-line com- 
pound analysis, efficient POS-filtering, and named 
entity recognition. The whole approach proved to 
be very useful for processing of free word order lan- 
guages like German. Especially for the divide-and- 
conquer parsing strategy we obtained an f-measure 
of 87.14% on unseen data. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Current information extraction (IE) systems are 
quite successful in efficient processing of large free 
text collections due to the fact that they can provide 
a partial understanding of specific types of text with 
a certain degree of partial accuracy using fast and ro- 
bust language processing strategies (basically finite 
state technology). They have been "made sensitive" 
to certain key pieces of information and thereby pro- 
vide an easy means to skip text without deep anal- 
ysis. The majority of existing IE systems are ap- 
plied to English text, but there are now a number of 
systems which process other languages as well (e.g., 
German (Neumann et al, 1997), Italian (Ciravegna 
et al, 1999) or Japanese (Sekine and Nobata, 1998)). 
The majority of current systems perform a partial 
parsing approach using only very few general syntac- 
tic knowledge for the identification of nominal and 
prepositional phrases and verb groups. The combi- 
nation of such units is then performed by means of 
domain-specific templates. Usually, these templates 
* DFKI GmbH, Stuhlsatzenhausweg 3, 66123 Saarbriicken, 
Germany, neumann@dfki, de 
t DFKI GmbH, Stuhlsatzenhausweg 3, 66123 Saarbriicken, 
Germany, cbratm@dfki, de 
DFKI GmbH, Stuhlsatzenhausweg 3, 66123 Saarbriicken, 
Germany, piskorsk@dfki, de 
are triggered by domain-specific predicates attached 
only to a relevant subset of verbs which express 
domain-specific selectional restrictions for possible 
argument fillers. 
In most of the well-known shallow text process- 
ing systems (cf. (Sundheim, 1995) and (SAIC, 
1998)) cascaded chunk parsers are used which per- 
form clause recognition after fragment recognition 
following a bottom-up style as described in (Abne), 
1996). We have also developed a similar bottom- 
up strategy for the processing of German texts, cf. 
(Neumann et al, 1997). However, the main prob- 
lem we experienced using the bottom-up strategy 
was insufficient robustness: because the parser de- 
pends on the lower phrasal recognizers, its perfor- 
mance is heavily influenced by their respective per- 
formance. As a consequence, the parser frequently 
wasn't able to process tructurally simple sentences, 
because they contained, for example, highly complex 
nominal phrases, as in the following example: 
"\[Die vom Bundesgerichtshof und den 
Wettbewerbshfitern als Verstofi gegen 
das Kartellverbot gegeiflelte zentrale TV- 
Vermarktung\] ist g~ngige Praxis." 
Central television raarketing, censured by the 
German Federal High Court and the guards 
against unfair competition as an infringement 
of anti-cartel legislation, is common practice. 
During free text processing it might be not possible 
(or even desirable) to recognize such a phrase com- 
pletely. However, if we assume that domain-specific 
templates are associated with certain verbs or verb 
groups which trigger template filling, then it will be 
very difficult to find the appropriate fillers without 
knowing the correct clause structure. Furthermore 
in a sole bottom-up approach some ambiguities - for 
example relative pronouns - can't be resolved with- 
out introducing much underspecification into the in- 
termediate structures. 
Therefore we propose the following divide-and- 
conquer parsing strategy: In a first phase only 
the verb groups and the topological structure of 
a sentence according to the linguistic field the- 
239 
"\[CooraS \[sse,,* Diese Angaben konnte der Bundes- 
grenzschutz aber nicht best~itigen\], [ssent Kinkel 
sprach von Horrorzahlen, \[relct denen er keinen 
Glauben schenke\]\]\]." 
This information couldn't be verified by the Border 
Police, Kinkel spoke of horrible figures that he didn't 
believe. 
Figure 1: An example of a topological structure. 
PREPROCESSOR 
-TokeNlatl~ 
, v .  
! 
DC-PARSER 
TOPOt.OGICAL P ~  
v , ,~ ,~,~ .. 
FRAGMENT RECOGNIZER 
Underspeclfied dependency trees 
Figure 2: Overview of the system's architecture. 
ory (cf. (Engel, 1988)) are determined omain- 
independently. In a second phase, general (as well 
as domain-specific) phrasal grammars (nominal and 
prepositional phrases) are applied to the contents of 
the different fields of the main and sub-clauses ( ee 
fig. 1) 
This approach offers several advantages: 
? improved robustness, because parsing of the 
sentence topology is based only on simple in- 
dicators like verbgroups and conjunctions and 
their interplay, 
? the resolution of some ambiguities, including 
relative pronouns vs. determiner, sub junction 
vs. preposition and sentence coordination vs. 
NP coordination, and 
? a high degree of modularity (easy integration of 
domain-dependent subcomponents). 
The shallow divide-and-conquer parser (DC- 
PARSER) is supported by means of powerful mor- 
phological processing (including on-line compound 
analysis), efficient POS-filtering and named entity 
recognition. Thus the architecture of the complete 
shallow text processing approach consists basically 
of two main components: the preprocessor and the 
DC-PARSER itself (see fig. 2). 
2 Preprocessor  
The DC-PARSER relies on a suitably configured pre- 
processing strategy in order to achieve the desired 
simplicity and performance. It consists of the fol- 
lowing main steps: 
Tokenization The tokenizer maps sequences of 
consecutive characters into larger units called tokens 
and identifies their types. Currently we use more 
than 50 domain-independent token classes including 
generic classes for semantically ambiguous tokens 
(e.g., "10:15" could be a time expression or volley- 
ball result, hence we classify this token as number- 
dot compound) and complex classes like abbrevia- 
tions or complex compounds (e.g., "AT&T-Chief"). 
It proved that such variety of token classes impli- 
fies the processing of subsequent submodules signif- 
icantly. 
Morphology Each token identified as a potential 
wordform is submitted to the morphological nalysis 
including on-line recognition of compounds (which is 
crucial since compounding is a very productive pro- 
cess of the German language) and hyphen coordina- 
tion (e.g., in "An- und Verkauf" (purchase and sale) 
"An-" is resolved to "Ankauf" (purchase)). Each 
token recognized as a valid word form is associated 
with the list of its possible readings, characterized 
by stem, inflection information and part of speech 
category. 
POS-fi ltering Since a high amount of German 
word forms is ambiguous, especially word forms with 
a verb reading 1 and due to the fact that the qual- 
ity of the results of the DC-PARSER relies essen- 
tially on the proper recognition of verb groups, ef- 
ficient disambiguation strategies are needed. Using 
case-sensitive rules is straightforward since generally 
only nouns (and proper names) are written in stan- 
dard German with a capitalized initial letter (e.g., 
"das Unternehmen" - the enterprise vs. "wir un- 
ternehmen" - we undertake). However for disam- 
biguation of word forms appearing at the beginning 
of the sentence local contextual filtering rules are 
applied. For instance, the rule which forbids the 
verb written with a capitalized initial letter to be 
followed by a finite verb would filter out the verb 
reading of the word "unternehmen" i  the sentence 
130% of the wordforms in the test corpus 
"Wirtschaftswoche" (business news journal) ,  which have a 
verb reading, turned to have at least one other non-verb 
reading. 
240 
"Unternehmen sind an Gewinnmaximierung intere- 
siert." (Enterprises are interested in maximizing 
their profits). A major subclass of ambiguous word- 
forms are those which have an adjective or attribu- 
tivly used participle reading beside the verb reading. 
For instance, in the sentence "Sie bekannten, die 
bekannten Bilder gestohlen zu haben." (They con- 
fessed they have stolen the famous paintings.) the 
wordform "bekannten" is firstly used as a verb (con- 
fessed) and secondly as an adjective (famous). Since 
adjectives and attributively used participles are in 
most cases part of a nominal phrase a convenient 
rule would reject the verb reading if the previous 
word form is a determiner or the next word form is 
a noun. It is important o notice that such rules 
are based on some regularities, but they may yield 
false results, like for instance the rule for filtering 
out the verb reading of some word forms extremely 
rarely used as verbs (e.g., "recht" - right, to rake 
(3rd person,sg)). All rules are compiled into a sin- 
gle finite-state transducer according to the approach 
described in (Roche and Schabes, 1995). 2 
Named ent i ty  f inder  Named entities such as or- 
ganizations, persons, locations and time expressions 
are identified using finite-state grammars. Since 
some named entities (e.g. company names) may ap- 
pear in the text either with or without a designator, 
we use a dynamic lexicon to store recognized named 
entities without their designators (e.g., "Braun AG" 
vs. "Braun") in order to identify subsequent occur- 
rences correctly. However a named entity, consisting 
solely of one word, may be also a valid word form 
(e.g., "Braun" - brown). Hence we classify such 
words as candidates for named entities since gen- 
erally such ambiguities cannot be resolved at this 
level. Recognition of named entities could be post- 
poned and integrated into the fragment recognizer, 
but performing this task at this stage of processing 
seems to be more appropriate. Firstly because the 
results of POS-filtering could be partially verified 
and improved and secondly the amount of the word 
forms to be processed by subsequent modules could 
be considerably reduced. For instance the verb read- 
ing of the word form "achten" (watch vs. eight) in 
the time expression "am achten Oktober 1995" (at 
the eight of the October 1995) could be filtered out 
if not done yet. 
3 A Sha l low D iv ide -and-Conquer  
S t ra tegy  
The DC-PARSER consists of two major domain- 
independent modules based on finite state technol- 
2The manually constructed rules proved to be a useful 
means for disambiguation, however not sufficient enough to 
filter out all unplausible readings. Hence supplementary rules 
determined by Brill's tagger were used in order to achieve 
broader coverage. 
ogy: 1) construction of the topological sentence 
structure, and 2) application of phrasal grammars 
on each determined subclause (see also fig. 3). In 
this paper we will concentrate on the first step, be- 
cause it is the more novel part of the DC-PARSER, 
and will only briefly describe the second step in sec- 
tion 3.2. 
3.1 Topo log ica l  s t ruc ture  
The DC-PARSER applies cascades of finite-state 
grammars to the stream of tokens and named en- 
titles delivered by the preprocessor in order to de- 
termine the topological structure of the sentence ac- 
cording to the linguistic field theory (Engel, 1988). 3
Based on the fact that in German a verb group 
(like "h~tte fiberredet werden mfissen" - -  *have con- 
vinced been should meaning should have been con- 
vinced) can be split into a left and a right verb part 
("h?tte" and "fiberredet werden miissen") these 
parts (abbreviated as LVP and RVP) are used for the 
segmentation of a main sentence into several parts: 
the front field (VF), the left verb part, middle field 
(MF), right verb part, and rest field (RF). Subclauses 
can also be expressed in that way such that the left" 
verb part is either empty or occupied by a relative 
pronoun or a sub junction element, and the complete 
verb group is placed in the right verb part, cf. figure 
3. Note that each separated field can be arbitrarily 
complex with very few restrictions on the ordering 
of the phrases inside a field. 
Recognition of the topological structure of a sen- 
tence can be described by the following four phases 
realized as cascade of finite state grammars (see also 
fig. 2; fig. 4 shows the different steps in action). 4
Initially, the stream of tokens and named entities is 
separated into a list of sentences based on punctua- 
tion signs. 5 
Verb  groups  A verb grammar ecognizes all sin- 
gle occurrences of verbforms (in most cases corre- 
sponding to LVP) and all closed verbgroups (i.e., se- 
quences of verbforms, corresponding to RVP). The 
parts of discontinuous verb groups (e.g., separated 
LvP and RVP or separated verbs and verb-prefixes) 
cannot be put together at that step of processing 
because one needs contextual information which will 
only be available in the next steps. The major prob- 
lem at this phase is not a structural one but the 
3Details concerning the implementation f the topological 
parsing strategy can be found in (Braun, 1999). Details con- 
cerning the representation a d compilation of the used finite 
state machinery can be found in (Neumann et al, 1997) 
4In this paper we can give only a brief overview of the 
current coverage of the individual steps. An exhaustive de- 
scription of the covered phenomena can be found in (Braun, 
1999). 
5 Performing this step after preprocessing has the advan- 
tage that the tokenizer and named entity finder already have 
determined abbreviation signs, so that this sort of disam- 
biguation is resolved. 
241 
'$KERH~TE$ 
SENT~ERI  " . "  
VERBI IMODUERB$ 
FORrl~ "lK~s~e uer-k~ut'en" 
flORPHO-INFOt rRCR: ~toPphix-FUek~or$\] 
GE}I~: IRK 
EHSE .. :FI~'S 
FORM: "ve~kau~em" 
P~RPHO-IHFO= R(~R= ~rZ%~'l~iX-i:V~kto~* 
FIHIT| =INF 
G~HUS: ~ 
TI~SE = :PRES 
LST~= "~=ue"  j 
STEM: "w JeSS" 
XSU~J-CL/~ 
CONTENT~ 'ZSPANNSAT L~ 
I1FI "~REL-CL$ 
CONTKHT| Z.SF'FIHHSAT ~
L ~,  (-~,') J h 
='/\[z: / 
\[~: m~-phlx-FVel~to~* J ,?RB: *VERB* 
F01~I.. ? leb%" 
~INFO."  rp~,Rl :l~to~phix-FVek*Oe:l: 
L~ lHI Ts T GEHUSt IR~ ENSIEI IPRIE 
STEM: =leb  ~ 
;~EL-P1RI~4: (" die') 
"RB, \[*~* 1 FORM: "er l i t~en ha%~?e" 
EHSE~ IPERF 
LsTErh "er le id"  J 
) 
Figure 3: The result of the DC-PARSER for the sentence "Weil die Siemens GmbH, die vom Export lebt, 
Verluste erlitten hat, musste sie Aktien verkaufen." (Because the Siemens GmbH which strongly depends on 
exports suffered from losses they had to sell some of the shares.) abbreviated where convenient. It shows 
the separation of a sentence into the front field (vF), the verb group (VERB), and the middle field (MF). The 
elements of different fields have been computed by means of fragment recognition which takes place after 
the (possibly recursive) topological structure has been computed. Note that the front field consists only of 
one but complex subclause which itself has an internal field structure. 
Well die Siemens GmbH, die vom Export lebt, Verluste erlitt, musste sie Aktien verkaufen. 
Well die Siemens GmbH, die ...\[Verb-Fin\], Verl. \[Verb-Fin\], \[Modv-Fin\] sie Akt. \[FV-Inf\]. 
Weil die Siemens GmbH \[ReI-CI\], Verluste \[Verb-Fin\], \[Modv-Fin\] sie Aktien \[FV-Inf\]. 
\[Subconj-CL\], \[Modv-Fin\] sie Aktien \[FV-Inf\]. 
\[Subconj-CL\], \[Modv-Fin\] sie Aktien \[FV-Inf\]. 
\[clause\] 
Figure 4: The different steps of the DC-PARSER for the sentence of figure 3. 
massive morphosyntactic ambiguity of verbs (for ex- 
ample, most plural verb forms can also be non-finite 
or imperative forms). This kind of ambiguity can- 
not be resolved without taking into account a wider 
context. Therefore these verb forms are assigned dis- 
junctive types, similar to the underspecified chunk 
categories proposed by (Federici et al, 1996). These 
types, like for example Fin-Inf-PP or Fin-PP, re- 
flect the different readings of the verbform and en- 
able following modules to use these verb fonns ac- 
cording to the wider context, thereby removing the 
ambiguity. In addition to a type each recognized 
verb form is assigned a set of features which rep- 
resent various properties of the form like tense and 
mode information. (cf. figure 5). 
Base clauses (BC)  are subclauses of type sub- 
junctive and subordinate. Although they are embed- 
ded into a larger structure they can independently 
9~L9 242
I Type VG-f inal 1 Subtype Mod-Perf-Ak Modal-stem kSnn Stem lob Form nicht gelobt haben kann Neg T Agr ... 
Figure 5: The structure of the verb fragment "nicht 
gelobt haben kann" - *not praised have could-been 
meaning could not have been praised 
and simply be recognized on the basis of commas, 
initial elements (like complementizer, interrogative 
or relative item - see also fig. 4, where SUBCONJ- 
CL and REL-CL are tags for subclauses) and verb 
fragments. The different ypes of subclauses are de- 
scribed very compactly as finite state expressions. 
Figure 6 shows a (simplified) BC-structure in fea- 
ture matrix notation. 
"Type Subj-Cl 
Subj wenn 
-Type Spannsatz 
Verb J 
"Type stelltenJ Verb .For m 
MF die Arbeitgeber Forderungen) 
Cont \['Type Iohfi\[l 1~ \] \[Type   mp e-Io: I II \[Verb rType Ve.b 1!!I L~.o. rm .u 'eb"enJl|| 
L MF (als Gegenleistung / / /  neue Stellen) j j /  
Figure 6: Simplified feature matrix of the base clause 
"... ,  wenn die Arbeitgeber Forderungen steUten, 
ohne als Gegenleistung neue Stellen zu schaffen." ... 
if the employers make new demands, without compensat- 
ing by creating new jobs. 
Clause combination It is very often the case that 
base clauses are recursively embedded as in the fol- 
lowing example: 
. . .  well der Hund den Braten gefressen 
hatte, den die Frau, nachdem sie ihn zu- 
bereitet hatte, auf die Fensterbank gestellt 
hatte. 
Because the dog ate the beef which was put on 
the window sill after it had been prepared by 
the woman. 
Two sorts of recursion can be distinguished: 1) 
middle field (MF) recursion, where the embedded 
base clause is framed by the left and right verb parts 
of the embedding sentence, and 2) the rest field (RF) 
recursion, where the embedded clause follows the 
right verb part of the embedding sentence. In order 
to express and handle this sort of recursion using 
a finite state approach, both recursions are treated 
as iterations uch that they destructively substitute 
recognized embedded base clauses with their type. 
Hence, the complexity of the recognized structure 
of the sentence is reduced successively. However, 
because subclauses of MF-recursion may have their 
own embedded RF-recursion the CLAUSE COMBINA- 
TION (CC) is used for bundling subsequent base 
clauses before they would be combined with sub- 
clauses identified by the outer MF-recursion. The 
BC and CC module are called until no more base 
clauses can be reduced. If the CC module would not 
be used, then the following incorrect segmentation 
could not be avoided: 
. . .  *\[daft das Gliick \[, das Jochen 
Kroehne ernpfunden haben sollte Rel-C1\] 
\[, als ihm jiingst sein Groflaktion/ir die 
Ubertragungsrechte bescherte Sub j -e l f ,  
nicht mehr so recht erwKrmt Sub j-C1\] 
In the correct reading the second subclause "... als 
ihm jiingst sein .. ." is embedded into the first one 
".. .  das Jochen Kroehne .. .".  
Ma in  c lauses (MC)  Finally the MC module 
builds the complete topological structure of the in- 
put sentence on the basis of the recognized (remain- 
ing) verb groups and base clauses, as well as on the 
word form information ot yet consumed. The latter 
includes basically punctuations and coordinations. 
The following figure schematically describes the cur- 
rent coverage of the implemented MC-module (see 
figure 1 for an example structure): 
CSent 
SSent 
CoordS 
AsyndSent 
CmpCSent 
AsyndCond 
:: . . . .  LVP .. .  \[RVP\] . . .  
::= LVP ...\[RVP\] . . .  
::= CSent ( , CSent)* Coord CSent \] 
::= CSent (, SSent)* Coord SSent 
::= CSent , CSent 
::= CSent , SSent I CSent , CSent 
::= SSent , SSent 
3.2 Phrase recognition 
After the topological structure of a sentence has been 
identified, each substring is passed to the FRAG- 
MENT RECOGNIZER in order to determine the in- 
ternal phrasal structure. Note that processing of 
a substring might still be partial in the sense that 
no complete structure need be found (e.g., if we 
cannot combine sequences of phrases to one larger 
unit). The FRAGMENT RECOGNIZER uses finite state 
grammars in order to extract nominal and preposi- 
tional phrases, where the named entities recognized 
by the preprocessor are integrated into appropriate 
places (unplausibte phrases are rejected by agree- 
ment checking; see (Neumann et al, 1997) for more 
243 
details)). The phrasal recognizer currently only con- 
siders processing of simple, non-recursive structures 
(see fig. 3; here, *NP* and *PP* are used for de- 
noting phrasal types). Note that because of the 
high degree of modularity of our shallow parsing 
architecture, it is very easy to exchange the cur- 
rently domain-independent fragment recognizer with 
a domain-specific one, without effecting the domain- 
independent DC-PARSER. 
The final output of the parser for a sentence is an 
underspecified dependence structure UDS. An UDS 
is a flat dependency-based structure of a sentence, 
where only upper bounds for attachment and scop- 
ing of modifiers are expressed. This is achieved by 
collecting all NPs and PPs of a clause into sepa- 
rate sets as long as they are not part of some sub- 
clauses. This means that although the exact attach- 
ment point of each individual PP is not known it 
is guaranteed that a PP can only be attached to 
phrases which are dominated by the main verb of the 
sentence (which is the root node of the clause's tree). 
However, the exact point of attachment is a matter 
of domain-specific knowledge and hence should be 
defined as part of the domain knowledge of an ap- 
plication. 
4 Evaluat ion 
Due to the limited space, we concentrate on the 
evaluation of the topological structure. An eval- 
uation of the other components (based on a sub- 
set of 20.000 tokens of the mentioned corpus from 
the "Wirtschaftswoche", see below) yields: From 
the 93,89% of the tokens which were identified by 
the morphological component as valid word forms, 
95,23% got a unique POS-assignment with an ac- 
curacy of 97,9%. An initial evaluation on the same 
subset yielded a precision of 95.77% and a recall of 
85% (90.1% F-measure) for our current named en- 
tity finder. Evaluation of the compound analysis 
of nouns, i.e. how often a morphosyntactical cor- 
rect segmentation was found yield: Based on the 
20.000 tokens, 1427 compounds are found, where 
1417 have the correct segmentation (0.9929% preci- 
sion). On a smaller subset of 1000 tokens containing 
102 compounds, 101 correct segmentations where 
found (0.9901% recall), which is a quite promising 
result. An evaluation of simple NPs yielded a recall 
of 0.7611% and precision of 0.9194%. The low recall 
was mainly because of unknown words. 
During the 2nd and 5th of July 1999 a test cor- 
pus of 43 messages from different press releases (viz. 
DEUTSCHE PREESSEAGENTUR (dpa), ASSOCIATED 
PRESS (ap) and REUTERS) and different domains 
(equal distribution of politics, business, sensations) 
was collected. 6 The corpus contains 400 sentences 
6This data collection and evaluation was carried out by 
(Braun, 1999). 
with a total of 6306 words. Note that it also was 
created after the DC-PARSER and all grammars were 
finally implemented. Table 1 shows the result of 
the evaluations (the F-measure was computed with 
/3=1). We used the correctness criteria as defined in 
figure 7. 
The evaluation of each component was measured 
on the basis of the result of all previous components. 
For the BC and MC module we also measured the 
performance by manually correcting the errors of the 
previous components (denoted as "isolated evalua- 
tion"). In most cases the difference between the pre- 
cision and recall values is quite small, meaning that 
the modules keep a good balance between coverage 
and correctness. Only in the case of the MC-module 
the difference is about 5%. However, the result for 
the isolated evaluation of the MC-module suggests 
that this is mainly due to errors caused by previous 
components. 
A more detailed analysis showed that the major- 
ity of errors were caused by mistakes in the prepro- 
cessing phase. For example ten errors were caused 
by an ambiguity between different verb stems (only 
the first reading is chosen) and ten errors because 
of wrong POS-filtering. Seven errors were caused by 
unknown verb forms, and in eight cases the parser 
failed because it could not properly handle the ambi- 
guities of some word forms being either a separated 
verb prefix or adverb. 
The evaluation has been performed with the 
Lisp-based version of SMES (cf. (Neumann et al, 
1997)) by replacing the original bidirectional shal- 
low buttom-up arsing module with the DC-PARSER. 
The average run-time per sentence (average length 
26 words) is 0.57 sec. A C++-version is nearly 
finished missing only the re-implementation f the 
base and main clause recognition phases, cf. (Pisko- 
rski and Neumann, 2000). The run-time behavior 
is already encouraging: processing of a German text 
document (a collection of business news articles from 
the "Wirtschaftswoche") of 197118 tokens (1.26 MB) 
needs 45 seconds on a PentiumII, 266 MHz, 128 
RAM, which corresponds to 4380 tokens per second. 
Since this is an increase in speed-up by a factor > 20 
compared to the Lisp-version, we expect o be able 
to process 75-100 sentences per second. 
5 Re lated  Work 
To our knowledge, there are only very few other 
systems described which process free German texts. 
The new shallow text processor is a direct succes- 
sor of the one used in the SMES-system, an IE-core 
system for real world German text processing (Neu- 
mann et al, 1997). Here, a bidirectional verb-driven 
bottom-up arser was used, where the problems de- 
scribed in this paper concerning parsing of longer 
sentences were encountered. Another similar divide- 
9,a~ 244
Cr i ter ium Match ing of annotated  ata  and results Used by module 
Borders 
Type 
Partial 
Top 
Structl 
Struct2 
start  and end points 
s tar t  and end points, type 
s tar t  or end point, type 
s tar t  and end points, type 
for the largest tag 
see Top, plus test of substructures  
using Par t ia l  
see Top, plus test of substructures  
using Type 
verbforms, BC 
verbforms, BC, MC 
BC 
MC 
MC 
MC 
Figure 7: Correctness criteria used during evaluation. 
Verb-Modu le  
correctness Verb fragments Recall 
criterium total found correct in % 
Borders 897 894 883 98.43 
Type 897 894 880 98.10 
Base-C lause-Modu le  
correctness B C- Fragments Recall 
cmterium total found correct in% 
Type 130 129 121 93.08 
Par t ia l  130 129 125 96.15 
Precision F-measure 
i n% in% 
98.77 98.59 
98.43 98.26 
Precision F-measure 
in % in % 
93180 93.43 
96.89 96.51 
Base-C lause-Modu le  (isolated evaluation) 
correctness 
criterium 
Type 
Partial 
Base-Clauses Recall 
total found correct in % 
130 131 123 94.61 
130 131 127 97.69 
Ma in -C lause-Modu le  
correctness Main-Clauses Recall 
cmtemum total found correct in% 
Top 400 377 361 90.25 
St ruct l  400 377 361 90.25 
Struct2 400 377 356 89.00 
Precision F-measure 
in % in % 
93.89 94.24 
96.94 97.31 
Precision F-measure 
in % in % 
95.75 92.91 
95.75 92.91 
94.42 91.62 
Precision F-measure 
in % in ,% 
96.65 95.30 
96.65 95.30 
95.62 94.29 
Ma ln -C lause-Modu le  (isolated evaluation) 
correctness Main- Clauses Recall 
criterium total found correct in % 
Top 400 389 376 94.00 
St ruct l  400 389 376 94.00 
Struct2 400 389 372 93.00 
complete  analys is  
correctness all components Recall Precision F-measure 
criterium total \[ found \[ correct in% in% in% 
Struct2 400 \[ \ ]377  339 84.75 89.68 87.14 
Table 1: Results of the evaluation of the topological structure 
and-conquer approach using a chart-based parser 
for analysis of German text documents was pre- 
sented by (Wauschkuhn, 1996). Nevertheless, com- 
paring its performance with our approach seems to 
be rather difficult since he only measures for an un- 
annotated test corpus how often his parser finds at 
least one result (where he reports 85.7% "coverage" 
of a test corpus of 72.000 sentences) disregarding to 
measure the accuracy of the parser. In this sense, 
our parser achieved a "coverage" of 94.25% (com- 
puting faund/total), ahnost certainly because we 
use more advanced lexical and phrasal components, 
245 
e.g., pos-filter, compound and named entity process- 
ing. (Peh and Ting, 1996) also describe a divide- 
and-conquer approach based on statistical methods, 
where the segmentation f the sentence is done by 
identifying so called link words (solely punctuations, 
conjunctions and prepositions) and disambiguating 
their specific role in the sentence. On an annotated 
test corpus of 600 English sentences they report an 
accuracy of 85.1% based on the correct recognition of 
part-of-speech, comma nd conjunction disambigua- 
tion, and exact noun phrase recognition. 
6 Conc lus ion and future work 
We have presented a divide-and-conquer st ategy 
for shallow analysis of German texts which is sup- 
ported by means of powerful morphological process- 
ing, efficient POS-filtering and named entity recog- 
nition. Especially for the divide-and-conquer pars- 
ing strategy we obtained an F-measure of 87.14% 
on unseen data. Our shallow parsing strategy has 
a high degree of modularity which allows the inte- 
gration of the domain-independent sentence recog- 
nition part with arbitrary domain-dependent sub- 
components (e.g., specific named entity finders and 
fragment recognizers). 
Considered from an application-oriented point of 
view, our main experience is that even if we are only 
interested in some parts of a text (e.g., only in those 
linguistic entities which verbalize certain aspects of 
a domain-concept) wehave to unfold the structural 
relationship between all elements of a large enough 
area (a paragraph or more) up to a certain level 
of depth in which the relevant information is em- 
bedded. Beside continuing the improvement of the 
whole approach we also started investigations to- 
wards the integration of deep processing into the 
DC-PARSER. The core idea is to call a deep parser 
only to the separated field elements which contain 
sequences of simple NPs and PPs (already deter- 
mined by the shallow parser). Thus seen the shallow 
parser is used as an efficient preprocessor for divid- 
ing a sentence into syntactically valid smaller units, 
where the deep parser's task would be to identify the 
exact constituent s ructure only on demand. 
Acknowledgments 
The research underlying this paper was supported 
by a research grant from the German Bundesmin- 
isterium fiir Bildung, Wissenschaft, Forschung 
und Technologie (BMBF) to the DFKI project 
PARADIME, FKZ ITW 9704. Many thanks to 
Thierry Declerck and Milena Valkova for their sup- 
port during the evaluation of the system. 
References 
S. Abney. 1996. Partial parsing via finite-state cas- 
cades. Proceedings ofthe ESSLLI 96 Robust Pars- 
ing Workshop. 
C. Braun. 1999. Flaches und robustes Parsen 
Deutscher Satzgeffige. Master's thesis, University 
of the Saarland. 
F. Ciravegna, A. Lavelli, N. Mana, L. Gilardoni, 
S. Mazza, M. Ferraro, J. Matiasek, W. Black, 
F. Rinaldi, and D. Mowatt. 1999. Facile: Clas- 
sifying texts integrating pattern matching and in- 
formation extraction. In Proceedings of IJCAI-99, 
Stockholm. 
Ulrich Engel. 1988. Deutsche Grammatik. Julius 
Groos Verlag, Heidelberg, 2., improved edition. 
S. Federici, S. Monyemagni, and V. Pirrelli. 1996. 
Shallow parsing and text chunking: A view on um 
derspecification in syntax. In Workshop on Robust 
Parsing, 8th ESSLLI, pages 35-44. 
G. Neumann, R. Backofen, J. Baur, M. Becker, 
and C. Braun. 1997. An information extraction 
core system for real world german text processing. 
In 5th International Conference of Applied Natu- 
ral Language, pages 208-215, Washington, USA, 
March. 
L. Peh and Christopher H. Ting. 1996. A divide- 
and-conquer strategy for parsing. In Proceedings 
of the ACL/SIGPARSE 5th International Work- 
shop on Parsing Technologies, pages 57-66. 
J. Piskorski and G. Neumann. 2000. An intelligent 
text extraction and navigation system. In 6th In- 
ternational Conference on Computer-Assisted In- 
formation Retrieval (RIAO-2000). Paris, April. 
18 pages. 
E. Roche and Y. Schabes. 1995. Deterministic part- 
of-speech tagging with finite state transducers. 
Computational Linguistics, 21(2):227-253. 
SAIC, editor. 1998. Seventh Message 
Understanding Conference (MUC- 7), 
http://www.muc.saic.com/. SAIC Information 
Extraction. 
S. Sekine and C. Nobata. 1998. An infor- 
mation extraction system and a customization 
tool. In Proceedings of Hitachi workshop-98, 
http://cs.nyu.edu/cs/projects/proteus/sekine/. 
B. Sundheim, editor. 1995. Sixth Message Un- 
derstanding Conference (MUC-6), Washington. 
Distributed by Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 
Inc.,San Mateo, California. 
O. Wauschkuhn. 1996. Ein Werkzeug zur par- 
tiellen syntaktischen Analyse deutscher Textko- 
rpora. In Dafydd Gibbon, editor, Natural Lan- 
guage Processing and Speech Technology. Results 
of the Third KONVENS Conference, pages 356- 
368. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin. 
246 
