Extracting and Evaluating General World Knowledge from the Brown
Corpus
Lenhart Schubert
University of Rochester
schubert@cs.rochester.edu
Matthew Tong
University of Rochester
mt004i@mail.rochester.edu
Abstract
We have been developing techniques for ex-
tracting general world knowledge from miscel-
laneous texts by a process of approximate inter-
pretation and abstraction, focusing initially on
the Brown corpus. We apply interpretive rules
to clausal patterns and patterns of modifica-
tion, and concurrently abstract general ?possi-
bilistic? propositions from the resulting formu-
las. Two examples are ?A person may believe
a proposition?, and ?Children may live with
relatives?. Our methods currently yield over
117,000 such propositions (of variable quality)
for the Brown corpus (more than 2 per sen-
tence). We report here on our efforts to eval-
uate these results with a judging scheme aimed
at determining how many of these propositions
pass muster as ?reasonable general claims?
about the world in the opinion of human judges.
We find that nearly 60% of the extracted propo-
sitions are favorably judged according to our
scheme by any given judge. The percentage
unanimously judged to be reasonable claims by
multiple judges is lower, but still sufficiently
high to suggest that our techniques may be of
some use in tackling the long-standing ?knowl-
edge acquisition bottleneck? in AI.
1 Introduction: deriving general
knowledge from texts
We have been exploring a new method of gaining gen-
eral world knowledge from texts, including fiction. The
method does not depend on full or exact interpretation,
but rather tries to glean general facts from particulars by
combined processes of compositional interpretation and
abstraction. For example, consider a sentence such as the
following from the Brown corpus (Kucera and Francis,
1967):
Rilly or Glendora had entered her room while she
slept, bringing back her washed clothes.
From the clauses and patterns of modification of this sen-
tence, we can glean that an individual may enter a room, a
female individual may sleep, and clothes may be washed.
In fact, given the following Treebank bracketing, our pro-
grams produce the output shown:
((S
(NP
(NP (NNP Rilly) )
(CC or)
(NP (NNP Glendora) ))
(AUX (VBD had) )
(VP (VBN entered)
(NP (PRP\$ her) (NN room) ))
(SBAR (IN while)
(S
(NP (PRP she) )
(VP (VBD slept) )))
(\, \,)
(S
(NP (\-NONE\- \*) )
(VP (VBG bringing)
(PRT (RB back) )
(NP (PRP\$ her) (JJ washed) (NNS clothes) ))))
(\. \.) )
A NAMED-ENTITY MAY ENTER A ROOM.
A FEMALE-INDIVIDUAL MAY HAVE A ROOM.
A FEMALE-INDIVIDUAL MAY SLEEP.
A FEMALE-INDIVIDUAL MAY HAVE CLOTHES.
CLOTHES CAN BE WASHED.
((:I (:Q DET NAMED-ENTITY) ENTER[V] (:Q THE ROOM[N]))
(:I (:Q DET FEMALE-INDIVIDUAL) HAVE[V] (:Q DET ROOM[N]))
(:I (:Q DET FEMALE-INDIVIDUAL) SLEEP[V])
(:I (:Q DET FEMALE-INDIVIDUAL) HAVE[V]
(:Q DET (:F PLUR CLOTHE[N])))
(:I (:Q DET (:F PLUR CLOTHE[N])) WASHED[A]))
The results are produced as logical forms (the last five
lines above ? see Schubert, 2002, for some details), from
which the English glosses are generated automatically.
Our work so far has focused on data in the Penn Tree-
bank (Marcus et al, 1993), particularly the Brown corpus
and some examples from the Wall Street Journal corpus.
The advantage is that Treebank annotations allow us to
postpone the challenges of reasonably accurate parsing,
though we will soon be experimenting with ?industrial
strength? parsers on unannotated texts.
We reported some specifics of our approach and some
preliminary results in (Schubert, 2002). Since then we
have refined our extraction methods to the point where we
can reliably apply them the Treebank corpora, on average
extracting more than 2 generalized propositions per sen-
tence. Applying these methods to the Brown corpus, we
have extracted 137,510 propositions, of which 117,326
are distinct. Some additional miscellaneous examples
are ?A PERSON MAY BELIEVE A PROPOSITION?, ?BILLS
MAY BE APPROVED BY COMMITTEES?, ?A US-STATE MAY
HAVE HIGH SCHOOLS?, ?CHILDREN MAY LIVE WITH RELA-
TIVES?, ?A COMEDY MAY BE DELIGHTFUL?, ?A BOOK MAY
BE WRITE-ED (i.e., written) BY AN AGENT?, ?A FEMALE-
INDIVIDUAL MAY HAVE A SPOUSE?, ?AN ARTERY CAN BE
THICKENED?, ?A HOUSE MAY HAVE WINDOWS?, etc.
The programs that produce these results consist of (1) a
Treebank preprocessor that makes various modifications
to Treebank trees so as to facilitate the extraction of se-
mantic information (for instance, differentiating different
kinds of ?SBAR?, such as S-THAT and S-ALTHOUGH,
and identifying certain noun phrases and prepositional
phrases, such as ?next Friday?, as temporal); (2) a pat-
tern matcher that uses a type of regular-expression lan-
guage to identify particular kinds of phrase structure pat-
terns (e.g., verb + complement patterns, with possible in-
serted adverbials or other material); (3) a semantic pat-
tern extraction routine that associates particular semantic
patterns with particular phrase structure patterns and re-
cursively instantiates and collects such patterns for the
preprocessed tree, in bottom-up fashion; (4) abstraction
routines that abstract away modifiers and other ?type-
preserving operators?, before semantic patterns are con-
structed at the next-higher level in the tree (for instance,
stripping the interpreted modifier ?washed? from the in-
terpreted noun phrase ?her washed clothes?); (5) routines
for deriving propositional patterns from the resulting mis-
cellaneous semantic patterns, and rendering them in a
simple, approximate English form; and (6) heuristic rou-
tines for filtering out many ill-formed or vacuous propo-
sitions. In addition, semantic interpretation of individual
words involves some simple morphological analysis, for
instance to allow the interpretation of (VBD SLEPT) in
terms of a predicate SLEEP[V].
In (Schubert, 2002) we made some comparisons be-
tween our project and earlier work in knowledge extrac-
tion (e.g., (muc, 1993; muc, 1995; muc, 1998; Berland
and Charniak, 1999; Clark and Weir, 1999; Hearst, 1998;
Riloff and Jones, 1999)) and in discovery of selectional
preferences (e.g., (Agirre and Martinez, 2001; Grishman
and Sterling, 1992; Resnik, 1992; Resnik, 1993; Zernik,
1992; Zernik and Jacobs, 1990)). Reiterating briefly, we
note that knowledge extraction work has generally em-
ployed carefully tuned extraction patterns to locate and
extract some predetermined, specific kinds of facts; our
goal, instead, is to process every phrase and sentence that
is encountered, abstracting from it miscellaneous general
knowledge whenever possible. Methods for discovering
selectional preferences do seek out conventional patterns
of verb-argument combination, but tend to ?lose the con-
nection? between argument types (e.g., that a road may
carry traffic, a newspaper may carry a story, but a road is
unlikely to carry a story); in any event, they have not led
so far to amassment of data interpretable as general world
knowledge.
Our concern in this paper is with the evaluation of the
results we currently obtain for the Brown corpus. The
overall goal of this evaluation is to gain some idea of
what proportion of the extracted propositions are likely
to be credible as world knowledge. The ultimate test of
this will of course be systems (e.g., QA systems) that use
such extracted propositions as part of their knowledge
base, but such a test is not immediately feasible. In the
meantime it certainly seems worthwhile to evaluate the
outputs subjectively with multiple judges, to determine
if this approach holds any promise at all as a knowledge
acquisition technique.
In the following sections we describe the judging
method we have developed, and two experiments based
on this method, one aimed at determining whether ?lit-
erary style makes a difference? to the quality of outputs
obtained, and one aimed at assessing the overall success
rate of the extraction method, in the estimation of several
judges.
2 Judging the output propositions
We have created judging software that can be used by the
researchers and other judges to assess the quality and cor-
rectness of the extracted information. The current scheme
evolved from a series of trial versions, starting initially
with a 3-tiered judging scheme, but this turned out to
be difficult to use, and yielded poor inter-judge agree-
ment. We ultimately converged on a simplified scheme,
for which ease of use and inter-judge agreement are sig-
nificantly better.
The following are the instructions to a judge using the
judger program in its current form:
Welcome to the sentence evaluator for the KNEXT knowledge ex-
traction program. Thank you for your participation. You will be
asked to evaluate a series of sentences based on such criteria as
comprehensibility and truth. Do your best to give accurate re-
sponses. The judgement categories are selected to try to ensure
that each sentence fits best in one and only one category. Help is
available for each menu item, along with example sentences, by
selecting ?h?; PLEASE consult this if this is your first time using
this program even if you feel confident of your choice. There is
also a tutorial available, which should also be done if this is your
first time. If you find it hard to make a choice for a particular sen-
tence even after carefully considering the alternatives, you should
probably choose 6 (HARD TO JUDGE)! But if you strongly feel
none of the choices fit a sentence, even after consulting the help
file, please notify Matthew Tong (mtong@cs.rochester.edu) to al-
low necessary modifications to the menus or available help infor-
mation to occur. You may quit at any time by typing ?q?; if you quit
partway through the judgement of a sentence, that partial judge-
ment will be discarded, so the best time to quit is right after being
presented with a new sentence.
  here the first sentence to be judged is presented 
1. SEEMS LIKE A REASONABLE GENERAL CLAIM (Of course. Yes.)
A grand-jury may say a proposition. A report can be favorable.
2. SEEMS REASONABLE BUT EXTREMELY SPECIFIC OR OBSCURE
(I suppose so)
A surgeon may carry a cage. Gladiator pecs can be Reeves-type.
3. SEEMS VACUOUS (That?s not saying anything)
A thing can be a hen. A skiff can be nearest.
4. SEEMS FALSE (No. I don?t think so. Hardly)
A square can be round. Individual -s may have a world.
5. SOMETHING IS OBVIOUSLY MISSING (Give me a complete sentence)
A person may ask. A male-individual may attach an importance.
6. HARD TO JUDGE (Huh?? How do you mean that? I don?t know.)
A female-individual can be psychic. Supervision can be with a company.
Based on this judging scheme, we performed two types
of experiments: an experiment to determine whether lit-
erary style significantly impacts the percentage of propo-
sitions judged favorably; and experiments to assess over-
all success rate, in the judgement of multiple judges. We
obtained clear evidence that literary style matters, and
achieved a moderately high success rate ? but certainly
sufficiently high to assure us that large numbers of po-
tentially useful propositions are extracted by our meth-
ods. The judging consistency remains rather low, but
this does not invalidate our approach. In the worst case,
hand-screening of output propositions by multiple judges
could be used to reject propositions of doubtful validity or
value. But of course we are very interested in developing
less labor-intensive alternatives. The following subsec-
tions provide some details.
2.1 Dependence of extracted propositions on
literary style
The question this experiment addressed was whether dif-
ferent literary styles correlated with different degrees of
success in extracting intuitively reasonable propositions.
The experiment was carried out twice, first by one of the
authors (who was unaware of the contents of the files be-
ing sampled) and the second time by an outside recruit.
While further experimentation is desirable, we believe
that the evidence from two judges that literary style corre-
lates with substantial differences in the perceived quality
of extracted propositions demonstrates that future work
on larger corpora should control the materials used for
literary style.
Judgements were based on 4 Brown files (ck01, ck13,
cd02, cd01). The 4 files were chosen by one of us on
purely subjective grounds. Each contains about 2,200
words of text. (Our extraction methods yield about 1
proposition for every 8 words of text. So each file yields
about 250-300 propositions.) The first two, ck01 and
ck13, are straightforward, realistic narratives in plain, un-
adorned English, while cd01 and cd02 are philosophical
and theological essays employing much abstract and fig-
urative language. The expectation was that the first two
texts would yield significantly more propositions judged
to be reasonable general claims about the world than the
latter two. To give some sense of the contents, the first
few sentences from each of the texts are extracted here:
Initial segments of each of the four texts
ck01: Scotty did not go back to school. His parents talked seri-
ously and lengthily to their own doctor and to a specialist
at the University Hospital? Mr. McKinley was entitled
to a discount for members of his family? and it was de-
cided it would be best for him to take the remainder of the
term off, spend a lot of time in bed and, for the rest, do
pretty much as he chose? provided, of course, he chose
to do nothing too exciting or too debilitating. His teacher
and his school principal were conferred with and everyone
agreed that, if he kept up with a certain amount of work at
home, there was little danger of his losing a term.
ck13: In the dim underwater light they dressed and straight-
ened up the room, and then they went across the hall to
the kitchen. She was intimidated by the stove. He found
the pilot light and turned on one of the burners for her. The
gas flamed up two inches high. They found the teakettle.
And put water on to boil and then searched through the
icebox.
cd01: As a result, although we still make use of this distinction,
there is much confusion as to the meaning of the basic
terms employed. Just what is meant by ?spirit? and by
?matter??? The terms are generally taken for granted as
though they referred to direct and axiomatic elements in
the common experience of all. Yet in the contemporary
context this is precisely what one must not do. For in the
modern world neither ?spirit? nor ?matter? refer to any
generally agreed-upon elements of experience...
cd02: If the content of faith is to be presented today in a form
that can be ?understanded of the people?? and this, it must
not be forgotten, is one of the goals of the perennial the-
ological task? there is no other choice but to abandon
completely a mythological manner of representation. This
does not mean that mythological language as such can no
longer be used in theology and preaching. The absurd
notion that demythologization entails the expurgation of
all mythological concepts completely misrepresents Bult-
mann?s intention.
Extracted propositions were uniformly sampled from
the 4 files, for a total count of 400, and the number of
judgements in each judgement category were then sep-
arated out for the four files. In a preliminary version of
this experiment, the judgement categories were still the 3-
level hierarchical ones we eventually dropped in favor of
a 6-alternatives scheme. Still, the results clearly indicated
that the ?plain? texts yielded significantly more propo-
sitions judged to be reasonable claims than the more
abstract texts. Two repetitions of the experiment (with
newly sampled propositions from the 4 files) using the 6-
category judging scheme, and the heuristic postprocess-
ing and filtering routines, yielded the following unequiv-
ocal results. (The exact sizes of the samples from files
ck01, ck13, cd01, and cd02 in both repetitions were 120,
98, 85, and 97 respectively, where the relatively high
count for ck01 reflects the relatively high count of ex-
tracted propositions for that text.)
  For ck01 and ck13 around 73% of the propositions
(159/218 for judge 1 and 162/218 for judge 2) were
judged to be in the ?reasonable general claim? cat-
egory; for cd01 and cd02, the figures were much
lower, at 41% (35/85 for judge 1 and 40/85 for judge
2) and less than 55% (53/97 for judge 1 and 47/97
for judge 2) respectively.
  For ck01 and ck13 the counts in the ?hard to judge?
category were 12.5-15% (15-18/120) and 7.1-8.2%
(6-7/85) respectively, while for cd01 and cd02 the
figures were substantially higher, viz., 25.9-28.2%
(22-24/85) and 19.6-23% (19-34/97) respectively.
Thus, as one would expect, simple narrative texts
yield more propositions recognized as reasonable claims
about the world (nearly 3 out of 4) than abstruse an-
alytical materials (around 1 out of 2). The question
then is then how to control for style when we turn
our methods to larger corpora. One obvious answer
is to hand-select texts in relevant categories, such as
literature for young readers, or from authors whose
writings are realistic and stylistically simple (e.g., Hem-
ingway). However, this could be quite laborious since
large literary collections available online (such as the
works in Project Gutenberg, http://promo.net/pg/,
http://www.thalasson.com/gtn/, with expired
copyrights) are not sorted by style. Thus we expect to use
automated style analysis methods, taking account of such
factors as vocabulary (checking for esoteric vocabulary
and vocabulary indicative of fairy tales and other fanciful
fiction), tense (analytical material is often in present
tense), etc. We may also turn our knowledge extraction
methods themselves to the task: if, for instance, we find
propositions about animals talking, it may be best to skip
the text source altogether.
2.2 Overall quality of extracted propositions
To assess the quality of extracted propositions over a wide
variety of Brown corpus texts, with judgements made by
multiple judges, the authors and three other individuals
made judgements on the same set of 250 extracted propo-
sitions. The propositions were extracted from the third
of the Brown corpus (186 files) that had been annotated
with WordNet senses in the SEMCOR project (Landes et
al., 1998) (chiefly because those were the files at hand
when we started the experiment ? but they do represent a
broad cross-section of the Brown Corpus materials). We
excluded the cj-files, which contain highly technical ma-
terial.
Table 1 shows the judgements of the 5 judges (as per-
centages of counts out of 250) in each of the six judge-
ment categories. The category descriptions have been
mnemonically abbreviated at the top of the table. Judge
1 appears twice, and this represents a repetition, as a test
of self-consistency, of judgements on the same data pre-
sented in different randomized orderings.
reasonable obscure vacuous false incomplete hard
9.6 0.4 7.6 12.8
9.6 0.4 7.2 11.6
54.8 14.8 5.6 8.8 5.2
6.4 3.2 7.6
8.4 4.8
60.0 9.6
61.6
49.0
10.4
9.2
2.8
8.4
12.4
10.0
22.5
judge 1
judge 1
judge 2
judge 4 64.0
judge 5
judge 3
58.4 4.4 0.8 2.8 10.0 23.2
Judgements (in %) for 250 randomly sampled propositionsTable 1.
As can be seen from the first column, the judges placed
about 49-64% of the propositions in the ?reasonable gen-
eral claim? category. This result is consistent with the re-
sults of the style-dependency study described above, i.e.,
the average lies between the ones for ?straightforward?
narratives (which was nearly 3 out of 4) and the ones for
abstruse texts (which was around 1 out of 2). This is an
encouraging result, suggesting that mining general world
knowledge from texts can indeed be productive.
One point to note is that the second and third judge-
ment categories need not be taken as an indictment of the
propositions falling under them ? while we wanted to dis-
tinguish overly specific, obscure, or vacuous propositions
from ones that seem potentially useful, such propositions
would not corrupt a knowledge base in the way the other
categories would (false, incomplete, or incoherent propo-
sitions). Therefore, we have also collapsed our data into
three more inclusive categories, namely ?true? (collaps-
ing the first 3 categories), ?false? (same as the original
?false? category), and ?undecidable? (collapsing the last
two categories). The corresponding variant of Table 1
would thus be obtained by summing the first 3 and last
2 columns. We won?t do so explicitly, but it is easy to
verify that the proportion of ?true? judgements comprise
about three out of four judgements, when averaged over
the 5 judges.
We now turn to the extent of agreement among the
judgements of the five judges (and judge 1 with himself
on the same data). The overall pairwise agreement results
for classification into six judgement catagories are shown
in Table 2.
judge 1
90.1
56.9 10.4
61.7 62.4
57.358.5
judge 1
judge 2
judge 3
judge 4
judge 5
54.5
56.0 49.3
judge 2 judge 3 judge 4
Table 2. Overall % agreement among judges
for 250 propositions
60.1
A commonly used metric for evaluating interrater relia-
bility in categorization of data is the kappa statistic (Car-
letta, 1996). As a concession to the popularity of that
statistic, we compute it in a few different ways here,
though ? as we will explain ? we do not consider it par-
ticularly appropriate. For 6 judgement categories, kappa
computed in the conventional way for pairs of judges
ranges from .195 to .367, averaging .306. For 3 (more in-
clusive) judgement categories, the pairwise kappa scores
range from .303 to .462, with an average of .375.
These scores, though certainly indicating a positive
correlation between the assessments of multiple judges,
are well below the lower threshold of .67 often employed
in deciding whether judgements are sufficiently consis-
tent across judges to be useful. However, to see that there
is a problem with applying the conventional statistic here,
imagine that we could improve our extraction methods to
the point where 99% of extracted propositions are judged
by miscellaneous judges to be reasonable general claims.
This would be success beyond our wildest dreams ? yet
the kappa statistic might well be 0 (the worst possible
score), if the judges generally reject a different one out of
every one hundred propositions!
One somewhat open-ended aspect of the kappa statistic
is the way ?expected? agreement is calculated. In the con-
ventional calculation (employed above), this is based on
the observed average frequency in each judgement cate-
gory. This leads to low scores when one category is over-
whelmingly favored by all judges, but the exceptions to
the favored judgement vary randomly among judges (as
in the hypothetical situation just described). A possible
way to remedy this problem is to use a uniform distri-
bution over judgement categories to compute expected
agreement. Under such an assumption, our kappa scores
are significantly better: for 6 categories, they range from
.366 to .549, averaging .482; for 3 categories, they range
from .556 to .730, averaging .645. This approaches, and
for several pairs of judges exceeds, the minimum thresh-
old for significance of the judgements.1
Since the ideal result, as implied above, would be
agreement by multiple judges on the ?reasonableness? or
truth of a large proportion of extracted propositions, it
seems worthwhile to measure the extent of such agree-
ment as well. Therefore we have also computed the
?survival rates? of extracted propositions, when we re-
ject those not judged to be reasonable general claims by
  judges (or, in the case of 3 categories, not judged to be
true by   judges). Figure 1 shows the results, where the
survival rate for   judges is averaged over all subsets of
size   of the 5 available judges.
1 2 3 4 5
.6
.8
.4
.2
0
1
Fraction of survivors
number of  concurring  judges
"true" (3 categories)
(6 categories)
"reasonable general claim"
by multiple judges
.75
.65
.31
.28
.35
.43
.57 .59
.52
.55
 Fraction of propositions placed in best categoryFigure 1.
Thus we find that the survival rate for ?reasonable gen-
eral claims? starts off at 57%, drops to 43% and then 35%
for 2 and 3 judges, and drops further to 31% and 28% for
4 and 5 judges. It appears as if an asymptotic level above
20% might be reached. But this may be an unrealistic
extrapolation, since virtually any proposition, no matter
how impeccable from a knowledge engineering perspec-
tive, might eventually be relegated to one of the other 5
categories by some uninvolved judge. The survival rates
based on 2 or 3 judges seem to us more indicative of the
likely proportion of (eventually) useful propositions than
an extrapolation to infinitely many judges. For the 3-way
judgements, we see that 75% of extracted propositions
are judged ?true? by individual judges (as noted earlier),
and this drops to 65% and then 59% for 2 and 3 judges.
Though again sufficiently many judges may eventually
bring this down to 40% or less, the survival rate is cer-
tainly high enough to support the claim that our method
of deriving propositions from texts can potentially deliver
very large amounts of world knowledge.
1The fact that for some pairs of judges the kappa-agreement
(with this version of kappa) exceeds 0.7 indicates that with more
careful training of judges significant levels of agreement could
be reached consistently.
3 Conclusions and further work
We now know that large numbers of intuitively reason-
able general propositions can be extracted from a cor-
pus that has been bracketed in the manner of the Penn
Treebank. The number of ?surviving? propositions for
the Brown corpus, based on the judgements of multiple
judges, is certainly in the tens of thousands, and the dupli-
cation rate is a rather small fraction of the overall number
(about 15%).
Of course, there is the problem of screening out, as
far as possible, the not-so-reasonable propositions. One
step strongly indicated by our experiment on the effect of
style is to restrict extraction to the kinds of texts that yield
higher success rates ? namely those written in straightfor-
ward, unadorned language. As we indicated, both style
analysis techniques and our own proposition extraction
methods could be used to select stylistically suitable ma-
terials from large online corpora.
Even so, a significant residual error rate will remain.
There are two remedies ? a short-term, brute-force rem-
edy, and a longer-term computational remedy. The brute-
force remedy would be to hand-select acceptable propo-
sitions. This would be tedious work, but it would still
be far less arduous than ?dreaming up? such proposi-
tions; besides, most of the propositions are of a sort one
would not readily come up with spontaneously (?A per-
son may paint a porch?, ?A person may plan an attack?,
?A house may have a slate roof?, ?Superstition may blend
with fact?, ?Evidence of shenanigans may be gathered by
a tape recorder?, etc.)
The longer-term computational remedy is to use a
well-founded parser and grammar, providing syntactic
analyses better suited to semantic interpretation than
Treebank trees. Our original motivation for using the
Penn Treebank, apart from the fact that it instantly pro-
vides a large number of parsed sentences from miscella-
neous genres, was to determine how readily such parses
might permit semantic interpretation. The Penn Tree-
bank pays little heed to many of the structural principles
and features that have preoccupied linguists for decades.
Would these turn out to be largely irrelevant to seman-
tics? We were actually rather pessimistic about this,
since the Treebank data tacitly posit tens of thousands of
phrase structure rules with inflated, heterogeneous right-
hand sides, and phrase classifications are very coarse (no-
tably, with no distinctions between adjuncts and com-
plements, and with many clause-like constructs, whether
infinitives, subordinate clauses, clausal adverbials, nom-
inalized questions, etc., lumped together as ?SBAR? ?
and these are surely semantically crucial distinctions). So
we are actually surprised at our degree of success in ex-
tracting sensible general propositions on the basis of such
rough-and-ready syntactic annotations.
Nonetheless, our extracted propositions in the ?some-
thing missing? and ?hard to judge? categories do quite
often reflect the limitations of the Treebank analyses. For
example, the incompleteness of the proposition ?A male-
individual may attach an importance? seen above as an il-
lustration of judgement category 5 can be attributed to the
lack of any indication that the PP[to] constituent of the
verb phrase in the source sentence is a verb complement
rather than an adjunct. Though our heuristics try to sort
out complements from adjuncts, they cannot fully make
up for the shortcomings of the Treebank annotations. It
therefore seems clear that we will ultimately need to base
knowledge extraction on more adequate syntactic analy-
ses than those provided by the Brown annotations.
Another general conclusion concerns the ease or dif-
ficulty of broad-coverage semantic interpretation. Even
though our interpretive goals up to this point have been
rather modest, our success in providing rough semantic
rules for much of the Brown corpus suggests to us that
full, broad-coverage semantic interpretation is not very
far out of reach. The reason for optimism lies in the ?sys-
tematicity? of interpretation. There is no need to hand-
construct semantic rules for each and every phrase struc-
ture rule. We were able provide reasonably comprehen-
sive semantic coverage of the many thousands of distinct
phrase types in Brown with just 80 regular-expression
patterns (each aimed at a class of related phrase types)
and corresponding semantic rules. Although our seman-
tic rules do omit some constituents (such as prenominal
participles, non-initial conjuncts in coordination, adver-
bials injected into the complement structure of a verb,
etc.) and gloss over subtleties involving gaps (traces),
comparatives, ellipsis, presupposition, etc., they are not
radical simplifications of what would be required for full
interpretation. The simplicity of our outputs is due not so
much to oversimplification of the semantic rules, as to the
deliberate abstraction and culling of information that we
perform in extracting general propositions from a specific
sentence. Of course, what we mean here by semantic in-
terpretation is just a mapping to logical form. Our project
sheds no light on the larger issues in text understanding
such as referent determination, temporal analysis, infer-
ence of causes, intentions and rhetorical relations, and
so on. It was the relative independence of the kind of
knowledge we are extracting of these issues that made
our project attractive and feasible in the first place.
Among the miscellaneous improvements under consid-
eration are the use of lexical distinctions and WordNet
abstraction to arrive at more reliable interpretations; the
use of modules to determine the types of neuter pronouns
and of traces (e.g., in ?She looked in the cookie jar, but it
was empty?, we should be able to abstract the proposition
that a cookie jar may be empty, using the referent of ?it?);
and extracting properties of events by making use of in-
formation in adverbials (e.g.,, from ?He slept soundly?
we should be able to abstract the proposition that sleep
may be sound; also many causal propositions can be in-
ferred from adverbial constructions). We also hope to
demonstrate extraction results through knowledge elici-
taton questions (e.g.,?What do you know about books??,
etc.)
4 Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to David Ahn for contributing
ideas and for extensive help in preparing and processing
Brown corpus files, conducting some of the reported ex-
periments, and performing some differential analyses of
results. We also benefited from the discussions and ideas
contributed by Greg Carlson and Henry Kyburg in the
context of our ?Knowledge Mining? group, and we ap-
preciate the participation of group members and outside
recruits in the judging experiments. As well, we thank
Peter Clark and Phil Harrison (at Boeing Company) for
their interest and suggestions. This work was supported
by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. IIS-
0082928.
References
Eneko Agirre and David Martinez. 2001. Learning
class-to-class selectional preferences. In Proc. of the
5th Workshop on Computational Language Learning
(CoNLL-2001), Toulouse, France, July 6-7,.
Matthew Berland and Eugene Charniak. 1999. Find-
ing parts in very large corpora. In Proc. of the 37th
Ann. Meet. of the Assoc. for Computational Linguistics
(ACL-99), Univ. of Maryland, June 22 - 27,.
Jean Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on classifica-
tion tasks: the kappa statistic. Computational Linguis-
tics, 22(2):249?254.
Stephen Clark and David Weir. 1999. An iterative
approach to estimating frequencies over a semantic
hierarchy. In Proc. of the Joint SIGDAT Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing and Very Large Corpora. Also available at
http://www.cogs.susx.ac.uk/users/davidw/research/
papers.html.
Ralph Grishman and John Sterling. 1992. Acquisition
of selectional patterns. In Proc. of COLING-92, pages
658?664, Nantes, France.
Marti A. Hearst. 1998. Automated discovery of Word-
Net relations. In Christiane Fellbaum, editor, Word-
Net: An Electronic Lexical Database, pages 131?153?
MIT Press.
H. Kucera and W.N. Francis. 1967. Computational Anal-
ysis of Present-Day American English. Brown Univer-
sity Press, Providence, RI.
Shari Landes, Claudia Leacock, and Randee I. Tengi.
1998. Building semantic concordances. In Chris-
tiane Fellbaum, editor, WordNet: An Electronic Lexi-
cal Database, pages chapter 8, 199?216. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated cor-
pus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computational
Linguistics, 19(2):313?330, June.
1993. Proc. of the 5th Message Understanding Confer-
ence (MUC-5). Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA.
1995. Proc. of the 6th Message Understanding Confer-
ence (MUC-6). Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA.
1998. Proc. of the 7th Message Understanding Confer-
ence (MUC-7). Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA,
April 29 ? May 1, Virginia.
P. Resnik. 1992. A class-based approach to lexical dis-
covery. In Proc. of the 30th Ann. Meet. of the Assoc.
for Computational Linguistics (ACL-92), pages 327?
329, Newark, DE.
P. Resnik. 1993. Semantic classes and syntactic ambigu-
ity. In Proc. of ARPA Workshop on Human Language
Technology, Plainsboro, NJ.
Ellen Riloff and Rosie Jones. 1999. Learning dictio-
naries for information extraction by multi-level boot-
strapping. In Proc. of the 16th Nat. Conf. on Artificial
Intelligence (AAAI-99).
Lenhart K. Schubert. 2002. Can we derive general world
knowledge from texts? In Proc. of 2nd Int. Conf. on
Human Language Technology Research (HLT 2002),
pages 94?97, San Diego, CA, March 24-27.
Uri Zernik and Paul Jacobs. 1990. Tagging for learning:
Collecting thematic relations from corpus. In Proc.
of the 13th Int. Conf. on Computational Linguistics
(COLING-90), pages 34?39, Helsinki.
Uri Zernik. 1992. Closed yesterday and closed minds:
Asking the right questions of the corpus to distin-
guish thematic from sentential relations. In Proc. of
COLING-92, pages 1304?1311, Nantes, France, Aug.
23-28,.
