Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Psychocomputational Models of Human Language Acquisition, pages 69?71,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Statistics vs. UG in language acquisition: 
Does a bigram analysis predict auxiliary inversion? 
 
 
Xu?n-Nga Cao Kam Iglika Stoyneshka Lidiya Tornyova 
PhD Program in Linguistics PhD Program in Linguistics PhD Program in Linguistics 
The Graduate Center, 
City University of New York 
The Graduate Center, 
City University of New York 
The Graduate Center, 
City University of New York 
xkam@gc.cuny.edu idst_r@yahoo.com ltornyova@gc.cuny.edu 
 
William Gregory Sakas Janet Dean Fodor 
PhD Programs in Computer Science and Linguistics 
The Graduate Center 
PhD Program in Linguistics  
The Graduate Center 
Department of Computer Science, 
Hunter College, 
City University of New York 
sakas@hunter.cuny.edu 
City University of New York 
jfodor@gc.cuny.edu 
 
 
 
 
Extended Abstract 
Reali & Christiansen (2003, 2004) have challenged 
Chomsky?s most famous "poverty of stimulus" 
claim (Chomsky, 1980) by showing that a 
statistical learner which tracks transitional 
probabilities between adjacent words (bigrams) 
can correctly differentiate grammatical and 
ungrammatical auxiliary inversion in questions like 
(1) and (2): 
 
(1) Is the little boy who is crying hurt? 
(2) *Is the little boy who crying is hurt? 
 
No examples like (1) occurred in the corpus that 
R&C employed, yet the grammatical form was 
chosen by the bigram model in 92% of the test 
sentence pairs. R&C conclude that no innate 
knowledge is necessary to guide child learners in 
making this discrimination, because the input 
evidently contains enough indirect statistical 
information (from other sentence types) to lead 
learners to the correct generalization.  
 
R&C's data are impressive, but there is reason to 
doubt that they extend to other natural languages or 
even to other constructions in English. While 
replicating R&C's Experiment 1 (see Data [A]), we 
discovered that its success rests on 'accidental' 
English facts. 
 
Six bigrams differ between the grammatical and 
ungrammatical versions of a sentence. (The 6 
relevant bigrams for the test sentence pair (1)/(2) 
are shown in Table 1.) However, 86% of the 
correctly predicted test sentences were definitively 
selected by the single bigram "who is" (or "that 
is"), because it occurred in the corpus and none of 
the remaining 5 bigrams did. 
 
Distinctive 
bigrams in (1) who is is crying crying hurt 
Distinctive 
bigrams in (2) who crying crying is is hurt 
 
Table 1. Six bigrams that differentiate Is the little 
boy who is crying hurt? from Is the little boy who 
crying is hurt? The first sentence is selected (as 
grammatical) solely due to the high probability of 
who is. 
 
It can be anticipated that when there is no 
bigram ?who/that is? in the grammatical test 
69
sentence (e.g., in relative clauses with object-gaps, 
auxiliaries such as was, can, or do-support), the 
learning will be less successful. Our results 
confirm this prediction: object relatives like (4) 
and (5), where "who/that is? is not present, were 
poorly discriminated (see Data [B]). 
 
(4) Is the wagon your sister is pushing red? 
(5) *Is the wagon your sister pushing is red? 
  
Results for sentences with only main verbs, 
requiring do-support in question-formation, like (6) 
and (7), were also very weak (see Data [C]). 
 
(6) Does the boy who plays the drum want a 
cookie? 
(7) *Does the boy who play the drum wants a 
cookie? 
  
Furthermore, the powerful effect of "who/that 
is" in R&C?s experiment reflects no knowledge of 
relative clauses. It rests on the homophony of 
English relative pronouns with interrogative "who" 
and deictic "that". In R&C's training-set, the 
phonological/orthographic form "who" occurred as 
relative pronoun only 3 times, but as interrogative 
pronoun 44 times. R&C's analysis didn't 
differentiate these. (Similarly for "that": 14 relative 
versus 778 deictic or complementizer.) 
 
In some languages relative pronouns are 
homophonous with other parts of speech (e.g., with 
determiners in German). We explored the possible 
effects of this by replacing the relative pronouns in 
the English corpus with ?the?. Discrimination 
between grammatical and ungrammatical aux-
inversion was poor (see Data [D]). 
 
Many human languages lack any such 
superficial overlaps with relative pronouns. So 
unless there are other cues instead, learning can be 
expected to be unsuccessful in those languages too. 
We tested this hypothesis in two ways:  
 
(i) We distinguished relative pronouns from their 
non-relative homophones in English by coding 
the former as ?who-rel? and ?that-rel? in both 
the corpus and the test sentences. We found a 
greatly reduced ability to select the grammatical 
aux-inversion construction (see Data [E]).  
 
(ii) We tested verb fronting in Dutch questions, 
using a Dutch corpus comparable to the English 
corpus used by R&C (the Groningen Dutch 
corpus from CHILDES; approximately 21,000 
utterances of child-directed speech, age 1;8 to 
1;11). Due largely to verb-final word order in 
relative clauses, there was no one distinctive 
bigram that could be relied on to predict the 
correct choice. Performance on a set of 20 items 
tested so far was no better than chance (see 
Data [F]). Clearly, the Dutch examples 
provided no alternative cues for selecting the 
grammatical version.   
 
Thus, the success rate in R&C?s experiment has 
very limited applicability. In general, bigram 
probability (or sentence cross-entropy, as 
computed in these experiments) is a poor predictor 
of grammaticality; e.g., the measure that prefers (1) 
over (2) mis-prefers (8) over (9):  
 
(8) *Scared you want to the doggie. 
(9) She can hear what we?re saying. 
 
We conclude that the bigram evidence against 
the poverty of the stimulus for language 
acquisition has not been substantiated to date. It 
remains to be seen whether richer statistics-based 
inductive models will offer more robust cross-
language learnability. 
References 
Chomsky, N. (1980). in M. Piattelli-Palmarini, 
(1980) Language and Learning: The Debate 
Between Jean Piaget and Noam Chomsky. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.  
 
Reali, F. & Christiansen, M. H. (2003). 
Reappraising Poverty of Stimulus Argument: A 
Corpus Analysis Approach. BUCLD 28 
Proceedings Supplement. 
 
Reali, F. & Christiansen, M. H. (2004). Structure 
Dependence in Language Acquisition: 
Uncovering the Statistical Richness of the 
Stimulus. Proceedings of the 26th Annual 
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society. 
 
 
70
 Data 
 
  
% correct 
 
% incorrect 
 
% can?t 
choose 
# of sentence 
pairs tested 
to date 
 
Experiment 
A 87 13 0 100 Replication of R&C 
B 33 15 52 100 Object-gap 
C 50 50 0 50 Do-support 
D 17 41 42 100 ?The? replacement 
E 17 39 44 100 Who-rel/That-rel 
F 45 50 5 20 Dutch 
 
71
