Proceedings of the Workshop on Embodied Language Processing, pages 67?74,
Prague, Czech Republic, June 28, 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Design and validation of ECA gestures to improve                   
dialogue system robustness 
Beatriz L?pez, ?lvaro Hern?ndez, David D?az, 
Rub?n Fern?ndez, Luis Hern?ndez 
GAPS, Signal, Systems and Radiocommunications 
Department 
Universidad Polit?cnica de Madrid                          
Ciudad Universitaria s/n, 28040 Madrid, Spain 
alvaro@gaps.ssr.upm.es 
Doroteo Torre 
 
ATVS, Escuela Polit?cnica Superior 
Universidad Aut?noma de Madrid   
Ciudad Universitaria de Cantoblanco, 
28049 Madrid, Spain 
Doroteo.torre@uam.es 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
In this paper we present validation tests 
that we have carried out on gestures that 
we have designed for an embodied conver-
sational agent (ECAs), to assess their 
soundness with a view to applying said 
gestures in a forthcoming experiment to 
explore the possibilities ECAs can offer to 
overcome typical robustness problems in 
spoken language dialogue systems 
(SLDSs). The paper is divided into two 
parts: First we carry our a literature review 
to acquire a sense of the extent to which 
ECAs can help overcome user frustration 
during human-machine interaction. Then 
we associate tentative, yet specific, ECA 
gestural behaviour with each of the main 
dialogue stages, with special emphasis on 
problem situations. In the second part we 
describe the tests we have carried out to 
validate our ECA?s gestural repertoire. The 
results obtained show that users generally 
understand and naturally accept the ges-
tures, to a reasonable degree. This encour-
ages us to proceed with the next stage of 
research: evaluating the gestural strategy in 
real dialogue situations with the aim of 
learning about how to favour a more effi-
cient and pleasant dialogue flow for the us-
ers.  
1 Introduction 
Spoken language dialogue systems and embodied 
conversational agents are being introduced in a 
rapidly increasing number of Human-Computer 
Interaction (HCI) applications. The technologies 
involved in SLDSs (speech recognition, dialogue 
design, etc.) are mature enough to allow the crea-
tion of trustworthy applications. However, robust-
ness problems still arise in concrete limited dia-
logue systems because there are many error 
sources that may cause the system to perform 
poorly. A common example is that users tend to 
repeat their previous utterance with some frustra-
tion when error recovery mechanisms come into 
play, which does not help the recognition process, 
and as a result using the system seems slow and 
unnatural (Boyce, 1999). 
At the same time, embodied conversational 
agents (ECAs) are gaining prominence in HCI sys-
tems, since they make for more user-friendly ap-
plications while increasing communication effec-
tiveness. There are many studies on the effects ?
from psychological to efficiency in goal achieve-
ment? ECAs have on users of a variety of applica-
tions, see Bickmore et al (2004) and Brave et al 
(2005), but still very few (Bell and Gustafson,  
2003) on the impact of ECAs in directed dialogue 
situations where robustness is a problem.  
Our research explores the potential of ECAs to 
assist in, or resolve, certain difficult dialogue situa-
tions that have been identified by various leading 
authors in the field (Cassell and Thorisson, 1999; 
Cassell and Stone, 1999), as well as a few we our-
67
selves suggest. After identifying the problematic 
situations of the dialogue we suggest a gestural 
strategy for the ECA to respond to such problem 
situations. Then we propose an experimental 
framework, for forthcoming tests, to study the po-
tential benefits of adding nonverbal communica-
tion in complex dialogue situations. In the study 
we present here we focus on preliminary validation 
of our gestural repertoire through user tests. We 
conclude by presenting our results and suggesting 
the direction our research will take from this point.   
2 How ECA technology can improve in-
teraction with SLDSs 
There are many nonverbal elements of communi-
cation in everyday life that are important because 
they convey a considerable amount of information 
and qualify the spoken message, sometimes even 
to the extent that what is meant is actually the op-
posite of what is said (Krauss et al, 1996). ECAs 
offer the possibility to combine several communi-
cation modes such as speech and gestures, making 
it possible, in theory, to create interfaces with 
which human-machine interaction is much more 
natural and comfortable. In fact, they are already 
being employed to improve interaction (Massaro et 
al., 2000). 
These are some common situations with SLDSs 
in which an ECA could have a positive effect: 
Efficient turn management: The body language 
and expressiveness of agents are important not 
only to reinforce the spoken message, but also to 
regulate the flow of the dialogue, as Cassell points 
out (in Bickmore et al, 2004). 
Improving error recovery: The process of rec-
ognition error recovery usually leads to a certain 
degree of user frustration (see Oviatt and VanGent, 
1996). Indeed, it is common, once an error occurs, 
to enter into an error spiral in which the system is 
trying to recover, the user gets ever more frustrated, 
and this frustration interferes in the recognition 
process making the situation worse (Oviatt et al, 
1998). ECAs may help reduce frustration, and by 
doing so make error recovery more effective (Hone, 
2005). 
Correct understanding of the state of the dia-
logue: Sometimes the user doesn?t know whether 
or not things are going normally (Oviatt, 1994). 
This sometimes leads the dialogue to error states 
that could be avoided. The expressive capacity of 
ECAs could be used to reflect with greater clarity 
the state the system takes the dialogue to be in. 
3 Suggesting ECA behaviour for each 
dialogue situation 
A variety of studies have been carried out on be-
havioural strategies for embodied conversational 
agents (Poggi, 2001; Cassell et al, 2000; Cassell et 
al., 2001; Chovil, 1992; Kendon, 1990), which deal 
with behaviour in hypothetical situations and in 
terms of the informational goals of each particular 
interaction (be it human-human or human-
machine). We direct our attention to the overall 
dialogue systems dynamics, focussing specifically 
on typical robustness problems and how to favour 
smooth sailing through the different stages of the 
dialogue. We draw from existing research under-
taken to try to understand the effects different ges-
tures displayed by ECAs have on people, and we 
apply this knowledge to a real dialogue system. In 
Table 1 we show the basic set of gestures we are 
using as a starting point. They are based mainly on 
descriptions in Bickmore (et al, 2004) and Cassell 
(et al, 2000), and on recommendations in Cassell 
and Thorisson (1999), Cassell (et al, 2001), Chovil 
(1992), Kendon (1990) and San-Segundo (et al, 
2001), to which we have added a few suggestions 
of our own.  
 
Dialogue stage 
ECA behaviour  
(movements, gestures and other cues) 
Initiation  
(welcoming the 
user)  
1. Welcome message: look at the camera, 
smile, wave hand 
2. Explanation of the task: zoom in 
3. Zoom out, lights dim 
Give turn 
 
Look directly at the user, raise eyebrows.   
Camera zooms out. Lights dim. 
Take turn Look directly at the user, raise hands into ges-
ture space. Camera zooms in. Light gets 
brighter. 
Wait Slight leaning back, one arm crossed and the 
other touching the cheek shift of body weight 
Help 
 
Beat gesture with the hands. Change of posture 
Error recovery 
with correction 
Lean towards the camera, beat gesture 
Confirmation 
(high  
confidence) 
Nod, smile, eyes fully open 
Confirmation 
(low  
confidence) 
Slight leaning of the head to one side, stop 
smiling, mildly squint 
Table 1: Gesture repertoire for the main dialogue 
stages 
 
68
3.1 Initiation 
The inclusion of an ECA at this stage ?humanises? 
the system (Oviatt and Adams, 2000). This is a 
problem, first because once a user has such high 
expectations the system can only end up disap-
pointing her, and secondly because the user will 
tend to use more natural (and thus complex) com-
munication, which the system is unable to handle, 
and the experience will ultimately be frustrating. 
On the other hand, especially in the case of new 
users, contact with a dialoguing animated character 
may have the effect that the user?s level of atten-
tion to the actual information that is being given is 
reduced (Schaumburg, 2001; Catrambone, 2002). 
Thus the goal is to present a human-like interface 
that is, at the same time, less striking and thus less 
distracting at first contact, and one that clearly 
?sets the rules? of the interaction and makes sure 
that the user keeps it framed within the capability 
of the system. 
We have designed a welcome gesture for our 
ECA based on the recommendations in Kendon 
(1990), to test whether or not it fosters a sense of 
ease in the user and helps her concentrate on the 
task at hand. Playing with the zoom, the size and 
the position of the ECA on the screen may also 
prove to be useful to frame the communication bet-
ter (see Table 1). 
3.2 Turn Management 
Turn management involves two basic actions: 
taking turn and giving turn. Again, in Table 1 we 
show the corresponding ECA gestures we will start 
testing with. Note that apart from the ECA gestures, 
we also play with zoom and light intensity: when 
it?s the ECA?s turn to speak the camera zooms-in 
slightly and the light becomes brighter, and when 
it?s the user?s turn the camera zooms out and the 
lights dim. The idea is that, hopefully, the user will 
associate each camera shot and level of light inten-
sity with each of the turn modes, and so know 
when she is expected to speak. 
The following are some typical examples of 
problem situations together with further considera-
tions about ECA behaviour that could help avoid 
or recover from them: 
? The user tries to interrupt at a point at 
which the barge-in feature is not active. If 
this happens the system does not process 
what the user has said, and when the system 
finally returns to listening mode there is si-
lence from both parts: the system expects 
input from the user, and the user expects an 
answer. Often both finally break the silence 
at the same time and the cycle begins again, 
or, if the system caught part of the user?s ut-
terance, a recognition error will most likely 
occur and the system will fall into a recogni-
tion error recovery subdialogue that the user 
does not expect. To help avoid such faulty 
events the ECAs demeanour should indicate 
as clearly as possible that the user is not be-
ing listened to at that particular moment. 
Speaking while looking away, perhaps at 
some object, and absence of attention cues 
(such as nodding) are possible ways to show 
that the user is not expected to interrupt the 
ECA. Since our present dialogue system 
produces fairly short utterances for the ECA, 
we are somewhat limited as to the active 
strategies to build into the ECA?s behaviour. 
However, there are at least three cues the 
user could read to realise that the system 
didn?t listen to what she said. The first is the 
fact that the system carries on speaking, ig-
noring the user?s utterance. Second, at the 
end of the system?s turn the ECA will per-
form a specific give-turn gesture. And third, 
after giving the turn the ECA will remain 
still and silent for a few seconds before per-
forming a waiting gesture (leaning back 
slightly with her arms crossed, shifting the 
body weight from one leg to another; see 
Table 1). In addition, if the user still remains 
silent after yet another brief waiting period 
the system will offer help. It will be interest-
ing to see at which point users realise that 
the system didn?t register their utterance. 
? A similar situation occurs if the Voice Ac-
tivity Detector (VAD) fails and the system 
doesn?t capture the user?s entire utterance, 
or when the user simply doesn?t say any-
thing when she is expected to (?no input?). 
Again, both system and user end up waiting 
for each other to say something. And again, 
the strategy we use is to have the ECA dis-
play a waiting posture. 
? It can also happen that the user doesn?t 
speak but the VAD ?thinks? she did, per-
haps after detecting some background noise 
69
(a ?phantom input?). The dialogue system?s 
reaction to something the user didn?t say can 
cause surprise and confusion in the user. 
Here the visible reactions of an ECA might 
help the user understand what has happened 
and allow her to steer the dialogue back on 
track. 
3.3 Recognition Confidence Scheme 
Once the user utterance has been recognised, in-
formation confirmation strategies are commonly 
used in dialogue systems. Different strategies are 
taken depending on the level of confidence in the 
correctness of the user locution as captured by the 
speech recognition unit (San-Segundo et al, 2001). 
Our scheme is as follows: 
? High confidence: if recognition confidence 
is high enough to safely assume that no error 
has occurred, the dialogue strategy is made 
more fluent, with no confirmations being 
sought by the system. 
? Intermediate confidence: the result is re-
garded as uncertain and the system tries im-
plicit confirmation (by including the uncer-
tain piece of information in a question about 
something else.) This, combined with a 
mixed initiative approach, allows the user to 
correct the system if an error did occur. 
? Low confidence: in this case recognition 
has probably failed. When this happens the 
dialogue switches to a more guided strategy, 
with explicit confirmation of the collected 
information and no mixed initiative. The 
user?s reply may confirm that the system 
understood correctly, in which case the dia-
logue continues to flow normally, or, on the 
other hand, it may show that there was a 
recognition error. In this case an error re-
covery mechanism begins. 
In addition to the dialogue strategies, ECAs 
could also be used to reflect in their manner the 
level of confidence that the system has understood 
the user, in accordance with the confirmation dia-
logue strategies. While the user speaks, our ECA 
will, if the recognition confidence level is high, 
nod her head (Cassell et al, 2000), smile and have 
her eyes fully open to give the user feedback that 
everything is going well and the system is under-
standing. If, on the other hand, confidence is low, 
in order to make it clearer to the user that there 
might be some problem with recognition and that 
extra care should be taken, an option might be for 
the ECA to gesture in such a way as to show that 
she isn?t quite sure she?s understood but is making 
an effort to. We have attempted to create this effect 
by having the ECA lean her head slightly to one 
side, stop smiling and mildly squint. Our goal, 
once again, is to find out whether these cues do 
indeed help users realise what the situation is. This 
is especially important if it helps to avoid the well-
known problem of falling into error spirals when a 
recognition error occurs in a spoken dialogue sys-
tem (Bulyko et al, 2005). In the case of intermedi-
ate recognition confidence followed by a mixed 
initiative strategy involving implicit confirmation, 
specific gestures could also be envisaged. We have 
chosen not to include specific gestures for these 
situations in our first trials, however, so as not to 
obscure our observations for the high and low con-
fidence cases. A neutral stance for the intermediate 
confidence level should be a useful reference 
against which to compare the other two cases. 
3.4 Recognition Problems 
We will consider those situations in which the sys-
tem finds the user?s utterance incomprehensible 
(no-match situations) and those in which the sys-
tem gets the user?s message wrong (recognitions 
errors). When a no-match occurs there are two 
ways in which an ECA can be useful. First, what 
the character should say must be carefully pon-
dered to ensure that the user is aware that the sys-
tem didn?t understand what she said and that the 
immediate objective is to solve this particular 
problem. This knowledge can make the user more 
patient with the system and tolerate better the un-
expected lengthening of the interaction (Goldberg, 
2003). Second, the ECAs manner should try to 
keep the user in a positive attitude. A common 
problem in no-match and error recovery situations 
is that the user becomes irritated or hyperarticu-
lates in an attempt to make herself understood, 
which in fact increases the probability of yet an-
other no-match or a recognition error. This we 
should obviously try to avoid. 
The ECA behaviour strategy we will test in no-
match situations is to have the character lean to-
wards the camera and raise her eyebrows (the idea 
being to convey a sense of surprise coupled with 
friendly interest). We have based our gesture on 
70
one given in (Fagerberg et al, 2003). If the user 
points out to the system that there has been a rec-
ognition error in a way that gives the correct in-
formation at the same time, then the ECA will con-
firm the corrected information with special empha-
sis in speech and gesture. For this purpose we have 
designed a beat gesture with both hands (see Table 
1).  
3.5 Help offers and request 
It will be interesting to see whether the fact that 
help is offered by an animated character (the ECA) 
is regarded by users to be more user-friendly than 
otherwise. If users feel more comfortable with the 
ECA, perhaps they will show greater initiative in 
requesting help from the system; and when it is 
offered by the system (when a problem situation 
occurs), the presence of a friendly ECA might help 
control user frustration. While the ECA is giving 
the requested information, she will perform a beat 
gesture with both hands for emphasis, and she will 
also change posture. The idea is to see whether this 
captures the interest of the user, makes her more 
confident and the experience more pleasant or, on 
the contrary, it distracts the user and makes help 
delivery less effective. 
 
Figure 1 illustrates a dialogue sequence includ-
ing the association between the different dialogue 
strategies and the ECA gesture sequences after a 
user?s utterance. 
4 Experimental set up 
Gestures and nonverbal communication are cul-
ture-dependent. This is an important fact to take 
into account because a single gesture might be in-
terpreted in different ways depending on the user?s 
culture (Kleinsmith et al, 2006). Therefore, a nec-
essary step prior to the evaluation of the various 
hypotheses put forward in the previous section is to 
test the gestures we have implemented for our 
ECA, within the framework designed for our study. 
This implies validating the gestures for Spanish 
users, since we have based them on studies within 
the Anglo-Saxon culture. 
4.1 Procedure 
For the purpose of testing the gesture repertoire 
developed for our ECA we have conceived an 
evaluation environment that simulates a realistic 
mobile videotelephony application that allows us-
ers to remotely check the state (e.g., on/off) of sev-
eral household devices (lights, heating, etc.). Our 
dialogue system incorporates mixed initiative, er-
ror recovery subdialogues, context-dependent help 
and the production of guided or flexible dialogues 
according to the confidence levels of the speech 
recogniser. Our environment uses Nuance Com-
munications? speech recognition technology 
(www.nuance.com). The ECA character has been 
designed by Haptek (www.haptek.com). 
During the gesture validation tests users didn?t 
interact directly with the dialogue system. We first 
asked the users to watch a system simulator (a 
video recording of a user interacting with the sys-
tem), so that they could see the ECA performing 
the gestures in the context of a real dialogue. 
After watching the simulation the users were 
asked to fill out a questionnaire. The questionnaire 
allowed users to view isolated clips of each
 
 
Figure 1: Dialogue strategies and related gesture sequence 
71
 
of the dialogue gestures (the eight that had ap-
peared in the video). To each gesture clip were as-
sociated questions basically covering the following 
three aspects:  
? Gesture interpretation: Users are asked to 
interpret each gesture, choosing one from 
among several given options (the same op-
tions for all gestures). The aim is to see 
whether the meaning and intention of each 
gesture are clear. In addition users told us 
whether they thought they had seen the ges-
ture in the previous dialogue sample. 
? Gesture design: Do users think the gesture 
is well made and does it look natural? To 
answer this question we asked users to rate 
the quality, expressiveness and clarity of the 
ECAs gesture (on a 9-point Likert scale). 
? User expectations: Users rated how useful 
they thought each gesture was (on a 9-point 
Likert scale). The idea is to juxtapose the 
utility function of the gestures in the users? 
mental model to our own when we designed 
them, and evaluate the similarity. In addition 
we collected suggestions as to how the users 
thought the gestures could be improved.  
4.2 Results  
We recruited 17 test users (most of them students 
between 20 and 25 years of age) for our trial. The 
results concerning the three previously mentioned 
aspects are shown in Table 2. In the case of the 
gesture interpretation, we present the percentage 
of the users who interpreted each gesture ?cor-
rectly? (i.e., as we had intended when we designed 
them). Depending on this percentage we label each 
gesture as ?Good?, ?Average?, or ?Bad?. For each 
of the parameters for gesture design and user ex-
pectations we give the mean and the standard de-
viation of the Likert scale scores. We label the av-
erage scores as ?Low? (Likert score between 1 and 
3), Medium (4-6) or ?High? (7-9).  
We now discuss the results separately for each 
of the dimensions: 
Regarding user expectations, the values for each 
gesture are High except for two of them, valued as 
Medium. These two gestures are the welcome ges-
ture and the gesture for offering help. In the case of 
the welcome gesture, users probably believe the 
beginning of the dialogue is already well enough 
defined when the ECA starts to speak. If so, users 
might see an element of redundancy in the wel-
come gesture, lowering its perceived utility in the 
dialogue process. On the other hand, the help ges-
ture utility might be valued lower than the rest be-
cause many users didn?t seem to understand its 
purpose (the clarity of the Help gesture was the 
least valued of all, ?=5.117). Nevertheless, the 
general user impressions of the utility of the evalu-
ated gesture repertoire fairly high. 
In relation to gesture design, we can see that, 
overall, the marks for quality and expressiveness 
are high. This implies our gesture design is, on the 
whole, adequate. Regarding the clarity of the ges-
tures, three of them are valued as Medium. These 
are the gestures expressing Give Turn, Error Re-
covery and Help offer. This could be related to the 
prevailing opinion among users that there are a few 
confusing gestures, although they are better under-
stood in the context of the application, when you 
listen to what the ECA says.   
Only half of the gestures were properly inter-
preted by the users. Those that weren?t (Give Turn, 
Take Turn, Error Recovery and the Help gesture) 
are, we realize, the subtlest in the repertoire, so we 
asked ourselves if there could be relation between 
a bad interpretation of the gesture and the whether 
that user didn?t remember seeing the gesture in the 
dialogue. In Figure 2 we show the number of users 
who claimed they hadn?t seen the ECA gestures 
during the dialogue sample. The coloured bars rep-
resent the overall accuracy in the interpretation of 
the gesture. We may observe that the gestures that 
a larger number of users hadn?t seen in the dia-
logue, and therefore, hadn?t an image of in proper 
context, tended also to be considered more unclear.  
We may conclude that some gestures need to be 
evaluated in context. In any case, and in spite of 
the uncertainty we have found regarding the inter-
pretation of certain gestures, we believe the posi-
tive evaluation by the users for the expressiveness 
and the quality of the gestures justifies us in vali-
dating our gestural repertoire for the next research 
stage where we will evaluate how well our ECA 
gestures function under real interaction conditions 
(taking into account objective data related to dia-
logue efficiency). 
72
 Table 2:  Results of the gesture validation tests. 
 
 
Figure 2: Interpretation vs. ?visibility? of the ges-
tures. 
 
5 Conclusions and future lines of work 
In this article we have identified a range of prob-
lem situations that may arise in dialogue systems, 
and defined various strategies for using an ECA to 
improve user-machine interaction throughout the 
whole dialogue. We have developed an experimen-
tal set up for a user validation of ECA gestures in 
the dialogue system and have obtained quantitative 
results and user opinions to improve the design of 
the gestures. The results of this validation allow us 
to be in a position to begin testing our dialogue 
system and evaluate our ECA gestures in the con-
text of a real dialogue. 
In future experiments we will attempt to go one 
step further and analyse how empathic emotions vs. 
self-oriented behaviour (see Brave et al, 2005) 
may affect the resolution of a variety of dialogue 
situations. To this end we plan to design ECA pro-
totypes that incorporate specific emotions, hoping 
to learn how best to connect empathically with the 
user, and what effects this may have on dialogue 
dynamics and the overall user perception of the 
system. 
References 
Linda Bell and Joakim Gustafson, 2003. Child and 
Adult SpeakerAdaptation during Error Resolution in 
a Publicly Available Spoken Dialogue System. Pro-
ceedings of Eurospeech 03, Geneve, Schweiz. 
Timothy W. Bickmore, Justine Cassell, Jan van Kup-
pevelt, Laila Dybkjaer and Niels Ole Bernsen,  2004. 
(atural, Intelligent and Effective Interaction with 
Multimodal Dialogue Systems, chapter Social Dia-
logue with Embodied Conversational Agents. Kluwer 
Academic. 
Susan J. Boyce, 1999. Spoken natural language dia-
logue systems: user interface issues for the future. In 
Human Factors and Voice Interactive Systems. D. 
Gardner-Bonneau Ed. Norwell, Massachusetts, Klu-
wer Academic Publishers: 37-62. 
Scott Brave, Clifford Nass, Kevin Hutchinson, 2005. 
Computers that care: investigating the effects of ori-
 INTERPRETATION DESIGN EXPECTATIONS 
 Good Interpretation (%) Quality Clarity Expressiveness Usefulness 
G1 
Wellcome 
88.23 
Good 
7.117 (0.927) 
High 
7.588 (1.277) 
High 
6.764 (1.147) 
High 
5.647  (2.119) 
Medium 
G2 
Give Turn 
35.29 
Average 
6.647 (1.057) 
High 
5.823 (1.333) 
Medium 
6.470  (1.007) 
High 
6.588 (1.543) 
High 
G3 
Take Turn 
23.53 
Bad 
7.117 (1.166) 
High 
6.705 (1.447) 
High 
6.941 (1.444) 
High 
6.647 (1.271) 
High 
G4 
Wait 
82.35 
Good 
7.058 (1.088) 
High 
7.176 (1.185) 
High 
7.176 (0.727) 
High 
6.588 (1.622) 
High 
G5 
Confirmation  
(Low confidence) 
76.47 
Good 
8.294 (0.587) 
High 
8.058 (1.028) 
High 
8.058 (1.028) 
High 
7.941 (1.028) 
High 
G6 
Confirmation (High 
confidence) 
94.11 
Good 
7.529 (1.124) 
High 
7.529 (1.124) 
High 
7.705(1.263) 
High 
7.588 (1.175) 
High 
G7 
Error Recovery 
41.17 
Average 
6.941 (1.088) 
High 
5.588 (2.032) 
Medium 
6.529 (1.462) 
High 
6.058 (1.390) 
High 
G8 
Help 
35.29 
Average 
6.823 (1.185) 
High 
5.117 (1.932) 
Medium 
6.058(1.560) 
High 
5.529 (1.771) 
Medium 
73
entation of emotion exhibited by an embodied com-
puter agent. Int. J. Human-Computer Studies, Nr. 62, 
Issue 2, pp. 161-178. 
Ivan Bulyko, Katrin Kirchhoff, Mari Ostendorf, Julie 
Goldberg, 2005 Error correction detection and re-
sponse generation in a spoken dialogue system. 
Speech Communication 45, 271-288. 
Justine Cassell, Kristinn R. Thorisson, 1999. The power 
of a nod and aglance: envelope vs. emotional feed-
back in animated conversational agents. Applied Ar-
tificial Intelligence, vol.13, pp.519-538. 
Justine Cassell and Matthew Stone, 1999. Living Hand 
to Mouth: Psychological Theories about Speech and 
Gesture in Interactive Dialogue Systems. Proceed-
ings of the AAAI 1999 Fall Symposium on Psycho-
logical Models of Communication in Collaborative 
Systems, pp. 34-42. November 5-7, North Falmouth, 
MA, 1999. 
Justine Cassell, Timothy W. Bickmore, Hannes 
Vilhj?lmsson and Hao Yan, 2000. More than just a 
pretty face: affordances of embodiment. In Proceed-
ings of the 5th international Conference on intelligent 
User interfaces. 
Justine Cassell, Yukiko I. Nakano, Timothy W. Bick-
more, Candace L. Sidner and  Charles Rich, 2001. 
(on-verbal cues for discourse structure. In Proceed-
ings of the 39th Annual Meeting on Association For 
Computational Linguistics. 
Richard Catrambone, 2002 Anthropomorphic agents as 
a user interface paradigm: Experimental findings 
and a framework for research. In: Proceedings of the 
24th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science 
Society (pp. 166-171), Fairfax, VA, August. 
Nicole Chovil, 1992. Discourse-Oriented Facial Dis-
plays in Conversation. Research on Language and 
Social Interaction, 25, 163-194. 
Petra Fagerberg, Anna St?hl, Kristina H??k, 2003. De-
signing Gestures for Afective Input: an Analysis of 
Shape, Effort and Valence. In Proceedings of Mobile 
Ubiquitious and Multimedia, Norrk?ping, Sweden. 
Julie Goldberg, Mari Ostendorf, Katrin Kirchhoff, 2003. 
The impact of response wording in error correction 
subdialogs, In EHSD-2003, 101-106. 
Kate Hone, 2005. Animated Agents to reduce user frus-
tration, in The 19th British HCI Group Annual Con-
ference, Edinburgh, UK. 
Adam Kendon, 1990. Conducting interaction: patterns 
of behaviour in focused encounters, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press. 
Andrea Kleinsmith, P. Ravindra De Silva, Nadia Bian-
chi-Berthouze, 2006 Cross-cultural differences in 
recognizing affect from body posture Interacting with 
computers 10  1371-1389 
Robert M. Krauss, Yihsiu Chen and Purnima Chawla, 
1996 (onverbal behavior and nonverbal communica-
tion: What do conversational hand gestures tell us? 
In M. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social 
psychology (pp. 389 450).San Diego, CA: Academic 
Press. 
Dominic W. Massaro, Michael M. Cohen, Jonas 
Beskow and Ronald A. Cole,  2000.Developing and 
evaluating conversational agents. In Embodied Con-
versational Agents MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 287-
318. 
Sharon Oviatt. 1994. Interface techniques for minimiz-
ing disfluent input to spoken language systems. In 
Proc. CHI'94 (pp. 205-210) Boston, ACM Press, 
1994 
Sharon Oviatt and Robert VanGent, 1996, Error resolu-
tion duringmultimodal humancomputer interaction. 
Proc. International Conference on Spoken Language 
Processing, 1 204-207. 
Sharon Oviatt, Margaret MacEachern, and Gina-Anne 
Levow, G.,1998. Predicting hyperarticulate speech 
during human-computer error resolution. Speech 
Communication, vol.24, 2, 1-23. 
Sharon Oviatt, and Bridget Adams, 2000. Designing 
and evaluating conversational interfaces with ani-
mated characters. Embodied conversational agents, 
MIT Press: 319-345. 
Isabella Poggi, 2001. How to decide which gesture to 
make according to our goals and our contextual 
knowledge. Paper presented at Gesture Workshop 
2001 London 18th-20th April, 2001 
Ruben San-Segundo, Juan M. Montero, Javier Ferreiros, 
Ricardo C?rdoba, Jose M. Pardo, 2001 Designing 
Confirmation Mechanisms and Error Recover Tech-
niques in a Railway Information System for Spanish. 
SIGDIAL. Septiembre 1-2,  Aalborg (Dinamarca). 
Heike Schaumburg, 2001. Computers as tools or as 
social actors?the users' perspective on anthropomor-
phic agents.International Journal of Cooperative In-
formation Systems.10, 1, 2, 217-234. 
 
74
