Toward a Large Spontaneous Mandarin Dialogue Corpus 
 
Shu-Chuan TSENG 
Institute of Linguistics,  
Academia Sinica, Nankang 
115 Taipei, Taiwan, 
tsengsc@gate.sinica.edu.tw 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper addresses recent results on 
Mandarin spoken dialogues and introduces 
the collection of a large Mandarin 
conversational dialogue corpus. In the 
context of data processing, principles of 
transcription are proposed and accordingly a 
transcription tool is specifically developed 
for Mandarin spoken conversations.   
Introduction 
Large speech corpora have become indispensable 
for current linguistic research and information 
science applications dealing with spoken data 
(Gibbon et al 1997). Concretely, they provide 
real phonetic data and empirical data-driven 
knowledge on linguistic features of spoken 
language. The corpus presented here is composed 
of conversational dialogues. Conversations 
contain a considerable variety of linguistic 
phenomena as well as phonetic-acoustic 
variations. Furthermore, they open up a wide 
range of research issues such as dialogue acts, 
turn-taking, lexical use of spoken language and 
prosodic use in conversation. From a diachronic 
point of view, such a large dialogue corpus 
archives the contemporary daily conversational 
use of a given language.  
 
1 General Issues on Mandarin Dialogues 
In the following, issues on Mandarin dialogues 
relevant to spontaneous dialogue annotation are 
summarized and discussed. It includes lexical 
distribution, discourse markers, turn-taking and 
prosodic characterization. 
 
1.1 Lexical Distribution in Spoken Mandarin 
Results presented by Tseng (2001) show that 
speakers of Mandarin adopt some 30 words for 
building core structures of utterances in 
conversation, independently of individual 
speakers. All subjects used these words more 
than three times. The occurrences of these 30 
core words make up about 80% of the overall 
tokens in conversation. Interestingly but also 
expected in conversational dialogues, the 
distribution of token frequency across all subjects 
is highly symmetric (Tseng 2001). For instance, 
verbs ?is located?, ?is?, ?that is?, ?say?, ?want? 
and ?have? were frequently used, so were 
pronouns ?s/he?, ?you? and ?I?. The negation 
?don?t have? was a high-frequency word, so were 
words ?right?, ?this/these? and ?that/those?. 
Grammatical particles as well as discourse 
particles were also among the core words. 
 
1.2 Discourse Markers 
It is now well known that what differentiates 
written texts from spontaneous speech most is the 
use of discourse particles. Among the core words, 
eleven words were discourse particles, or they 
were used as discourse markers. In the literature, 
there is still no consistent definition for discourse 
markers (Hirschberg and Litman 1993). 
Discourse markers can be defined as follows: 
elements whose original semantic meaning tends 
to decrease and their use in spoken discourse 
becomes more pragmatic and indicative of 
discourse structuring are discourse markers. In 
addition to several adverbs and determiners, 
discourse particles can also be categorized as 
discourse markers. They are very often observed 
in Mandarin spoken conversations as mentioned 
in Tseng (2001) and Clancy et al (1996). 
 
 In Tseng (2001), each subject used on average 
1.6 discourse particles per turn. This result leads 
to the consideration, if there is a need to add 
special categories for discourse particles or 
particle-like words for spoken Mandarin. 
Discourse particles were found to have different 
and specific discourse use in conversation. 
Namely, there exist discourse particles appearing 
preferably in turn-beginning position and some 
other discourse particles may exclusively mark 
the location of repairs. Regarding the small size 
of data used in Tseng (2001), it is one of the 
reasons why the ongoing project is necessary for 
research of Mandarin spontaneous conversations. 
 
1.3 Taking Turns in Dialogues 
In spontaneous conversation, turn-taking usually 
takes place arbitrarily to the extent that every 
individual interacts differently with the others 
under different circumstances. Thus, how to 
annotate overlapping sequences is one of the 
essential tasks in developing annotation systems. 
In Mandarin conversation, there are words 
preferably used in turn-initial position (Tseng 
2001, Chui 2000). They normally have their own 
discourse-related pragmatic function associated 
with their positioning in utterances. Similarly, 
how to mark up turn-initial positions is also 
directly connected with the annotation 
convention.  
 
 
1.4 Prosody in Spoken Mandarin  
Lexical tones are typically characteristic of 
spoken Mandarin. The interaction of lexical tones 
and the other prosodic means such as stress and 
intonation are related to a number of research 
issues, particularly in conversation. Falling tones 
may not show falling tendency anymore, when 
the associated words are used for specific 
discourse functions such as for indicating 
hesitation or the beginning of a turn (Tseng 
2001). 
2 Mandarin Conversational Dialogue Corpus 
This section deals with the design and collection 
of a large Mandarin dialogue corpus currently 
produced in Academia Sinica. 
 
2.1 Design and Methodology 
The long-term goal of this project is to collect 
domain-independent Mandarin spoken dialogues. 
They are daily conversations with specific topics 
given for each stage of recording. Since the 
design of scenario aims to collect natural and 
spontaneous conversations, limitations on the 
topics are reduced to a minimum. Different from 
task-oriented dialogues such as air-planning or 
instruction-construction tasks (Kowtko and Price 
1989, Sagerer et al 1994), subjects participating 
in this project were told to converse as naturally 
as possible. The scenario is similar to a situation 
where two strangers meet at the first time, try to 
find common topics interested by both of them 
and have a chat. 
 
Figure 1: Corpus Domain Design 
 
    topic 1                                      WHAT-WHERE 
                      topic 2                               
   topic 3                                       WHAT-WHEN             
              topic 5        topic 4          WHAT-WHO 
                                                    WHERE-HOW  
                                                       WHAT-WHY               
 
As illustrated in Figure 1, this stage of corpus 
collection consists of WHAT-WHERE 
component. The subjects have to determine on 
WHAT topic they?d like to talk. Usually, they do 
not stick to only one topic. Sometime in 
conversation, the participants asked each other 
WHERE the events mentioned in their 
conversation happened or WHERE they could 
take part in the events. There are two reasons for 
this design. First, we will extend the local 
domains to WHAT-WHEN, WHAT-WHO, 
WHERE-HOW as well as WHAT-WHY 
combinations in the next five years to cover 
important dialogue components used for daily 
talks in Taiwan. This aims to archive the use of 
contemporary spoken Mandarin from varied 
daily-life perspectives. Second, casual 
conversations usually do not require correctness 
of information. To make sure that we will obtain 
at least some ?seriously spoken? materials, the 
subjects should interact with attention to fulfil the 
WHERE task, namely the route-asking and 
route-describing task. 
 
2.2 Subjects and Instructions 
60, 23 male and 37 female, Taipei residents of 
Taipei City who volunteered to participate in the 
project were recorded in pairs. Age ranges from 
16 to 45. Subjects did not know each other and 
their task was to introduce themselves first. Then 
they chose topics from those given on the 
instruction sheet or they were also free of 
choosing any other not-listed topics to talk about. 
In addition, they asked some questions about 
routes within conversation. The topics given to 
the subjects are family, work, shopping, food, 
travelling, politics and economics. Both subjects 
can be information-acquirer or information-giver. 
However, they were told that the person who 
asked route questions had to make sure that s/he 
has completely understood the described routes.  
 
2.3 Recording 
The dialogues were recorded by a SONY 
TCD-D10 Pro II DAT tape recorder with 
Audio-Technica ATM-33a handheld/stand 
cardioid condenser microphones at a sampling 
rate of 48 kHz. Each subject was recorded on a 
separate channel on a DAT tape. There was no 
time constraint given in advance. Once the 
subjects completed their task and wished to end 
the conversation, the recording was stopped. 
Total length of corpus is about 25 hours 
recording. 
3 An Extensible Transcription Tool 
3.1 Functional Considerations  
This section discusses three principles for 
constructing word-based database for Mandarin 
dialogues from audio data to lexical database. 
Three functions have to be included in a 
transcription system, either directly or potentially: 
1) connecting the tasks of transcribing, 
annotating and labelling of sound data, 2) being 
able to deal with overlapping turns and 3) making 
available possible tiers for later time-alignment. 
 
There are three working levels for processing 
spoken data: transcribe, annotate and label. First, 
transcription is the transliteration of audio data. 
Normally, it is verbatim transcription in plain text 
form. A transcription tool has exclusively been 
developed for broadcast spoken data, named 
Transcriber (Barras et al 2001). Audio data can 
be nicely combined with the other information. 
However, it lacks flexible possibility for defining 
new annotation tags. It is especially difficult to 
use Transcriber to transcribe Mandarin 
conversations because of the written system of 
Mandarin. For the understanding of content and 
for the completeness of written system, Chinese 
characters are as representative and important as 
Latin transcriptions.  
 
Secondly, to annotate spoken data is to add 
linguistic explanations to the plain transcript to 
represent linguistic structures at selected levels. 
And lastly, to label sound data is to temporally 
align transcript texts with speech signals. The 
tool we develop for our corpus collection aims to 
transcribe and annotate the speech data as well as 
to build potential temporal tiers for future 
labelling work. Traditional annotations of spoken 
data orient at turn-structured separation of 
utterances or sets of utterances (Sagerer et al 
1994). This leads to the following 
inconveniences. The beginning and ending 
boundaries between utterances are not 
represented, because it is presupposed that the 
current ending boundary is the beginning 
boundary of the next unit. While doing temporal 
alignment, pauses between utterance units and 
speakers may be missing. From the point of view 
of searching mechanism, an annotation system 
should also satisfy the demand on classifying 
sequences produced by given speakers or 
sequences produced in a given time period. Thus, 
it will be statistically effective and useful to 
output annotated transcription data in a database 
format. 
3.2 TransList 
Recorded dialogues are currently being 
transcribed by using a computer-aided program 
TransList, specifically developed for transcribing 
Mandarin conversations. The interface is 
illustrated in Figure 2. Input contents include 
location of sound file, subject, start and end times 
of the transcribed segment in the correspondent 
sound file, the person who transcribes the 
segment. The actual transcription is done twofold: 
in characters and in Pinyin.  
 
Figure 2: TransList 
 
 
 
Tag list can be flexibly extended to annotate 
different phenomena any time while doing the 
transcription. Each transcribed segment is 
referred to its original sound file. However, a 
direct connection to processing audio files is not 
available yet. Regarding the output format of 
TransList, two variations are currently in use. 
One is conversation-typed format. In other words, 
all sound files split from one conversation form 
an independent text file. In order of time and 
subject, the program outputs a turn-oriented 
format, as illustrated in the next section.  More 
important is the second output format. All 
transcribed segments belonging to one 
conversation will be listed in a database, having 
the following columns: characters, pinyin, sound 
file and all added tags. Words marked up by 
different tags will all have the values of added 
tags as their attribute in the database. By doing 
this, we plan to do word segmentation and 
tagging for spoken Mandarin. An automatic word 
segmentation and tagging system is currently 
available for written Mandarin (Chen et al 1996). 
We intend to test this program for spontaneous 
Mandarin. By outputting the transcription in 
database format, we will make the continuing 
data processing and searching more effective. 
 
3.3 An Output Example 
This section gives an example produced by 
TransList.  
 
<A 1 6473> cong shili yao dao shili meishuguan dehua 
women jiushi keyi zhiyao ni en jiushi cong women xuexiao 
yeshi yiyang da ersanliu zui fangbian de a </A 1 16200><B 1 
16230> mhm </B 1 16380><A 2 16530> ranhou da dao 
yeshi dao gongguan huan danshuixian ranhou ni zhiyao zuo 
dao dagai yuanshanzhan1</A 2 22230> 
 
In the above example, the brackets <> and </> 
mark up the beginning and ending boundaries of 
a speaker production sequence. A and B stand for 
speakers. Turns are not explicitly separated, but 
marked up in the annotation. Numbers after the 
speaker abbreviations indicate numbers of 
production sequences by the speaker. Thus, 
whether it is a turn-taking or it is a overlapping 
can be evaluated by means of the third parameter 
time (msec). With respect to tags added into the 
transcribed segments, it is optional to include or 
                                                     
1 <A 1 6473> from city want go city gallery in the case we 
just can just you en just from our school too is same take 236 
most convenient PRT a </A 1 16200> <B 1 16230> mhm 
</B 1 16380> <A 2 16530> afterwards take to too to 
Gongguan change Danshui-Line afterwards you just take to 
approximately Yuanshan-Station </A 2 22230> 
to exclude the annotation tags. As shown in 
Figure 2, these can be non-speech sounds, repairs 
or discourse markers (Heeman and Allen 1999).  
Conclusion 
This paper discussed general issues on Mandarin 
spoken dialogues and analysed components of a 
new developed transcription and annotation tool 
for spoken Mandarin. 
References  
Barras, C. et al (2001) Transcriber: Development and 
Use of a Tool for Assisting Speech Corpora 
Production. Speech Communication. 33. Pp. 5-22. 
Chen, K.-J. et al (1996) SINICA CORPUS: Design 
Methodology for Balanced Corpora. PACLIC 11. 
Pp.167-176. 
Chui, K.-W. (2000) Ritualization in Evolving 
Pragmatic Functions: A Case Study of DUI. In 
Proc. of the 7th International Symposium on 
Chinese Language and Linguistics. Pp. 177-192. 
Clancy, P. et al (1996) The Conversational Use of 
Reactive Tokens in English, Japanese and 
Mandarin. Journal of Pragmatics. Pp. 355-387. 
Gibbon, D., Moore, R. and Winski, R. (1997) 
Handbook of Standards and Resources for Spoken 
Language Systems. Mouton de Gruyter. 
Heeman, P. and Allen, J. (1999) Speech Repairs, 
Intonational Phrases and Discourse Markers: 
Modelling Speakers? Utterances in Spoken 
Dialogue. Computational Linguistics, 25/4. Pp. 
527-571. 
Hirschberg, J. and Litman, D. (1993) Empirical 
Studies on the Disambiguation of Cue Phrases. 
Computational Linguistics, 19(3), pp. 501-530. 
Kowtko, J. C. and Price, P.J. (1989) Data Collection 
and Analysis in the Air Planning Domain. In Proc. 
of the DARPA Speech and Natural Language 
Workshop. Pp. 119-125. 
Sagerer G. and Eikmeyer H. and Rickheit G. (1994) 
?Wir bauen jetzt ein Flugzeug?: Konstruieren im 
Dialog. Arbeitsmaterialien, Technical Report. 
SFB360 ?Situierte K?nstliche Kommunikation. 
University of Bielefeld, Germany. 
Tseng, S.-C. (2001) Highlighting Utterances in 
Chinese Spoken Discourse. In Language, 
Information and Computation. PACLIC 15. Pp. 
163-174. 
 
 
Modelling Speech Repairs 
in German and Mandarin Chinese Spoken Dialogues 
Shu-Chuan Tseng 
Da-Yeh University 
112 Shan-Jiao Rd. Da-Tsuen 
Changhua, Taiwan 515 
tseng@aries.dyu.edu.tw 
Abstract 
Results presented in this paper strongly 
support the notion that similarities as well as 
differences in language systems can be 
empirically investigated by looking into the 
linguistic patterns of speech repairs in real 
speech data. A total of 500 Gemmn and 325 
Mandarin Chinese overt immediate speech 
repairs were analysed with regard to their 
internal phrasal structures, with particular 
focus on the syntactic and morphological 
characteristics. Computational models in the 
form of finite state automata (FSA) also 
illustrate the describable regularity of 
German and Mandarin Chinese speech 
repairs in a formal way. 
Introduction 
Spontaneous speech analysis has recently been 
playing a crucial role in providing empirical 
evidence for applications in both theoretical nd 
applied fields of computational linguistics. For 
the purpose of constructing more salient and 
robust dialogue systems, recent analyses on 
speech repairs, or more generally speaking, on 
speech disfluencies in spoken dialogues have 
tried to explore the distributional characteristics 
of irregular sequences in order to develop 
annotation systems to cope with speech repairs 
(Heeman and Allen 1999, Nakatani and 
Hirschberg 1994). This new research direction, 
nevertheless, has until recently merely focused 
on the surface structure of speech repairs on the 
one hand. On the other hand, except for very few 
ilwestigations tarting to deal with speech 
repairs across several languages (Eklund and 
Shribcrg 1998), most of the studies on speech 
repairs have investigated only single languages. 
In addition, studies have shown that syntactic 
and prosodic features of spontaneous speech 
data provide empirical evidence with regard to 
reflecting the speaking habits of speakers, and 
also help to develop better parsing strategies and 
natural language processing systems (Heeman 
and Allen 1999, Hindle 1983). These systems 
should understand and react o the language use 
of human users (Lickley and Bard 1998, Tseng 
1998). 
This paper presents results of a comparative 
stud), of speech repairs with the goal of 
examining and modelling repair syntax by 
looking into empirical cross-linguistic spccch 
data. In this paper, the phenomena of speech 
repairs are introduced first, followed by an 
empirical cross-linguistic analysis of speech 
repairs in German and Mandarin Chinese, which 
have different language typologies. Speech data, 
therefore, were collected to look for linguistic 
sequences and particularities of spontaneous 
speech, which usually cause difficulties for 
language dialogue systems. Syntactic patterns 
found in the comparative analysis have 
subsequently been formalised to make clear the 
internal structures of speech repairs. Formal 
modelling in FSA should finally show the 
fonnal characteristics of repair sequences in 
these two language systems. 
1 Related Work 
This section sumlnariscs previous results related 
864 
to speech repairs. First, a generally adopted 
template model of describing repairs is 
introduced, lbllowed by a brief sumnaary of 
recent studies on speech repair processing in 
German and Mandarin Chinese. 
1.1 Template Model of Repairs 
Most models of repair structures (Lcvclt 1983) 
apply a template-based approach. In 1)rinciplc, a 
telnplate model is colnposed of three parts: 
rcparandum (Rcp), editing tcnns (Et) and 
alteration (Alt). The rcparanduna denotes the 
speech stretch, which nccds to bc repaired, 
whereas the alteration is the repair itself. Editing 
terms are seqnences produced between the 
reparandum and the alteration, which often 
appear in tbrm of silent or filled pauses and can 
also bc absent, depending on the Sl)caking 
situation. A classification systenl of repairs can 
bc derived from the structural relations betv,'ecll 
the reparandum, the editing term and the 
alteration: 
? addil ion repait:s' 
Ex an\]pie: -#: -2~,~, - -~, i,J ~,,= e,~4'\[.*./ ej~j (Rcp) %. "IN ~ ;-~- 
#~ n g (TWPTH Corpus) l __t'J"J (Alt) . . . .  ': ,a -'~ ,,
? suhstilulion repaitw 
Examl)lc: Und unten rnnten ist halt die gelbe 
Mutter (Rcp) /ilA (Et) die orangc Mutter (Alt) 
(Sagcrer el al. 1994) -~ 
? repel/l/or1 repairs 
Example: En aan dc rechtcrkallt een oraRjc stip 
(Rcp) oranjc stip (Alt). (Lcvelt 1983) 3 
? abr idged repair,s' 
Example: I think that you get - it is more strict in 
Catholic schools. (Hindle 1983) 
1.2 Gramnmr-Or iented  Product ion of  
Gernmn Speech Repairs  
German, an Indo-Europcan language, is a 
language with a strong emphasis on grammatical 
flexion. Phrases with congruence in gender, 
i Verbatiln translation: will influence whole 
POSSESSIVF,-particle Mmle industry 
PO SS\]:;SS1VI ';-particle investment interests. 
Sentential translation : It will influence the whole the 
whole industrial investment interests. 
2 And beneath that is the yellow nut dl the orange 
nut. 
3 And at the right-side an orange dot orange dot. 
munber and case are important from syntactic 
and naorphological viewpoints. Tiros, phrasal 
boundaries may play a role in the production of 
German repairs. Results provided by Tseng 
(1999) empirically support the significant role of 
phrasal boundaries in German by examining 
Gcmmn specch repairs. Phrasal boundaries seem 
to be the positions to start as well as to end 
speech repairs. The following utterance in which 
a German repair is produced clearly illustrates 
this t)henolneuon: "lch habe eiuen Wiirfel rail 
einer mit emem Gewmde 4'', where mit einer is a 
phrasal liagmcnt and mit einem Gewinde, 
starting fi'oln the phrasal beginning, is a 
complete phrase repairing the previous phrasal 
fiagment. In her conversation analysis on 
sclf-rcpairs in Gennan, Uhmalm (1997) also 
lnentions that repairs tend to appear at 
constituent boundaries ill nlost cases, i.e., 
deleting problem sequences involved in repairs 
will result in the utterances containing speech 
repairs becolning well-formed. 
1.3 Lcxis-Oricnted Production of Chinese 
Speech Repairs 
One way to illustrate the differences in 
languages is to examine and to compare the 
types of speech repairs in the languages 
respectively. The modcrn description 
methodologies of gralmnar structures in German 
and Chinese (Chao 1968, Li and Thompson 
1981) originated froln similar theoretical 
backgrounds. However, Chinese has a great 
variety of colnpound words, but lacks 
grammatical narkings at the morphological 
level. To be morn specific, the word formation 
in Chinese is accomplished by combining 
morphelncs, where each morpheme has its own 
lexical content and orthographic character. This 
is essentially different from the 
syntactic-lnorphological derivation as well as 
compounding in Gennan. 
Lee and Chen (1997) classified Chinese speech 
repairs in patterns and developed a language 
lnodol for their language recognition system to 
4 I have one cube with a\[fcminine, singular, dative, 
indefinite\] with a\[neuter, singular, dative, indefinite\] 
bolt. 
865 
cope with speech repairs. However, they did not 
carry out any further investigations on the 
structure of repairs. Different fronl the 
production of German speech repairs, Chui 
(1996) proposed, in her studies on repairs in 
Chinese spoken conversations, that syntax seems 
to play a less important role than the lexical 
complexity and tile size of words in the 
production of Chinese speech repairs. For 
instance, not tbe constituent boundaries, but the 
completeness of the lexical content and the 
scope of the lexical quantity of the words should 
(~)  and engineer (~-~_~) in the utterance 
/ ,g~ ;/c //g~y ~ ~_~ ~4~'~,f #/;~ "/2 
t~.~ s, are the major factors which influence the 
production of repairs. 
2 Data and Corpus 
In order to examine the production of speech 
repairs in different languages, the German 
corpus BAUFIX and the Chinese corpus 
TWPTH were chosen to carry out further 
comparative analyscs. 
2.1 German Data: BAUFIX 
The BAUFIX corpus (Sagerer el al. 1994) 
consists of 22 digitally recorded German 
human-human dialogues. 44 participants 
co-operated in pairs as instructor and constructor, 
where their task was to build a toy-plane. 
Because of the limited visual contact between 
dialogue partners in some given cases, subjects 
had to rely on their verbal comnmnication to a 
great extent. This corpus setting was especially 
constructed to force subjects to repair their 
speech errors. For the purpose of this paper to 
investigate repair syntax, the corpus analysis is 
mainly concerned with immediate self-repairs. 
They were identified and hand-annotated by the 
author. In total, 500 speech repairs were 
classified according to their syntactic attributes 
such as categories and parts of speech. They 
were subsequently analysed with respect o the 
5 Verbatim translation: Hc should 
NEGATION-particle should promote ngineer(word 
fragment) engineer so quickly DISCOURSE-particle. 
Sentential translation: He shouM should not be 
promoted to engineel(word fragment) engineer so 
soon .  
location of interruption and their repair structure. 
2.2 Mandarin Chinese Data: Taiwan 
Putonghua Corpus (TWPTH) 
Taiwan Putonghua Corpus (TWPTH), where 
Putonghua refers to Mandarin Chinese, was 
recorded in Taiwan. The speakers were all born 
in Taiwan and their first language is Taiwancsc 
(Southern Min). The speakers wcrc given the 
instructions in advance to speak in usual 
conversation style and they could speak on any 
topic they wanted to, or even on no topic at all. 
Thus, the spontaneous and conversation-oriented 
speech data were obtained. A total of 40 
speakers were recorded including five dialogues 
and 30 monologues. Three dialogues were 
analysed for the study in this paper and each is 
about 20 nfinutes long. In total, 325 immediate 
speech repairs were identified in these three 
dialogues and they were annotated according to 
the POS system developed for the Sinica Corpus 
(CKIP 1995). 
2.3 Comparison of Repair Data 
Seine central statistics on BAUFIX and TWPTH 
data are summarised in Table 1: 
Table 1: Summary Statistics 
13AUFIX TWPTH 
Language German Mandarin Chinese 
total no. ofwoMs 35036 9168 words 
woMs 47655 characters 
total no. of repairs 500 325 
no. words involved 1823 words 950 woMs 
m rcpairs 1622 characters 
% repair-woMs of 5.2 % 10.4 % (woM) 
total words 3.4 % (chmacter) 
% of phrases PP 34.8 % VP 35.7 % 
involved in repairs NP 38 % NP 41.2 % 
Table 1 shows that the percentage of problem 
words (words involved in speech repairs) is 
similar in both BAUFIX and TWPTH corpora. 
Witb regard to the number of words (i.e. lexical 
itelns) 10.4% of overall words in TWPTH are 
involved in repair sequences, whereas only 5.2% 
of words in BAUFIX are found in repair 
sequences. However, the statistics show a 
pattern, Mlich is more closely related, 3.4% and 
5.2% respectively, if we consider the number of 
characters instead of words ill Chinese. Chinese 
866 
words can bc mono- or multi-syllabic. In 
Chinese, lexical items are composed of 
characters, where each character is all 
independent lneaningful monosyllabic 
morpheme. This study can possibly provide 
insights into the role of characters in Chinese at 
syntactic and morphological levels. 
Other interesting results that can be noted from 
Table 1 are the types of phrases involved in 
repair sequences. In BAUFIX, because of the 
task-oriented corpus setting, few verbs were 
used. lnstead, the focus is more on NPs and PPs, 
since the speakers had to express exactly what 
the parts look like and where to place them. 
Different from BAUF1X, the TWPTH speakers 
did not have to give exact descriptions. 
Therefore, a considerable number of verbs were 
used, which we can observe from the high 
pereentage of VPs involved in repair sequences. 
However, in both corpora, NPs make up a high 
percentage, 38% and 41.2% respectively. For 
this reason, NPs will bc further investigated for 
their syntactic structures. 
3 Analysis of Repair Syntax in NPs 
Tiffs section is concerned with the distribution 
and patterns of NPs in the context of repair 
syntax in German and Mandarin Chinese. 
3.1 Regular Patterns 
Among 190 NPs involved in repair sequences in
BAUFIX, there arc 147 NPs for which the 
internal structure within the NPs can bc given 
exactly as follows (Tscng 1999), 
NP => N 
NP => DET + N 
NP => DET + ADI 
NP => DET + ADI + N 
NP --> DET + ADJ + ADJ + N 
NP =>so + DET+ N 
NP => so + DET + ADI 4- N 
NP => so + DET + AD\] + ADJ + N 
where lhe other 43 NPs in repairs are abridged 
repairs, therefore, their internal structures cannot 
be determined. 
Compared with Gennan NP-rcpairs, Chinese 
speakers produce rather simple repair sequences 
in NPs. Only 62.7% (84 out of 134) of Chinese 
repairs found in the corpus are single NP phrases. 
The rest of repair sequences in which NPs are 
involvcd, contain other phrasal categories uch 
as verb phrases or adverbials. Since these 
dialogues arc concerned with normal and 
everyday conversations, no complicated noun 
phrases were used. These NP-rcpairs have the 
following structures: 
NP => N 
NP => DET 
NP => DET + N 
NP => ADI + N 
NP => QUAN + CLASS 
NP => OUAN + CLASS + N 
where QUAN denotes numbers and CLASS 
means classifiers in Chinese. 
3.2 Syntactic Formalization 
83.4% out of 147 specific NP repairs in German 
start at phrase-initial positions and end at 
phrase-final positions. In the Chinese data, only 
thrcc NP-repairs among the 84 single NP-repairs 
were not traced back to file phrase-initial 
position. Phrasal boundaries play a role while 
speech repairs are produced in both languages, 
especially phrase-initial positions before the 
rcparandum. The syntactic structure of the 
maiority of German and Chinese repairs in NPs 
can bc fonnally described by means of phrasal 
modelling. 
Figure 1 : Phrasal Modelling of German NP-Rcpairs 
63 
Figure 1 models 50% of NP repair sequcnces of 
the type DET ADJN  in BAUFIX, where the 
reflexive arrow on DET designates the sequence 
867 
DET DET. The first DET can be a fragmentary 
or a false determiner, whereas the second DET is 
supposed to be the corrected word accordingly. 
The initial element DET in a German noun 
phrasc, i.e. the phrase-initial boundary is the 
most frequent location at which a repair is 
restarted. In other words, while producing 
repairs, speakers tend to go back to the 
determiner torepair NPs. 
Although the data investigated here is not 
necessarily representative for most Chinese 
speakers, this result, does not empirically 
confirm Chui's conclusion (1996) that syntax 
should play a less important role than the lexical 
complexity and the quantity constraint of the 
to-be-repaired lexical items, hlstead, the 
phrase-initial position seems to be the location 
to restart repairs in Chinese. Therefore, the 
results indicate that the lexical content of the 
to-be-repaired itclns tends to play a less 
important role than syntax in both languages. 
3.3 Cross-Linguistic Differences 
In contrast o the similarities between German 
and Chinese speech repairs lncntioned in the 
sections above, differences can also be identified. 
Some differences can bc noted through a 
comparison of repair syntax in German and 
Mandarin Chinese. It is more colnnlon for NPs 
in German to be repaired directly within NPs, 
whereas in Chinese NPs are often repaired 
within a more complex syntactic context, i.e. 
Chinese repairs arc composed of more than one 
phrasal category. To investigate the syntactic 
and morphological distribution of speech repairs 
in both languages, the length of retracing in both 
languages i examined. The results are presented 
in Table 2. 
Table 2: Distribution of Retracing 
retraced words or German Chinese 
characters (words) (characters) 
0 22.5% 3.6% 
1 62.9% 61.9% 
2 12.9% 27.4% 
3 1.7% 6% 
4 0 1.2% 
No similarity between German and Chinese was 
obtained by checking the nulnbcr of retraced 
words in Chinese, because the majority of "the 
retraced parts" in Chinese are word fragments. 
But it is clearly shown in Table 2 that Gennan 
words and Chinese characters play a similar role 
in the production of speech repairs. Whether it 
has to do with the syllabic weighting in both 
languages or the semantic ontcnt of characters 
in Chinese necds fnrther linguistic investigation. 
4 Formal Modelling 
With regard to relations of repair syntax and the 
editing structuring in repairs, instead of only 
looking into their surface structure, the syntactic 
regularity in German and Chinese NP-repairs 
can be modelled in the form of finite state 
automata. We again take German as example. 
4.1 Finite State Automata 
Finite state automata similar to M with 
e-transitions denoted by a quintuple <Q, E, 8, q0, 
IF> defined as follows can model more than 80% 
of overall German NP-repairs: 
Q = {q0, ql, q2, q3, qf}, 
E = {det, adj, 11, dct-d G, adj-d, n-d, e}, 
q0 is the initial state, 
F ={q3} and 
~5(q0, det)=ql, 8(q l, adj)=q2, 6(@, n)=q3, 
8(q0, det-d)-qf, 6(ql, adj-d)=qf, 8(q2, n-d)=qf, 
6(qf, e)=q0, 8(ql, e)=q0, 6(@, e)=q(), 
8(@, e)=q0 
M is graphically illustrated in Figure 2. Several 
particularities are described in this automaton. 
First, when NP-repairs are produced, no matter 
where the real problmn word is located (It can be 
dct-d, adj, adj-d, n or n-d), speakers tend to go 
back to the phrase-initial position to restart lheir 
speech. It the case of NPs, the determiner is the 
most frequent location for re-initiating a correct 
speech. The final position is in most cases 
phrase-final. Therefore, in M, there is only one 
final state q3. This models the coherence within 
NP phrases in German that speakers usually 
complete pluTases, after they have started them. 
6 Det-d, adj-d, and n-d denote fragmentary (or false) 
determiners, adjectives and nouns respectively. 
868 
Figure 2: Finite State Automaton M
E 
4.2 Discussion 
The FSA M suggested above is suitable for the 
syntactic haracteristics of speech repairs in both 
German and Chinese. Repair syntax has been 
taken into consideration from a procedural point 
of view, instead of simply dcscribing the 
sequential structures. In this modcl, probabilities 
(for instance, word frequency or acoustic 
features) on the arcs can be implemented to 
operate a parsing system, which can deal with 
speech repairs, ttowcver, speech data of 
appropriate size are needed to obtain significant 
probabilities. 
\["or more linguistic insights into the 
word-character relations in Chinese or across 
languages, i.e. the ovcrlapping syntactic and 
morphological role of phrasal boundaries, 
further modification is necded to make the rcpair 
processing and detection in the Chinese case 
more realistic. 
Conclusion 
This paper has shown that speech repairs not 
only play a decisive role in speech processing 
technology systems, they also provide empirical 
evidence and insights into the inherent linguistic 
characteristics of languages. Based on the results 
of corpus analysis, similar syntactic features of 
speech repairs ill German and Chinese were 
identified and the repair syntax was formally 
modelled by means of phrasal modelling and 
finite state automata. Discrepancy at the 
morphological evel of both languages was 
shown and more detailed investigations are 
necessary. Further analyses on acoustic-prosodic 
features of cross-linguistic data am CmTently 
being can'ied out. 
Acknowledgements 
Fd like to thank the Sonderforschungsbereich 
(SFB 360) colleagues in Bielefeld who collccted 
and pre-proeessed the BAUFIX data as wall as 
the colleagues in the Industrial Research 
Technology Institute (IRTI) in Chu-Dong who 
kindly supported me with the TWPTH corpus 
data. Without them the investigation described 
in this paper would not have been carried out 
and this paper could not possibly have been 
written. 
Refe fences  
Chao Y.-R. (1968) A Grammar of S))ol:en Chinese. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Clmi K.-W. (1996) Organization oJ" Repair #7 
Chinese Convel:vation. Text 16/3, pp. 343-372. 
CKIP (1995) S#Tica Balanced ('.orpus. Tedmical 
Report no. 95-02/98-04. (in Chinese) 
Ekhmd R. and Shribcrg E. (1998) Civ.~'s-l, ingui.vtic 
l)i,vfhten~3, Modeling: A Comparative AnaO~si,v o J"
,S~,edish and American Engli,s'h thtman-Human 
and Hltnlan-Machme Dialogs. in: Proceedings 
oflCSLP'98. Sydney, Australia. pp. 2631-2634. 
Hecman, P. and Allen, J. (1999)Speech Repair.~', 
hTtonational Phra,s'es and Discozuwe Marketw: 
Modell#Tg ,S)~eaketw' Utterances in ,S))oken 
Dialogue. Computational Linguistics 25/4. to 
appear. 
Hindle, D. (1983) Determ#dstic Par,s'mg of 
,~vntactic Non-Jluencies. In: ACL'83. 
Philadelphia, USA. pp. 123-128. 
Lee Y.-S. and Chen H.-H. (1997) Using Acoustic 
and Prosodic Cues to Correct Chhwse Speech 
Repaim. In: Proceedings of EUROSPEECH'97. 
Rhodes, Greece. pp. 2211-2214. 
Levelt W. J. (1983) Monitoring and 5'elf-l~epair #7 
Speech. Cognition 14. pp. 41-104. 
869 
Li C. and Thompson S. (1981)Mandarin Chinese: 
A Functional Reference Grammar. Berkeley: 
University of California Press. 
Liekley, R. J. and Bard, E. G. (1998) When Can 
Listeners Detect Di~fluency m Spontaneous 
Speech? Language and Speech 41/2. pp. 
203-226. 
Nakatani, C. and Hirschberg, J. (1994) A 
Corpus-Based Study of Repair Cues m 
Spontaneous Speech. Journal of lhe Acoustical 
Society of America 95. pp. 1603-1616. 
Sagerer G. and Eikmeyer H. and Riekheit G. (1994) 
"Wtr bauen jetzt em Flugzeug": Konstruieren 
im Dialog. Arbeitsmateriafen, Technical Report. 
SFB360 "Situierte Ktinstliche Kommunikation. 
University of Bielefeld, Germany. 
Tseng S.-C. (1999)Grammat; Pro.vody and Speech 
DLsfluencies #~ Spolcen Dialogues. PhD Thesis. 
University of Bielefeld, Gemlany. 
Tscng S.-C. (1998) A L#~guistic Analysis of Repair 
S(~,,nals m Co-operative Spoken Dialogues. In: 
Proceedings of ICSLP'98. Sydney, Australia. pp. 
2099-2102. 
Uhmann, S. (1997) Selbstreparaturen in 
Alltagsdialogen: Ein Fall .\[ilr eine integrative 
Konvetwationstheorie. In: Syntax des 
gesprochenen Deutsehen. Ed. Schlobinski. 
Westdeutscher Verlag. pp. 157-180. 
870 
