Maximal Match Chinese Segmentation Augmented by Resources 
Generated from a Very Large Dictionary for Post-Processing 
Ka-Po Chow  Andy C. Chin Wing Fu Tsoi 
Language Information Sciences Research Centre 
City University of Hong Kong 
Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong 
 {kapo.chow,cochin,rlwftsoi}@cityu.edu.hk 
Abstract
We used a production segmentation 
system, which draws heavily on a large 
dictionary derived from processing a 
large amount (over 150 million Chinese 
characters) of synchronous textual data 
gathered from various Chinese speech 
communities, including Beijing, Hong 
Kong, Taipei, and others. We run this 
system in two tracks in the Second In-
ternational Chinese Word Segmenta-
tion Bakeoff, with Backward Maximal 
Matching (right-to-left) as the primary 
mechanism. We also explored the use 
of a number of supplementary features 
offered by the large dictionary in post-
processing, in an attempt to resolve 
ambiguities and detect unknown words. 
While the results might not have 
reached their fullest potential, they 
nevertheless reinforced the importance 
and usefulness of a large dictionary as a 
basis for segmentation, and the impli-
cation of following a uniform standard 
on the segmentation performance on 
data from various sources. 
1 Introduction 
Our team has participated in two tracks of the 
ACL SIGHAN-sponsored Second International 
Chinese Word Segmentation Bakeoff, namely 
Academia Sinica open (ASo) and Peking Uni-
versity open (PKo). The production segmenta-
tion system we used draws heavily on a large 
dictionary derived from processing a very large 
amount of synchronous textual data. In Section 
2, our segmentation flow for the current Bakeoff 
will be described, and in Section 3, the results 
will be evaluated and analysed. Errors will be 
analysed and implications discussed in Section 4, 
followed by a conclusion in Section 5. 
2 Segmentation Framework 
The major resource of our segmentation system 
is a large dictionary. In the following, we de-
scribe the main segmentation mechanism based 
on maximal matching, and other supplementary 
features for post-processing attempted in the 
current Bakeoff.
2.1 Dictionary-based Segmentation 
The primary mechanism of segmentation makes 
use of a large dictionary derived from process-
ing a large amount (over 150 million Chinese 
characters) of synchronous textual data, mostly 
printed news, gathered from various Chinese 
speech communities, including Beijing, Hong 
Kong, Taipei, and others, following a uniform 
segmentation standard. The dictionary has now 
grown to a size of over 800,000 word types, 
with frequencies of each entry being tracked 
closely. For this Bakeoff, additional items from 
the respective training data were also included in 
the existing dictionary for segmentation. Thus 
unsegmented texts will first go through a proc-
ess of Backward Maximal Matching (BMM) 
segmentation equipped with the combined dic-
tionary. 
2.2 Supplementary Features 
2.2.1 Rule Development 
According to specific divergence of the segmen-
tation standard of each test corpus from our pro-
duction standard, a set of general adaptation 
rules were applied to transform the texts to 
achieve ?standard complacency? as much as 
possible. The adaptation rules vary in nature, 
176
depending on how intense the segmentation 
standard differences are between each test cor-
pus and our own. Hence some rules are based on 
linguistic structures while others are based on 
particular treatment of elements like numerals 
and units. 
These adaptation rules are coupled with a set 
of heuristic segmentation disambiguation rules 
derived from our long-term and extensive proc-
essing of text data. Such rules are based on 
BMM, and amount to around 20,000 at the time 
of writing. Each rule has gone through careful 
consideration before putting to real production 
use, to ensure that they produce correct results in 
most cases without overgeneralisation. 
2.2.2 Statistical BMM/FMM Comparison 
and Replacement 
After texts were segmented by BMM, the for-
ward counterpart (Forward Maximal Matching, 
FMM) was also done for comparison, as the dis-
crepancies between the two segmented texts of-
ten indicate potential ambiguities. Statistical 
information such as the frequency distributions 
of the segmented units in question were obtained 
from our large dictionary. By comparing the 
independent joint likelihood of the two combi-
nations, segmented units with exceptionally low 
frequency are likely to be disregarded, allowing 
us to choose the correct segmentation. For ex-
ample, in the test data, the phrase ???  is 
segmented as ? /??  by the backward ap-
proach, whereas ?? /?  will be obtained if 
segmented forwardly. The latter segmented al-
ternative, ??/?, is more likely to appear in 
the text. 
2.2.3 Unknown Word Detection 
One of the most challenging issues in Chinese 
word segmentation is the treatment of unknown 
words which can be further divided into two 
categories: new words (NWs) and named enti-
ties (NEs). In our treatment of unknown words, 
a slight distinction was made between Chinese 
NEs and other NWs including foreign names. 
The detection processes are similar but statisti-
cal data were gathered from different portions of 
our textual data. When a sequence of single 
characters is hit, windows of two and three char-
acters (only nominal morphemes were consid-
ered) were extracted to form ?potential NE/NW 
candidates?. The likelihood of these characters 
being monosyllabic words (i.e. out-word) and 
that of being part of multi-syllabic words (i.e. 
in-word) were compared to make the best guess 
whether they should be combined or segmented. 
For NE detection, the in-word statistics was 
based on all the multi-syllabic named entities in 
the Taipei portion from our dictionary and the 
out-word statistics on the rest of it. The in-word 
frequency of a given character is thus the num-
ber of times the character appears within a 
multi-syllabic named entity. The in-word prob-
ability is the in-word frequency divided by the 
total number of times the character appears in all 
our textual data. The independent joint in-word 
and out-word probabilities were computed and 
compared for each candidate, which would be 
combined as a word if the in-word probability is 
greater than the out-word probability and the 
first character in the candidate is within a list of 
Chinese surnames, again collected from all tex-
tual data. 
 For NW detection, the in-word statistics was 
based on all the multi-syllabic words in our dic-
tionary. For every newly combined word, 
neighbouring prefixes and suffixes (according to 
those provided in the segmentation standard) 
were also detected and combined, if any. A list 
of foreign names and all the characters appear-
ing in them was also extracted from our diction-
ary. When a new word is detected, its 
neighbouring words would be scanned and 
would be combined if they are within this for-
eign name list, thus enabling the identification 
of names like????.
3 Results and Analysis 
The results of the different stages of segmenta-
tion are shown in Table 1 and Table 2. 
In both test corpora, the primary dictionary-
based segmentation alone has achieved a sig-
nificant percentage (over 95% in recall and over 
90% in precision). This exemplifies that the rich 
vocabulary we have offers a useful resource for 
language engineering, and provides a solid plat-
form for further enhancement. 
Post-processing with supplementary features 
from the dictionary shows consistent incre-
mental improvement in segmentation. The 
scores (F-measure) due to FMM and BMM with 
heuristic rules demonstrate a relatively substan-
tial gap at the very beginning, largely because of 
the heuristic rules developed and accumulated 
177
through the precise and systematic processing of 
our sizable textual data. 
Operation R P F ROOV RIV
FMM only 0.953 0.903 0.927 0.658 0.966
BMM, plus 
heuristic rules 0.960 0.915 0.937 0.661 0.974
Comparison and 
replacement 0.964 0.921 0.942 0.663 0.978
Unknown word 
detection 0.966 0.931 0.948 0.715 0.977
Official results* 0.943 0.931 0.937 0.531 0.962
Table 1: Results for ASo using combined dic-
tionary 
Operation R P F ROOV RIV
FMM only 0.957 0.928 0.942 0.842 0.964
BMM, plus 
heuristic rules 0.967 0.947 0.957 0.849 0.974
Comparison and 
replacement 0.969 0.951 0.960 0.851 0.977
Official results* 0.952 0.951 0.951 0.784 0.962
Table 2: Results for PKo using combined dic-
tionary 
The performance of unknown word detection 
can be seen from the leap in ROOV after the op-
eration. It increases remarkably from 0.663 to 
0.715, offsetting the fall in RIV, which drops by 
0.001 and this may be due to the concatenation 
of some monosyllabic morphemes which are 
supposed to be independent words. 
The results of the comparison between FMM 
and BMM are summarized in Table 3 and Table 
4. A noticeable drawback of such comparison is 
that some phrases will be mis-segmented in ei-
ther direction. For example, the phrase ???
?? will be segmented backwardly into ?/?
?/?? but ??/??/? forwardly. The cor-
rect segmentation, ??/?/??, cannot be at-
tained in both cases. Hence as an experiment, 
for any combination of five characters which are 
segmented into 1/2/2 pattern by BMM and 2/2/1 
pattern by FMM, the 2/1/2 pattern will be also 
tested against the overall probabilities. For the 
former example, ??/?/?? will override the 
other two. 
Table 3 shows that the number of correct re-
placements from FMM is 399 in the AS test 
corpus, combining the gain from the reshuffling 
                                                          
* The reported figures differ from those computed on our 
platform, probably due to system differences. The official 
scorer program is publicly available and described in 
(Sproat and Emerson, 2003). 
of 5-character strings, the total is 408. Since the 
default choice is the BMM segmented texts, the 
sum 408 is the total gain from this BMM/FMM 
comparison, while 77 correct segmented texts 
have been mis-replaced, the gain/loss ratio is 
5.30. This means that our system only loses 1 
correct segmentation in exchange of gaining 5.3 
correct ones. 
Likewise in the case of the PK test corpus in 
Table 4, the gain/loss ratio is 4.67. The ratio is 
smaller than that for the AS test corpus. It is thus 
evident that the comparison and replacement by 
means of BMM and FMM offers a substantial 
achievement in the accuracy of the segmentation 
process.
BMM FMM Re-shuffle Total
Correct Replacement 1124 399 9 1532
Incorrect Replace-
ment 281 267 0 
548
Mis-replaced Correct 
Segmentation 77 78 / 155 
Table 3: Analysis of BMM/FMM comparison 
for ASo 
BMM FMM Re-shuffle Total
Correct Replacement 1097 254 3 1354
Incorrect Replace-
ment 131 117 2 250 
Mis-replaced Correct 
Segmentation 55 33 / 88 
Table 4: Analysis of BMM/FMM comparison 
for PKo 
We are aware that the performance of re-
placement may be improved by using probabili-
ties of n-grams, conditional probabilities 
involving the boundary words, and perhaps by 
considering all possibilities of segmentations for 
the same string of texts, as in some other seg-
mentation systems. On the semantic level, the 
overall message of a paragraph can be examined 
as well by gathering statistics of collocating 
words. The ordering of applying these algo-
rithms, however, should be important, and how 
they interplay with one another will be an arena 
to explore. 
Although we have not incorporated such en-
hancement measures into our system in this ex-
ercise, the dictionary can nevertheless support 
such extension with the necessary statistical data. 
All previous results are based on the first-stage 
of segmentation with a large dictionary. Since 
178
we had processed texts from different Chinese 
speech communities including Beijing, Hong 
Kong, Taipei, and others, the dictionary used for 
segmentation also consists of all words appear-
ing in any of these communities. In order to in-
vestigate the effect of locality on the dictionary 
used in segmentation, two independent diction-
aries have been generated from the Beijing por-
tion and Taipei portion, and all the above stages 
were repeated for the two test corpora, with re-
sults shown below in Table 5 and Table 6. 
Operation R P F ROOV RIV
FMM only 0.942 0.891 0.916 0.602 0.957
BMM, plus 
heuristic rules 0.948 0.901 0.924 0.603 0.964
Comparison and 
replacement 0.951 0.907 0.929 0.605 0.967
Table 5: Results for ASo using Taipei dictionary 
Operation R P F ROOV RIV
FMM only 0.954 0.923 0.938 0.800 0.963
BMM, plus 
heuristic rules 0.969 0.941 0.955 0.814 0.978
Comparison and 
replacement 0.971 0.946 0.958 0.815 0.981
Table 6: Results for PKo using Beijing diction-
ary 
The results show that dictionaries derived 
from specific communities alone yield slightly 
smaller F-measures than that derived from all 
places together. The largest difference lies in 
ROOV where it is 0.605 and 0.663 for ASo and 
0.815 and 0.851 for PKo, confirming the signifi-
cance of adopting a large and all-rounded dic-
tionary in word segmentation. 
4 Error Analysis 
We have examined the discrepancies between 
the gold standard files and our resultant seg-
mented files, and it is found that the segmenta-
tion errors can be basically classified into 
several categories. 
The errors due to standard divergence have 
the most impact. For example, ?/?? is con-
sidered the correct segmentation in the AS test 
corpus while ??? is one word in our large 
dictionary. 
Inconsistencies within the same corpus (both 
training and test corpora) also give rise to per-
formance fluctuations. There are cases where the 
same phrase is segmented differently. For ex-
ample, in the AS training corpus, both ??/?
?/? and ??/??? are found. Similar cases 
are also found in the test corpus, e.g. ?0??0
? vs.?0???.
Another factor that affects the segmentation 
performance over the PK corpus is encoding 
conversion. Our production system is based 
primarily on materials which are in BIG5 encod-
ing, specifically traditional Chinese characters in 
the BIG5 encoding space. Since the given test 
data are in simplified Chinese characters, a 
process of encoding conversion to BIG5 is in 
place. Such a conversion is a one-to-many map-
ping and thus some original words will be dis-
torted, influencing segmentation correctness. 
5 Conclusion
We have reported our results on two open tracks 
of the Second International Chinese Word Seg-
mentation Bakeoff, based on a production seg-
mentation system, which draws heavily on a 
large and unique dictionary. The dictionary is 
derived from processing a very large amount of 
synchronous textual data gathered from various 
Chinese speech communities, based on a uni-
form segmentation standard. It is shown that the 
primary dictionary-based BMM segmentation 
alone contribute the most in our segmentation 
system, with over 95% in recall and over 90% in 
precision, attributable to the large size of the 
dictionary, although our uniform segmentation 
standard may not have realized its full potential 
given the test corpora with different and chang-
ing standards. We also explored supplementary 
features offered by the large dictionary in post-
processing, and results incrementally improve. 
Hence our large dictionary derived from our 
uniform treatment of synchronous data provides 
a useful resource and provides a good platform 
for further extension in various aspects of lan-
guage engineering.  
References
Richard Sproat and Tom Emerson. 2003. The First 
International Chinese Word Segmentation Bakeoff.
In proceedings of the Second SIGHAN Workshop 
on Chinese Language Processing, July 11-12, 
2003, Sapporo, Japan. 
179
