Multiple Indexing in an Electronic Kanji Dictionary 
James BREEN 
Monash University 
Clayton 3800, Australia 
jwb@csse.monash.edu.au 
 
Abstract  
Kanji dictionaries, which need to present a 
large number of complex characters in an 
order that makes them accessible by users, 
traditionally use several indexing techniques 
that are particularly suited to the printed 
medium. Electronic dictionary technology 
provides the opportunity of both introducing 
new indexing techniques that are not 
feasible with printed dictionaries, and also 
allowing a wide range of index methods 
with each dictionary. It also allows 
dictionaries to be interfaced at the character 
level with documents and applications, thus 
removing much of the requirement for 
complex index methods. This paper surveys 
the traditional indexing methods, introduces 
some of the new indexing techniques that 
have become available with electronic kanji 
dictionaries, and reports on an analysis of 
the index usage patterns in a major WWW-
based electronic kanji dictionary. This is 
believed to be the first such analysis 
conducted and reported.  
1 Introduction  
Unlike languages written in alphabetic, 
syllabic or similar scripts, languages such as 
Japanese and Chinese, which are written 
using a large number of characters: hanzi in 
Chinese, kanji in Japanese, require two 
distinct sets of dictionaries. These are:  
a. the traditional "word" dictionaries, 
as used in most recorded languages. Such 
dictionaries are usually ordered in some 
recognized phonetic sequence, and typically 
include the pronunciation or reading of the 
word as well as the usual dictionary 
components: part-of-speech, explanation. 
etc.  
b. character dictionaries, which 
typically have an entry for each character, 
and contain such information as the 
classification of the character according to 
shape, usage, components, etc., the 
pronunciation or reading of the character, 
variants of the character, the meaning or 
semantic application of the character, and 
often a selection of words demonstrating the 
use of the character in the language's 
orthography. These dictionaries are usually 
ordered on some visual characteristic of the 
characters.  
A typical learner of Japanese needs to have 
both forms of dictionary, and the process of 
"looking up" an unknown word often 
involves initially using the character 
dictionary to determine the pronunciation of 
one or more of the characters, then using 
that pronunciation as an index to a word 
dictionary, in a process that can be time-
consuming and error-prone.  
The advent of electronic dictionaries has had 
a considerable impact on Japanese 
dictionary usage:  
a. it has facilitated the integration or 
association of character and word 
dictionaries such that a user can index 
between them in a relatively straightforward 
manner. This integration was pioneered by 
the author in the early 1990s (Breen, 1995), 
and is now a common feature of almost all 
hand-held electronic Japanese dictionaries 
and PC-based dictionary packages;  
b. it has allowed the direct transfer of 
words between text documents and 
dictionary software, thus removing the 
often-laborious character identification;  
c. for kanji dictionaries, it has greatly 
increased the number of character indexing 
methods that can effectively be used, and 
has also provided the opportunity for new 
indexing methods that are not available to 
traditional paper dictionaries.  
This paper will concentrate on the issues 
associated with Japanese kanji dictionaries. 
Many of these also apply to Chinese.  
2 Indexing a Kanji Dictionary  
The general problem confronting the 
publication of kanji dictionaries is the large 
number of kanji in use and the absence of an 
intrinsic and recognized lexical order for 
kanji. In the post-war educational reforms in 
Japan, the number of kanji taught in schools 
was restricted to a basic 1,850, which has 
now been increased to 1,945. This set of 
kanji, along with a small set designated for 
use in personal names, accounts for all but a 
small proportion of kanji usage in modern 
Japanese. Many dictionaries and similar 
reference books compiled for students are 
based on this set (Sakade, 1961; Henshall, 
1988; Halpern, 1999; etc.). The main 
computer character-set standard used in 
Japan, JIS X 0208 (JIS, 1997), which 
extends to less-common kanji including 
those used in places-names, has 6,355 kanji. 
This set is the basis for several kanji 
dictionaries (Nelson, 1997; Spahn & 
Hadamitzky, 1996), while larger sets of 
kanji are covered in many dictionaries, e.g. 
the Kodansha Daijiten (Ueda, 1963) has 
14,900 kanji and the 13-volume Morohashi 
Daikanwajiten (Morohashi, 1989) has over 
45,000 kanji.  
In this paper, the term "primary index" has 
been used for the method of ordering the 
kanji entries, and "secondary index" has 
been used for cross-reference lists of kanji 
based on alternative ordering systems.  
The major traditional indexing technique for 
kanji and hanzi dictionaries has been the 
radical system (bushu in Japanese), based on 
214 elements plus about 150 variants. These 
elements are graphic components of the 
character that occur frequently enough to be 
used for indexing purposes. For example, 
the kanji ? (mura: village) is identified by 
the ? radical, and in a dictionary would be 
grouped with other kanji identified by that 
radical (?, ?, ?, ?, etc.), with the 
grouped kanji ordered by the number of 
strokes in the remainder of the kanji. Radical 
systems have been used in Chinese character 
dictionaries for nearly 2,000 years, and the 
dominant 214-radical system was first used 
in the ???? (kangxi zidian) published in 
1716.  
Virtually all major kanji dictionaries 
published in Japan use the radical indexing 
method as the primary index, as do a 
number of dictionaries published elsewhere. 
Some dictionaries use modified or reduced 
sets of radicals. The technique is not simple 
to use, and some skill and practice is 
required in correctly identifying the radical 
and counting the residual strokes. The 
difficulty has been compounded by recent 
simplifications of the glyphs of the kanji, 
which in some cases have modified or 
eliminated the radical.  
There are a number of other techniques used 
for indexing kanji in a dictionary:  
a. reading. The reading or 
pronunciation of a kanji is a common and 
useful method of identification, and virtually 
all kanji dictionaries have a separate 
reading/kanji index. The reading cannot be 
used effectively as the primary index, as in 
Japanese each kanji usually has two sets of 
readings, and some kanji have as many as 
fifteen distinct readings.  
b. shape/stroke. A number of 
techniques have been used to decompose the 
shape of a kanji according to coded patterns. 
One, which was popular in China, is the 
Four-Corner code, which allocates a number 
(0-9) to the pattern of strokes at each corner 
of the character, leading to a four-digit 
index. Another method, which is quite 
popular, is the SKIP (System of Kanji 
Indexing by Patterns) used by Jack Halpern 
in his kanji dictionaries (Halpern, 1990, 
1999). In this, a kanji is typically divided 
into two portions, and a code constructed 
from the division type and the stroke-counts 
in the portions. Thus ? has a SKIP code of 
1-4-3, indicating a vertical division into four 
and three-stroke portions.  
c. school grade. In Japan the kanji to 
be taught in each grade of elementary school 
are prescribed, and some references either 
organize kanji in those groupings or provide 
a secondary index of grades.  
d. stroke count. The number of pen or 
brush strokes making up a kanji, ranging 
from one to over forty, can be an effective 
indexing technique, particularly for the 
simpler kanji. Some dictionaries employ a 
secondary index using the total number of 
strokes in a kanji.  
e. frequency. The ranking of kanji 
according to frequency-of-use can be a 
useful secondary index, especially for the 
commonly used kanji.  
f. code-point. The standardization of 
character set code-points for kanji has led to 
the emergence of dictionaries with these as 
the primary index. The Sanseido Unicode 
Kanji Information Dictionary (Tanaka, 
2000) uses the Unicode code-point as the 
primary index, and the first edition of the 
JIS Kanji Dictionary (Shibano, 1997) used 
the JIS X 0208 code-point. It is interesting 
to note that the second edition (Shibano, 
2002) changed to the traditional radical 
system, with the codepoints being relegated 
to a secondary index.  
A summary of the indices available in a 
selection of dictionaries and references is in 
Table 1. The "P" indicates the primary index 
and an "S" indicates a secondary index. (The 
original Nelson uses a slightly modified 
version of the traditional radical index, and 
the Spahn & Hadamitzky Kanji Dictionary 
uses a simplified 79-radical system. 
  Index Type 
Dictionary Radical Shape Code-point Grade Reading Frequency Stroke Order 
Morohashi (1989) P       S     
Ueda (1963) P       S     
Nelson (1974) P*     S S   S 
Nelson (1997) P     S S     
S&H (1996) P*       S     
S&H (1997) S       S P S 
Halpern (1990) S P   S S S   
Halpern (1999) S P     S S   
Sakade (1961)       P S     
Henshall (1988)       P S   S 
Shibano (1997)     P   S     
Shibano (2002) P   S   S     
Tanaka (2000) S   P         
Table 1: Index Types in Printed Kanji Dictionaries. 
3 Electronic Kanji Dictionaries  
As mentioned above, electronic kanji 
dictionaries have an increased number of 
indexing methods available, and in 
particular have navigational advantages over 
traditional paper dictionaries:  
a. the concept of a "secondary" index 
no longer applies, as every index is capable 
of linking directly to the kanji entries;  
b. dictionary users can choose flexibly 
between index methods according to 
preference, and can select a method 
appropriate to the characteristics of an 
individual kanji;  
c. the above-mentioned capability to 
index directly to a kanji entry from a kanji 
selected from a text or application;  
d. suitable GUIs can enhance the kanji 
lookup process by providing visual cues and 
a degree of interactivity.  
Figures 1 and 2 show the GUIs for the bushu 
and SKIP methods in the kanji dictionary 
module of the JWPce word-processor 
(Rosenthal, 2002).  
Fig. 1: Bushu Lookup GUI 
 
Fig. 2: SKIP Lookup GUI 
Among the new indexing methods 
introduced with electronic kanji dictionaries 
are:  
a. indexing using the meaning of a 
kanji. The compilation of the KANJIDIC 
database (Breen 2004), which contains the 
English meanings for over 12,000 kanji, has 
enabled this technique to be employed. 
Searching for kanji meaning "castle" 
immediately gives ?, "fox" gives ?, etc.  
b. multi-radical searching. Most kanji 
are made up of several basic shapes drawn 
from a set of about 300 patterns. For 
example, the kanji ? (atarashii: new) 
consists of the ?, ? and ? patterns. 
Clearly, a traditional dictionary can only use 
one of these as an index (the index radical of 
? is ?) but an electronic dictionary can use 
all the patterns to identify a kanji. A file of 
the visual components of the 6,355 kanji in 
the JIS X 0208 standard was prepared by a 
team of volunteers and is currently 
maintained by the author. The patterns used 
are similar to the traditional 214 radicals, but 
include common shapes such as ? and ? 
that are not among the 214, and 
distinguishes between shapes such as ? and 
? that are regarded as variants of the same 
radical. The following is an extract from the 
file of kanji with the radical components 
identified.  
? : ? ?  
? : ? ? ?  
? : ? ? ?  
? : ? ? ? ? ?  
This file is inverted, enabling dictionary 
software to identify the kanji containing a 
particular selection of radicals. Figure 3 
shows the multi-radical lookup GUI in 
JWPce, having identified the ? kanji from 
its components.  
 
Fig. 3: Multi-radical Lookup GUI 
New indexing techniques, such as those 
described above, have to date been largely 
confined to non-commercial packages based 
on the author's KANJIDIC project files 
(Breen, 2004). The commercial electronic 
kanji dictionaries in Japan, which are 
typically based on published kanji 
dictionaries, usually only provide radical, 
reading and occasionally stroke-count 
indices.  
4 Usage Patterns in an Electronic Kanji 
Dictionary  
The availability of a large range of indexing 
techniques in an electronic kanji dictionary 
raises the question of how useful they 
actually are to users of such dictionaries, and 
which methods are preferred by users. With 
dictionaries provided as software packages, 
measurement of the usage of the differing 
indexing techniques would be limited to 
such things as surveys of users. To date no 
analysis appears to have been carried out on 
user preferences in indexing methods.  
One form of electronic kanji dictionary 
which is amenable to the direct 
measurement of usage patterns is the kanji 
dictionary component of WWW-based 
Japanese dictionary, such as the WWWJDIC 
server (Breen, 2003) developed by the 
author. The WWWJDIC server provides 
over twenty indices to its database of over 
13,000 kanji, including all the techniques 
mentioned earlier in this paper. The users 
are primarily students of Japanese and non-
native speakers of Japanese.  
The server code at the Monash University 
site was extended to provide detailed 
statistics of the accesses to the kanji 
dictionary module. Information was 
collected over a two-week period, during 
which time over 70,000 accesses to the kanji 
dictionary were made. Table 2 contains a 
breakdown of the accesses by index type. In 
the case of accesses using the multi-radical 
method, it is clear that users frequently have 
to make several selections of radicals to 
reach the correct kanji. From inspection of 
the raw statistics, it appeared that on average 
three accesses were made by each user of 
this method for each target kanji. 
Accordingly, the reported accesses for this 
method have been reduced to make a more 
meaningful comparison with the other 
methods. The "Direct" method involves 
access to the kanji in a word encountered in 
another dictionary function, whereas the 
"Cut-Paste" method refers to kanji 
transferred from another WWW page or 
application.  
Access Method Access % 
Multi-radical 24.8 
Reading (ja) 24.1 
Direct 17.6 
Cut-Paste 9.7 
English Meaning 9.2 
Code-Point 6.4 
Stroke Count 2.8 
Reading (cn,ko) 1.5 
Radical/Bushu 1.4 
SKIP, 4-Corner 1.3 
Dictionary Index 0.6 
Other 0.6 
Table 2: Kanji Access Statistics 
(In 20.3% of the accesses recorded in Table 
2, the user opted to make a follow-on search 
of one of the "word" dictionaries on the 
server using a kanji as a search key.)  
These results are interesting for a number of 
reasons:  
a. the index methods which dominate 
are either those which have only become 
available with electronic dictionaries: multi-
radical, direct access, English meaning, etc., 
or those which can only be used via a 
secondary index in traditional dictionaries.  
b. the high levels of access based on 
the code-points of the kanji, which includes 
the Direct, Cut-Paste and Code-Point 
methods is an indication of the usefulness of 
operating an electronic dictionary in 
association with other software. The 
relatively high result for the Code-Point 
method, which involves supplying the server 
with the hexadecimal representation of the 
kanji's code, was investigated further. Over 
60% of these accesses used the Unicode 
code-point, and on inspection of the server 
logs it transpired that most arrived as 
linkages from other WWW servers and 
database collections dealing with kanji and 
hanzi.  
c. the relatively low usage of the 
traditional radical index and the SKIP 
method is an indication that while they may 
be suitable and accepted in paper 
dictionaries as the primary indices, they play 
only a minor role in electronic dictionaries, 
where users clearly find other methods more 
useful.  
It is recognized that this survey of usage 
patterns reflects both the preferences of the 
particular set of users who have chosen to 
use it, and the biases introduced by the 
interface, which in the case of HTML forms 
is often not as easily used as, for example, a 
tailored GUI. It is, however, a strong 
indication of the sorts of indexing methods 
which are found to be useful by such a 
group. It is also worth noting that despite the 
clumsiness of the Multi-radical selection 
form, which has over 200 check-boxes, it is 
clearly among the most popular kanji index 
methods.  
5 Conclusion  
Kanji dictionaries have traditionally been 
published using indexing techniques 
developed for use in the printed medium. 
Electronic dictionary techniques provide the 
opportunity both to interface such 
dictionaries directly with text, and also to 
introduce new techniques more suited to the 
computer-human interface. Implementation 
of such techniques and the subsequent 
measurement of their usage in an 
environment where users can choose from a 
variety of indexing methods indicates a high 
level of acceptance of and preference for the 
new indexing techniques.  
References  
Breen, J.W. 1995. Building an Electronic 
Japanese-English Dictionary, JSAA 
Conference, Brisbane.  
Breen, J.W. 2003. A WWW Japanese 
Dictionary, in "Language Teaching at the 
Crossroads", Monash Asia Institute, 
Monash University Press  
Breen, J.W. 2004. KANJIDIC - Kanji 
Database Project, 
http://www.csse.monash.edu.au/~jwb/ka
njidic.html  
Rosenthal, G. 2002. JWPce: Japanese Word 
Processor 
http://www.physics.ucla.edu/~grosenth/j
wpce.html  
Halpern, J. 1990. New Japanese-English 
Character Dictionary, Kenkyusha/NTC.  
Halpern, J. 1999. Kanji Learner's 
Dictionary, Kodansha  
Henshall, K.G. 1988. A Guide to 
Remembering Japanese Characters, 
Tuttle.  
Japanese Industrial Standards Committee. 
1997. JIS X 0208-1997 7-bit and 8-bit 
Coded Kanji Sets for Information 
Interchange, Japanese Standards 
Association.  
Morohashi, T. et al (1989) Daikanwa Jiten, 
(Large Character Dictionary), Taishukan.  
Nelson, A.N. 1974. The Modern Reader's 
Japanese-English Character Dictionary, 
(second revised edition), Tuttle.  
Nelson, A.N. revised Haig, J.H. 1997. The 
New Nelson Japanese-English Character 
Dictionary, Tuttle.  
Sakade, F. et al 1961. A Guide to Reading 
& Writing Japanese, (second edition), 
Tuttle.  
Shibano, K. et al 1997, 2002. JIS Kanji 
Dictionary, (first and second editions), 
Japan Standards Association.  
Spahn, M. & Hadamitzky, W. 1996. The 
Kanji Dictionary, Tuttle.  
Spahn, M. & Hadamitzky, W. 1997. Kanji & 
Kana: A Handbook of the Japanese 
Writing System Tuttle.  
Tanaka, Y. et al 2000. Unicode Kanji 
Information Dictionary, Sanseido.  
Ueda, K. et al 1963. Daijiten, (Large 
Character Dictionary), Kodansha.  
JMdict: a Japanese-Multilingual Dictionary 
James BREEN 
Monash University 
Clayton 3800, Australia 
jwb@csse.monash.edu.au 
 
Abstract  
The JMdict project has at its aim the 
compilation of a multilingual lexical 
database with Japanese as the pivot 
language. Using an XML structure designed 
to cater for a mix of languages and a rich set 
of lexicographic information, it has reached 
a size of approximately 100,000 entries, 
with most entries having translations in 
English, French and German. The 
compilation involves information re-use, 
with the French and German translations 
being drawn from separately maintained 
lexicons. Material from other languages is 
also being included. The file is freely 
available for research purposes and for 
incorporation in dictionary application 
software, and is available in several WWW 
server systems.  
1 Introduction  
The JMdict project has as its primary goal 
the compilation of a Japanese-multilingual 
dictionary, i.e. a dictionary in which the 
headwords are from the Japanese lexicon, 
and the translations are in several other 
languages. It may be viewed as a synthesis 
of a series of Japanese-Other Language 
bilingual dictionaries, although, as discussed 
below, there is merit in having this 
information collocated.  
The project grew out of, and has now 
subsumed, an earlier Japanese-English 
dictionary project (EDICT: Electronic 
Dictionary) (Breen, 1995, 2004a). With 
Japanese being an important language in 
world trade, and with it being the second 
most common language used on the WWW, 
it is not surprising that there is considerable 
interest in electronic lexical resources for 
Japanese in combination with other 
languages.  
2 Project Goals and Development  
As mentioned above, the JMdict project 
grew out of the bilingual EDICT dictionary 
project. The EDICT project began in the 
early 1990s with a relatively simple goal of 
producing a Japanese-English dictionary file 
that could be used in basic software 
packages to provide traditional dictionary 
services, as well as facilities to assist reading 
Japanese text. The format was (and is) quite 
simple, comprising lines of text consisting 
of a Japanese word written using kanji 
and/or kana, the reading (pronunciation) of 
that word in kana, and one or more English 
translations.  
By the late 1990s, the file had outgrown its 
humble origins, having reached over 50,000 
entries, and having spun off a parallel 
project for recording Japanese proper nouns 
(see below). The material has partly been 
drawn from word lists, vocabulary lists, etc. 
in the public domain, and supplemented by 
material prepared by large numbers of users 
and other volunteers wishing to contribute. 
While it had been used in a variety of 
software systems, and as a source of lexical 
material in a number of projects, it was clear 
that its structure was quite inadequate for the 
lexical demands being made by users. In 
particular, it was not able to incorporate a 
suitable variety of information, nor represent 
the orthographical complexities of the 
source language. Accordingly, in 1999 it 
was decided to launch a new dictionary 
project incorporating the information from 
the EDICT file, but expanded to include 
translations from other languages with the 
Japanese entries remaining as the pivots. 
The project goals were:  
a. a file format, preferably using a 
recognized standard, which would enable 
ready access and parsing by a variety of 
software applications;  
b. the handling of orthographical and 
pronunciation variation within the single 
entry. This addressed a major problem with 
the EDICT format, as many Japanese words 
can be written with alternative kanji and 
with varying portions in kana (okurigana), 
and may have alternative pronunciations. 
The EDICT format required each variant to 
be treated as a separate entry, which added 
to the complexity of maintaining and 
extending the dictionary;  
c. additional and more appropriately 
associated tagging of grammatical and other 
information. Certain information such as the 
part of speech or the source language of loan 
words had been added to the EDICT file in 
parentheses within the translation fields, but 
the scope was limited and the information 
could not easily be parsed;  
d. provision for differentiation 
between different senses in the translations. 
While basic indication of polysemy had 
been provided in the EDICT file by 
prepending (1), (2), etc. to groups of 
translations, the result was difficult to parse. 
Also it did not support the case where a 
sense or nuance was tied to a particular 
pronunciation, as occurs occasionally in 
Japanese;  
e. provision for the inclusion of 
translational equivalents from several 
languages. The EDICT dictionary file was 
being used in a number of countries, and 
several informal projects had begun to 
develop equivalent files for Japanese and 
other target languages. A small Japanese-
German file (JDDICT) had been released in 
the EDICT format. There was considerable 
interest expressed in having translations in 
various languages collocated to enable such 
things as having a single reference file for 
several languages, cross-referencing of 
entries, cross-language retrieval, etc. as well 
as acting as a focus for the possible 
development of translations for as yet 
unrepresented languages;  
f. provision for inclusion of examples 
of the usage of words. As the file expanded, 
many users of the file requested some form 
of usage examples to be associated with the 
words in the file. The EDICT format was 
not capable of supporting this;  
g. provision for cross-references to 
related entries;  
h. continued generation of EDICT-
format files. As a large number of packages 
and servers had been built around the 
EDICT format, continued provision of 
content in this format was considered 
important, even if the information only 
contained a sub-set of what was available.  
An early decision was to use XML 
(Extensible Markup Language) as a format 
for the JMdict file, as this was expected to 
provide the appropriate flexibility in format, 
and was also expected to be supported by 
applications, parsing libraries, etc.  
An examination was made of other available 
dictionary formats to ascertain if a suitable 
formatting model was available. It was 
known that commercial dictionary 
publishers has well-structured databases of 
lexical information, and some were moving 
to XML, but none of the details were 
available. A large number of bilingual 
dictionary files and word lists were in the 
public domain; however in general they only 
used very simple structures, and none could 
be found which covered all the content 
requirements of the project. The dictionary 
section of the TEI (Text Encoding 
Initiative), which at the time of writing has a 
well-developed document structure for 
bilingual dictionaries, was at that stage quite 
limited (Sperberg-McQueen et al 1999). 
Accordingly, an XML DTD (Document 
Type Definition) was developed which was 
tailored to the requirements of the project.  
The EDICT file was parsed and reformatted 
into the JMdict structure, and at the same 
time, many of the orthographical variants 
were identified and merged. The initial 
release of the DTD and XML-format file 
took place in May 1999. At that stage, it 
contained the English translations from the 
EDICT file and the German translations 
from the JDDICT file. As described below, 
it has been expanded considerably since 
then, both in terms of number of entries and 
also in multi-lingual coverage.  
3 Project Status  
The JMdict file was first released in 1999, 
and updated versions are released 3-4 times 
each year along with versions of the EDICT 
file, which is generated at the same time 
from the same data files. The file now has 
over 99,300 entries, i.e. the size of a 
medium-large printed dictionary, and the 
growth in numbers of entries is now 
relatively slow, with most updates dealing 
with corrections and expansion of existing 
entries.  
The file is available under a liberal licence 
that allows its use for almost any purpose 
without fee. The only requirement is that its 
use be fully acknowledged and that any files 
developed from it continue under the same 
licence conditions.  
4 Structure  
The JMdict XML structure contains one 
element type: <entry>, which in turn 
contains sequence number, kanji word, kana 
word, information and translation elements. 
The sequence number is used for 
maintenance and identification.  
The kanji word and kana word elements 
contain the two forms of the Japanese 
headwords; the former is used for 
representations containing at least one kanji 
character, while the latter is for 
representations in kana alone. The kana 
word is effectively the pronunciation, but is 
also an important key for indexing the 
dictionary file, as Japanese dictionaries are 
usually ordered by kana words. The 
minimum content of these fields is a single 
word in the kana word element. In addition, 
each entry may contain information about 
the words (unusual orthographical variant, 
archaic kanji, etc.) and frequency of use 
information. The latter needs to be 
associated with the actual words rather than 
the entry as a whole because some 
combinations of kanji and kana words are 
used more frequently than others. (For 
example, ??? and ??? are 
orthographical variants of the one word 
(aikid?), but the former is more common.)  
The kana used in the elements follows 
modern Japanese orthography, i.e. hiragana 
is used for native Japanese words, and 
katakana for loan words, onomatopoeic 
words, etc.  
In most cases an entry has just one kanji and 
one kana word (approx. 75%), or one kana 
word alone (15%). In about 10% of entries 
there are multiple words in one of the 
elements. In some cases a kana reading can 
only be associated with a subset of the kanji 
words in the entry. For example, soyokaze 
(????: breeze) can be written either 
?? or ??? (the latter is more common 
as ?? is a non-standard reading of the ? 
kanji). However ?? can also be 
pronounced bifuu (???) with the same 
meaning, but clearly this pronunciation 
cannot be associated with the ??? form, 
as the kana portion is read "soyo". XML 
does not provide an elegant method for 
indicating a restricted mapping between 
portions of two elements, so when such a 
restriction is required, additional tags are 
used with each kana word supplying the 
kanji word with which it may be validly 
associated.  
The information element contains general 
information about the Japanese word or the 
entry as a whole. The contents allow for 
ISO-639 source language codes (for loan 
words), dialect codes, etymology, 
bibliographic information and update 
details.  
The translation area consists of one or more 
sense elements that contain at a minimum a 
single gloss. Associated with each sense is a 
set of elements containing part of speech, 
cross-reference, synonym/antonym, usage, 
etc. information. Also associated with the 
sense may be restriction codes tying the 
sense to a subset of the Japanese words. For 
example, ?? can be pronounced suiki 
(???) and mizuge (???); both 
meaning "moisture", but the former alone 
can also mean "dropsy".  
The gloss element has an attribute stating 
the target language of the translation. In its 
absence it is assumed the gloss is in English. 
There is also an attribute stating the gender, 
if for example, the part-of-speech is a noun 
and the gloss is in a language with gendered 
nouns. Figure 1 shows a slightly simplified 
example of an entry. The <ke_pri> and 
<re_pri> elements indicate the word is a 
member of a particular set of common 
words.  
<entry> 
<ent_seq>1206730</ent_seq> 
<k_ele> 
<keb>??</keb> 
<ke_pri>ichi1</ke_pri> 
</k_ele> 
<r_ele> 
<reb>????</reb> 
<re_pri>ichi1</re_pri> 
</r_ele> 
<sense> 
<pos>&n;</pos> 
<gloss>school</gloss> 
<gloss g_lang="nl" g_gend="fg">school</gloss> 
<gloss g_lang="fr" g_gend="fg">?cole</gloss> 
<gloss g_lang="ru" g_gend="fg">?????</gloss> 
<gloss g_lang="de" g_gend="fg">Schule</gloss> 
<gloss g_lang="de" 
g_gend="fg">Lehranstalt</gloss> 
</sense> 
</entry> 
Fig. 1: Example JMdict entry  
The potential to have multiple kanji and 
kana words within an entry brings attention 
to the issues of homonymy, homography 
and polysemy, and the policies for handling 
these, in particular the criteria for combining 
kanji and kana words into a single entry. As 
Japanese has a comparatively limited set of 
phonemes there are a large number of 
homophonous words. For example, over 
twenty different words have the kana 
representation ????? (k?j?). If we 
regard homography as only applying to 
words written wholly or partly with kanji, 
there are relatively few cases of it, however 
they do exist, e.g. ?? when read 
????? (senry?) means a comic poem, 
but when read ????? (kawayanagi) 
means a variety of willow tree.  
The combining rule that has been applied in 
the compilation of the JMdict file is as 
follows:  
a. treat each basic entry as a triplet 
consisting of: kanji representation, matching 
kana representation, senses;  
b. if for any basic entries two or more 
members of the triplet are the same, 
combine them into the one entry;  
i. if the entries differ in kanji 
or kana representation, include these 
as alternative forms;  
ii. if the entries differ in sense, 
treat as a case of polysemy;  
c. in other cases leave the entries 
separate.  
This rule has been applied successfully in a 
majority of cases. The main problems arise 
where the meanings are similar or related, as 
in the case of the entries: (??, ???, to 
separate; to set free; to turn loose) and 
(??, ???, to part; to divide; to 
separate), where the kana words are the 
same and the meanings overlap. Japanese 
dictionaries are divided on ?? and ??; 
some keeping them as separate entries, and 
others having them as the one entry with two 
main senses. (The two words derive from a 
common source.)  
5 Parts of Speech and Related Issues  
As languages differ in their parts of speech 
(POS), the recording of those details in 
bilingual dictionaries can be a problem (Al-
Kasimi, 1977). Traditionally bilingual 
dictionaries involving Japanese avoid 
recording any POS information, leaving it to 
the user to deduce that information from the 
translation and examples (if any). In the 
early stages of the EDICT project, POS 
information was deliberately kept to a 
minimum, e.g. indicating where a verb was 
transitive or intransitive when this was not 
apparent from the translation, mainly to 
conserve storage space. As there are a 
number of advantages in having POS 
information marked in an electronic 
dictionary file, a POS element was included 
in the JMdict structure, and publicly 
available POS classifications were used to 
populate much of the file. About 30% of 
entries remain to be classified; mostly nouns 
or short noun phrases.  
In the interests of saving space an early 
decision had been made to avoid listing 
derived forms of words. For example, the 
Japanese adjective ?? (takai) meaning 
"high, tall, expensive" has derived forms of 
?? (takasa) "height" and ?? (takaku) 
"highly". As this process is very regular, 
many Japanese dictionaries do not carry 
entries for the derived forms, and some 
bilingual dictionaries follow suit. Another 
such example is the common verb form, 
sometimes called a "verbal noun", which is 
created by adding the verb ?? (suru) "to 
do" to appropriate nouns. The verb "to 
study" is ???? (benky?suru) where 
?? is a noun meaning "study" in this 
context. Again, Japanese dictionaries often 
do not include these forms as headwords, 
preferring to indicate in the body of an entry 
that the formation is possible.  
The omission of such derived forms means 
that care needs to be taken when 
constructing the translations so that the user 
is readily able to identify the appropriate 
translation of one of the derived forms.  
In a multilingual context, the omission of 
derived forms can have other problems. The 
recording of ?? verbs only in their noun 
base form has been reported to lead to some 
discomfort among German users, as German 
language orthographical convention 
capitalizes the first letters of nouns but not 
verbs (the WaDokuJT file has ?? verbs as 
separate entries for this reason).  
6 Inclusion and Maintenance of Multiple 
Languages  
As mentioned above, part of the interest in 
having entries with translations in a range of 
languages came from the compilation of a 
number of dictionary files based on or 
similar to the EDICT file. There are a 
number of issues associated with the 
inclusion of material from other dictionary 
files, in particular those relating to the 
compilation policies: coverage, handling of 
inflected forms, etc. (Breen, 2002) There is 
also the major issue of the editing and 
maintenance of the material, which has the 
potential to become more complex as each 
language is incorporated.  
The approach taken with JMdict has been to:  
a. maintain a core Japanese-English 
file with a well-documented structure and 
set of inclusion and editing policies;  
b. encourage the development and 
maintenance of equivalent files in other 
languages paired with Japanese, which can 
draw on the JMdict/EDICT material as 
required;  
c. periodically build the complete 
multi-lingual JMdict from the different 
components.  
This approach has proved successful in that 
it has separated the compilation of the file 
from the ongoing editing of the components, 
and has left the latter in the hands of those 
with the skills and motivation to perform the 
task.  
At the time of writing, the JMdict file has 
over 99,300 entries (Japanese and English), 
of which 83,500 have German translations, 
58,000 have French translations, 4,800 have 
Russian translations and 530 have Dutch 
translations. A set of approximately 4,500 
Spanish translations is being prepared, with 
the prospects that some 20,000 will be 
available shortly.  
The major sources of these additional 
translations are:  
a. French translations from two 
projects:  
i. approximately 17,500 
entries have come from the 
Dictionnaire fran?ais-japonais Project 
(Desperrier, 2002), a project to 
translate the most common Japanese 
words from the EDICT File into 
French;  
ii. a further 40,500 entries 
drawn from the ?????? 
(French-Japanese Complementation 
Project) at 
http://francais.sourceforge.jp/ (This 
project is also based on the EDICT 
file.)  
b. German translations from the 
WaDokuJT Project (Apel, 2002). This is a 
large file of over 300,000 entries; however, 
unlike JMdict it includes many phrases, 
proper nouns and inflected forms of verbs, 
etc. The overlap of coverage with JMdict is 
quite high, leading to the large number of 
entries that have been included in the JMdict 
file.  
One of the issues that can lead to problems 
when incorporating translations from other 
project files is that of aligning the 
translations when an entry has several 
senses. In the case of the French 
translations, the project coordinator has 
marked the translations of polysemous 
entries with a sense code, thus enabling the 
translations to be inserted correctly when 
compiling the final file. For other languages, 
the translations are being appended to the set 
English translations. The appropriate 
handling of multiple senses is an item of 
future work.  
7 Examples of Word Usage  
When the project was begun and the DTD 
designed, it was intended that sets of 
bilingual examples of usage of the entry 
words would be included. For this reason an 
<example> element was associated with 
each sense to allow for such example 
phrases, sentences, etc, to be included.  
In practice, a quite different approach has 
been taken. With the availability since 2001 
of a large corpus of parallel 
Japanese/English sentences (Tanaka, 2001), 
it was decided to keep the corpus intact, and 
instead provide for the association of 
selected sentences from the corpus with 
dictionary entries via dictionary application 
software (Breen, 2003b). This strategy, 
which required the corpus to be parsed to 
extract a set of index words for each 
sentence, has proved effective at the 
application level. It also has the advantage 
of decoupling the maintenance of the 
dictionary file from that of the example 
corpus.  
8 Related Projects  
Apart from a few small word lists involving 
several European languages, the only other 
major current project attempting to compile 
a comprehensive multilingual database is the 
Papillon project (e.g. Boitet et al 2002). See 
http://www.papillon-dictionary.org/ for a 
full list of publications. The Papillon design 
involves linkages based on word-senses as 
proposed in (S?rasset, 1994) with the finer 
lexical structure based on Meaning-Text 
Theory (MTT) (Mel'cuk, 1984-1996). At the 
time of writing the Papillon database is still 
in the process of being populated with 
lexical information.  
Closely related to the JMdict project is the 
Japanese-Multilingual Named Entity 
Dictionary (JMnedict) project. This is a 
database of some 400,000 Japanese place 
and person names, and non-Japanese names 
in their Japanese orthographical form, along 
with a romanized transcription of the 
Japanese (Breen, 2004b). Some 
geographical names have English 
descriptions: cape, island, etc. which are in 
the process of being extended to other 
languages. The JMnedict file is in an XML 
format with a similar structure to JMdict.  
Another multilingual lexical database is 
KANJIDIC2 (Breen, 2004c), which contains 
a wide range of information about the 
13,039 kanji in the JIS X 0208, JIS X 0212 
and JIS X 0213 character standards. Among 
the information for each kanji are the set of 
readings in Japanese, Chinese and Korean, 
and the broad meanings of each kanji in 
English, German and Spanish. A set of 
Portuguese meanings is being prepared. The 
database is in an XML format.  
9 Applications  
While there are a number of experimental 
systems using the JMdict file, the only 
application system using the full 
multilingual file at present is the Papillon 
project server. Figure 2 shows the display 
from that server when looking up the word 
??. The author's WWWJDIC server 
(Breen, 2003a) uses the Japanese-English 
components of the file. Figure 3 is an extract 
from the WWWJDIC display for the word 
??, which is an example of an entry with 
multiple kana words, and senses restricted 
by reading. (The (P) markers indicate the 
more common readings.)  
 
Fig. 2: Papillon example for ?? 
 
Fig. 3: WWWJDIC example for ?? 
The EDICT Japanese-English dictionary 
file, which is generated from the same 
database as the JMdict file, continues to be a 
major non-commercial Japanese-English 
lexical resource, and is used in a large 
number of applications and servers, as well 
as in a number of research projects.  
10 Conclusion  
The JMdict project has successfully 
developed a multilingual lexical database 
using Japanese as the pivot language. In 
doing so, it has reached a lexical coverage 
comparable to medium-large printed 
dictionaries, and its components are used in 
a wide range of applications and research 
projects. It has also demonstrated the 
potential for re-use of material from related 
and cooperating lexicon projects. The files 
of the JMdict project are readily available 
for use by researchers and developers, and 
have the potential to be a significant lexical 
resource in a multilingual context.  
References  
Al-Kasami, A.M. 1977 Linguistics and 
Bilingual Dictionaries, E.J. Brill, 
Leiden  
Apel, U. 2002. WaDokuJT - A Japanese-
German Dictionary Database, 
Papillon 2002 Seminar, NII, Tokyo  
Boitet, C, Mangeot-Lerebours, M, 
S?rasset, G. 2002 The PAPILLON 
project: cooperatively building a 
multilingual lexical data-base to 
derive open source dictionaries & 
lexicons, Proc. of the 2nd Workshop 
NLPXML 2002, Post COLING 2002 
Workshop, Ed. Wilcock, Ide & 
Romary, Taipei, Taiwan.  
Breen, J.W. 1995. Building an Electronic 
Japanese-English Dictionary, JSAA 
Conference, Brisbane.  
Breen, J.W. 2002. Practical Issues and 
Problems in Building a Multilingual 
Lexicon, Papillon 2002 Seminar, NII, 
Tokyo.  
Breen, J.W. 2003a. A WWW Japanese 
Dictionary, in "Language Teaching at 
the Crossroads", Monash Asia 
Institute, Monash Univ. Press.  
Breen, J.W. 2003b. Word Usage 
Examples in an Electronic 
Dictionary, Papillon 2003 Seminar, 
Sapporo.  
Breen, J.W. 2004a. The EDICT Project, 
http://www.csse.monash.edu.au/~jwb/
edict.html  
Breen, J.W. 2004b. The 
ENAMDICT/JMnedict Project, 
http://www.csse.monash.edu.au/~jwb/
enamdict_doc.html  
Breen, J.W. 2004c. The KANJIDIC2 
Project, 
http://www.csse.monash.edu.au/~jwb/
kanjidic2/  
Desperrier, J-M. 2002. Analysis of the 
results of a collaborative project for 
the creation of a Japanese-French 
dictionary, Papillon 2002 Seminar, 
NII, Tokyo.  
Mel'cuk, I, et al 1984-1996. DEC: 
dictionnaire explicatif et 
combinatoire du fran?ais 
contemporain, recherches lexico-
s?mantiques, Vols I-IV, Montreal 
Univ. Press.  
S?rasset, G. 1994. SUBLIM: un Syst?me 
Universel de Bases Lexicales 
Multilingues et NADIA: sa 
sp?cialisation aux bases lexicales 
interlingues par acceptions, (Doctoral 
Thesis) Joseph Fourier University, 
Grenoble  
Sperberg-McQueen, C.M.. and Burnard, 
L. (eds.) 1999. Guidelines for 
Electronic Text Encoding and 
Interchange. Oxford Univ. Press.  
Tanaka, Y. 2001. Compilation of a 
Multilingual Parallel Corpus 
PACLING 2001, Japan.  
