MiTAP for SARS Detection 
 
 
Laurie E. Damianos, Samuel Bayer, 
Michael A. Chisholm, John Henderson,  
Lynette Hirschman, William Morgan, 
Marc Ubaldino, Guido Zarrella 
The MITRE Corporation 
202 Burlington Road 
Bedford, MA 01730 
{laurie, sam, chisholm, 
jhndrsn, lynette, wmorgan, 
ubaldino,jzarrella}@mitre.org 
James M. Wilson, V, MD and  
Marat G. Polyak 
Division of Integrated Biodefense 
ISIS Center, Georgetown University 
2115 Wisconsin Avenue Suite 603 
Washington, DC 20007 
{wilson, mgp5} 
@isis.imac.georgetown.edu 
 
Abstract 
The MiTAP prototype for SARS detection 
uses human language technology for detect-
ing, monitoring, and analyzing potential indi-
cators of infectious disease outbreaks and 
reasoning for issuing warnings and alerts. Mi-
TAP focuses on providing timely, multi-
lingual information access to analysts, domain 
experts, and decision-makers worldwide. Data 
sources are captured, filtered, translated, 
summarized, and categorized by content. 
Critical information is automatically extracted 
and tagged to facilitate browsing, searching, 
and scanning, and to provide key terms at a 
glance. The processed articles are made avail-
able through an easy-to-use news server and 
cross-language information retrieval system 
for access and analysis anywhere, any time. 
Specialized newsgroups and customizable fil-
ters or searches on incoming stories allow us-
ers to create their own view into the data 
while a variety of tools summarize, indicate 
trends, and provide alerts to potentially rele-
vant spikes of activity. 
1 
2 
Background 
Potentially catastrophic biological events that threaten 
US national security are steadily increasing in fre-
quency. These events pose immediate danger to ani-
mals, plants, and humans. Current disease surveillance 
systems are inadequate for detecting indicators early 
enough to ensure the rapid response needed to combat 
these biological events and corresponding public reac-
tion. Recent examples of outbreaks include both the 
HIV/AIDS and foot and mouth pandemics, the spread of 
West Nile virus to and across the US, the escape of Rift 
Valley Fever from Africa, SARS, and the translocation 
of both mad cow disease (BSE) and monkey pox to the 
United States.  
Biological surveillance systems in the United States 
rely most heavily on human medical data for signs of 
epidemic activity. These systems span multiple organi-
zations and agencies, are often not integrated, and have 
no alerting capability. As a result, responders have an 
insufficient amount of lead time to prepare for biologi-
cal events or catastrophes. 
Indications and Warnings (I&Ws) provide the poten-
tial for early alert of impending biological events, per-
haps weeks to months in advance. Sources of I&Ws 
include transportation data, telecommunication traffic, 
economic indices, Internet news, RSS feeds (RSS) in-
cluding weblogs, commerce, agricultural surveillance, 
weather, and other environmental data. Retrospective 
analyses of major infectious disease outbreaks (e.g., 
West Nile Virus and SARS) show that I&Ws were pre-
sent weeks to months in advance, but these indicators 
were missed because data sources were difficult to ob-
tain and hard to integrate. As a result, the available in-
formation was not utilized for appropriate national and 
international response. This illuminates a critical need in 
biodefense for an integrated system linking I&Ws for 
biological events from multiple and disparate sources 
with the response community. 
Introduction 
MiTAP (Damianos et al 2002) was originally devel-
oped by the MITRE Corporation under the Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) 
Translingual Information Detection Extraction and 
Summarization (TIDES) program. TIDES aims to revo-
lutionize the way that information is obtained from hu-
man language by enabling people to find and interpret 
relevant information quickly and effectively, regardless 
of language or medium. MiTAP was initially created for 
tracking and monitoring infectious disease outbreaks 
and other biological threats as part of a DARPA Inte-
grated Feasibility Experiment in biosecurity to explore 
the integration of synergistic TIDES language process-
ing technologies applied to a real world domain. The 
system has since been expanded to other domains such 
as weapons of mass destruction, satellite monitoring, 
and suspect terrorist activity. In addition, researchers 
and analysts are examining hundreds of MiTAP data 
sources for differing perspectives on conflict and hu-
manitarian relief efforts. 
Our newest MiTAP prototype explores the integra-
tion of outputs from operational data mining (anomaly 
detection), human language technology (information 
extraction, temporal tagging, machine translation, cross-
language information retrieval), and visualization tools 
to detect SARS-specific I&Ws in Asia, with relevance 
to pathogen translocation to the United States. Using 
feeds from English and Chinese language newswire, 
weblogs, and other Internet data, the system translates 
Chinese text data and tracks keyword combinations 
thought to represent I&Ws specific to SARS outbreaks 
in China. Analysts can use cross-language information 
retrieval for retrospective analysis and improving the 
I&W model, save searches to use as filters on incoming 
data, view trends, and visualize the data along a time-
line. Figure 1 shows an overview of the prototype. 
Warnings generated by this MiTAP prototype are in-
tended to complement traditional biosurveillance and 
communications already in use by the international pub-
lic health community. This system represents an expan-
sion of current US surveillance capabilities to detect 
biological agents of catastrophic potential.
 
 
Figure 1 Overview of the MiTAP prototype for SARS detection. 
3 Component Technologies 
The MiTAP prototype relies extensively on human 
language technology and expert system reasoning. 
Below, MiTAP capabilities are described briefly 
along with their contributing component 
technologies. 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
Information Processing 
After Internet news sources are captured and 
normalized, they are passed through a zoner using 
human-generated rules to identify source, date, and 
other information such as headline, or title, and 
content. The Alembic natural language analyzer (Ab-
erdeen et al 1995; Vilain and Day 1996) processes 
the zoned messages to identify paragraph, sentence, 
and word boundaries as well as part-of-speech tags. 
The messages then pass through the Alembic named 
entity recognizer for identification and tagging of 
person, organization, location, and disease names. 
Finally, the article is processed by the TempEx 
normalizing time expression tagger (Mani and Wil-
son 2000). 
For Chinese and other non-English sources, the 
CyberTrans machine translation system (Miller et al 
2001) is used to translate articles automatically into 
English. CyberTrans wraps commercial and research 
translation engines to produce a common set of 
interfaces; the current prototype makes use of the 
SYSTRAN Chinese-English system.  
RSS feeds can provide a high volume textual ge-
stalt.  Weblogs, in particular, are a good source of 
timely text, some of which is topical and all of which 
is based on personal observations and experiences. 
Aggregate measurements on these feeds can provide 
indications of public health-related phenom-
ena.  Consider the relative rates of words and phrases 
such as "stay home from" or "pneumonia.?  Geotem-
poral location of non-seasonal spikes in relative rank 
of these strings can establish suspicion for further 
investigation by I&W experts. 
Browsing 
English language data and pairs of foreign language 
documents and their translated versions are made 
available on a news server (INN 2001) for browsing. 
The system categorizes and bins articles into 
newsgroups based on their content. To do this, the 
system relies on a combination of the information 
extraction results as well as human-generated rules 
for pattern matching. Newsgroups are created to 
provide multiple perspectives on the data; analysts 
can subscribe to specific disease tracking 
newsgroups, regional newsgroups, specific data 
source newsgroups, or to customized topic tracking 
newsgroups that may be based on several related 
subjects. 
Tagged entities in each article are color-coded to 
enable rapid scanning of information and easy identi-
fication of key names. The five most frequently men-
tioned locations in each article as well as the top five 
people are presented as a list for quick reference. 
Information Retrieval 
To supplement access to the articles on the news 
server and to allow for retrospective analysis, articles 
are indexed using the Lucene information retrieval 
system (The Jakarta Project 2001) for English 
language documents and using PSE (Darwish 2002) 
for foreign language documents. Web links are 
maintained between foreign language documents and 
their translated versions to allow for more accurate 
human translations of selected documents. 
Analysts can perform full text, source-specific 
queries over the entire set of archived documents and 
view the retrieved results as a relevance-ranked list or 
as a plot across a timeline. A cross-language informa-
tion retrieval interface allows users to search in Eng-
lish across the Chinese language sources. 
Users can also save specific search constraints to 
be used as filters on incoming data. These saved 
searches provide a simple analytic capability as well 
as an alerting feature. (See below.) 
Analysis 
To assist analysts in identifying relevant and related 
articles, we have integrated multi-document summa-
rization and watch lists. Columbia University?s 
Newsblaster (McKeown et al 2002) automatically 
detects daily topics, clusters MiTAP articles around 
those topics, and generates multi-document summari-
zations which are made available on the news server. 
Multiple technologies (e.g., coreference, information 
extraction) from Alias I, Inc. (Baldwin et al 2002) 
produces comprehensive views on specific named 
entities (i.e., people or disease) across MiTAP docu-
ments. These views are summarized through ranked 
lists, highlighting important topics of the day and 
activities which might indicate disease outbreak.  
Finely-tuned searches can be saved and applied as 
filters or topic tracking mechanisms. These saved 
searches are automatically updated at specific inter-
vals and can be aggregated and displayed visually as 
bar graphs to reveal spikes of activity that otherwise 
might go undetected. 
Alerting 
The MiTAP prototype has two separate alerting ca-
pabilities: saved searches and an integrated expert 
system. The saved search functionality allows ana-
lysts to set thresholds for alerting purposes. For ex-
ample, MiTAP can send email when any new article 
arrives, when a specified maximum number of arti-
cles arrives, or when the daily number of new articles 
increases by some percentage of the total or moving 
average. 
The Human Language Indication Detector 
(HLID) performs data fusion on a number of dispa-
rate sources, compressing a large volume of informa-
tion into a smaller but more significant set of alerts. 
HLID monitors a variety of sources including MiTAP 
articles, information events in RSS feeds, and other 
dynamically updated information on the World Wide 
Web. HLID analyzes events from these sources in 
real time and generates an estimate of significance 
for each, complete with an audit trail of supporting 
and negating evidence. This allows an analyst to di-
rect a search for indicators towards interesting data 
while reducing the time spent investigating false 
alarms and insignificant events.  
HLID is composed of four major components. 
The first is an event collector, which monitors a data 
source and triggers action when an event is observed. 
These events are sent to the rule based reasoning en-
gine, an expert system shell (JESS 2004) with hand 
authored rules. The engine performs vetting and ini-
tial investigation of each event by identifying corre-
lated events, corroborating or invalidating evidence, 
and references to supporting information. The engine 
can also supplement its knowledge base by perform-
ing a directed search via the query management sys-
tem, which allows retrieval of information from a 
wide variety of sources including databases and web 
pages. Lastly, the alerting mechanism disseminates 
the conclusions reached by the system and provides 
an interface that allows an analyst to launch a deeper 
search for indicators and warnings. 
4 
5 
Acknowledgments 
This work has been funded, in part, by the Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency Translingual 
Information Detection Extraction and Summarization 
program under contract numbers DAAB07-01-C-
C201 and W15P7T-04-C-D001, the Office of the 
Secretary of Defense in support of the Coalition Pro-
visional Authority in Baghdad, and a MITRE Special 
Initiative for Rapid Integration of Novel Indications 
and Warnings for SARS. 
References 
Aberdeen, J., Burger, J., Day, D., Hirschman, L., 
Robinson, P., and Vilain, M. 1995. MITRE: De-
scription of the Alembic System as Used for 
MUC-6. In Proceedings of the Sixth Message Un-
derstanding Conference (MUC-6). 
Baldwin, B,, Moore, M., Ross, A., Shah, D.  2002. 
Trinity Information Access System. Proceedings of 
Human Lanuage Technology Conference, San 
Diego, CA. 
Damianos, L., Ponte, J., Wohlever, S., Reeder, F., 
Day, D., Wilson, G., Hirschman, L. 2002. MiTAP, 
Text and Audio Processing for Bio-Security: A 
Case Study In Proceedings of IAAI-2002: The 
Fourteenth Innovative Applications of Artificial 
Intelligence Conference, Edmonton, Alberta, Can-
ada. 
Darwish, K. PSE: A Small Search Engine written in 
Perl 2002 
http://tides.umiacs.umd.edu/software.html 
INN: InterNetNews, Internet Software Consortium 
2001, http://www.isc.org/products/INN.  
The Jakarta Project, 2001 
http://jakarta.apache.org/lucene/docs/index.html. 
JESS: the Rule Engine for the Java? Platform 2004 
http://herzberg.ca.sandia.gov/jess/  
Mani, I. and Wilson, G. 2000. Robust Temporal 
Processing of News. In Proceedings of the 38th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL'2000), 69-76. 
McKeown, K., Barzilay, R., Evan, D., Hatzivassi-
loglou, V., Klavans, J., Sable, C., Schiffman, B., 
Sigelman, S. 2002. Tracking and Summarizing 
News on a Daily Basis with Columbia's Newsblas-
ter. In Proceedings of HLT 2002: Human Lan-
guage Technology Conference. 
Miller, K., Reeder, F., Hirschman, L., Palmer, D. 
2001. Multilingual Processing for Operational 
Users, NATO Workshop on Multilingual Process-
ing at EUROSPEECH. 
RSS RDF Site Summary http://purl.org/rss/1.0/spec 
Vilain, M. and Day, D. 1996. Finite-state phrase 
parsing by rule sequences. In Proceedings of the 
1996 International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING-96), Copenhagen, Denmark. 
