A Disambiguation Method for Japanese Compound Verbs 
Kiyoko Uchiyama and Shun Ishizaki 
Graduate School of Media and Governance 
Keio University 
5322 Endo, Fujisawa-shi, Kanagawa, 252-8520, JAPAN 
{kiyoko, ishizaki}@sfc.keio.ac.jp 
 
Abstract 
The purpose of this study is to construct a 
semantic analysis method for disambiguating 
Japanese compound verbs. Japanese speakers 
produce a rich variety of compound verbs, 
making it difficult to process them by computer. 
We construct a method employing 110 
disambiguation rules based on the semantic 
features of the first verb of a compound and 
syntactic patterns consisting of co-occurrence 
between verbs and nouns. The disambiguation 
rules are evaluated by applying them to 
compound verbs in the dictionary. The 
obtained accuracy is 87.19% for our rules. This 
result shows the advantage of our method. 
1 Introduction 
The treatment of multiword expressions (MWEs) 
has attracted much interest as an important issue 
(Sag et al 2002). Japanese has diverse types of 
MWEs and there are difficulties in processing them 
(Baldwin and Bond 2002). In those studies, MWEs 
are defined as a ?word with spaces? in English and 
?idiosyncratic interpretations that cross word 
boundaries? in Japanese. Verb particles as one type 
of MWE in English have been studied (Villavicencio 
and Copestake 2002). We predict that verb particles 
in English and compound verbs in Japanese have 
commonalities in terms of ambiguity and semantic 
constraints. For example, the English particle ?up? 
has both an aspectual (?finish up writing? cf. 
?kaki-owaru?) and a spatial meaning (?go up the 
stairs? cf. ?kake-agaru?), which is equivalent to the 
second verb in Japanese compound verbs. We 
investigate Japanese compound verbs (JCVs) and 
extract semantic constraints for the purpose of 
applying them to machine translation.  
JCVs consist of two verbs, the first verb (V1) 
and the second verb (V2). V1 always appears in the 
continuative form. In this paper, we discuss only 
?Verb-Verb? JCVs, which are a composition of two 
native Japanese verbs, for example oshi-ageru ?push 
up?, tabe-sugiru ?eat too much? and so on. JCVs of 
V1-V2 form are frequently used for expressing 
complex motion, elaborated phenomena and 
emotional state. However, JCVs have high 
productivity, a great number of ambiguities and 
semantic constraints between each constituent. 
Examples of correlation between semantic constraint 
and ambiguities of JCVs are given in (1). 
 
(1) a. nage-ageru ?throw up?, keri-ageru ?kick up?, 
mochi-ageru ?lift up?, oshi-ageru ?push up? 
b. yude-ageru ?finish boiling?, mushi-ageru 
?finish steaming?, yaki-ageru ?finish baking? 
 
Ageru ?lift? has multiple meanings when it appears 
in the V2 position of a JCV. A directional compound 
verb in (1a) is formed by compounding ageru ?lift? 
as V2 with a verb of motion like nageru ?throw? and 
keru ?kick? as V1. Conversely, an aspectual 
compound verb in (1b) is formed by combining 
ageru ?lift? as V2 with a verb of cooking process 
like yuderu ?boil? and musu ?steam? as V1. There 
are a small number of such ambiguous verbs which 
appear as V2. Ambiguous JCVs are generated by 
compounding various instances of V1 with an 
ambiguous V2, which makes it difficult to process 
on computer.  
The analysis of JCVs has been discussed in the 
field of linguistics and natural language processing. 
In linguistics, JCVs have been studied mainly in 
terms of syntax (Kageyama 1999) and constraints on 
semantic structures (Matsumoto 1996, 1998). 
Himeno (2000) made a semantic analysis 
concerning the types of V2s which have multiple 
meanings. She classified JCVs by the meaning of 
their V2. However, she confounded the meaning of 
V1 with that of V2 in her classification. In order to 
clarify the semantic constraints between V1 and V2, 
we need to analyze each constituent individually. 
In natural language processing, Shirai (1998) 
proposed a method of building valency patterns for 
JCVs by compiling a Japanese and English corpus. 
This approach, in which whole compound verbs are 
registered in an electronic dictionary, can improve 
the translation rate of the system. However, it is 
inefficient to register all the compound verbs in 
advance. For that reason, it is desirable to develop a 
framework for understanding JCVs by processing 
each constituent. 
Based on this background, we propose a method 
employing rules which utilize semantic features and 
syntactic information to clarify the semantic 
constraints for disambiguation of JCVs. 
In this paper, we take two steps in order to 
construct a disambiguation method. The first step is 
to identify the meaning of V1 using by rules which 
an MT system or other lexical database should have 
already. The second step is to classify JCVs into 
semantic clusters and extract commonalities of 
semantic features on V1 (semantic information) and 
verb complements (syntactic information). We build 
rules using this obtained semantic and syntactic 
information. This is the major innovation of this 
study. The proposed method based on 
disambiguation rules has the advantage of being able 
to analyze new compound verbs not in the dictionary. 
Since the semantic restrictions of JCVs are similar to 
those of phrasal verbs in English (Villavicencio and 
Copestake 2002), there might be a possibility of 
applying our method to machine translation.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. 
Section 2 describes the definition, ambiguities and 
semantic relations of JCVs. Section 3 shows analysis 
results. The semantic analysis method is explained in 
Section 4. The evaluation of this method is discussed 
in Section 5. The conclusion of our study and 
implication for future work are stated at the end. 
2  Ambiguities of JCVs 
2.1 Types of Ambiguities 
Kageyama (1993) has proposed that JCVs can 
be analyzed by the argument structure of each 
constituent and divided into two types: syntactic 
compounds and lexical compounds. Lexical 
compounds have semantic constraints and are 
limited to lexically specified combinations, whereas 
syntactic compounds are basically compositional 
and have no lexical idiosyncrasies . 
We do not differentiate these two types in 
advance, because our method may be also useful for 
identifying them. There are two types of ambiguity 
in JCVs: ambiguities within lexical compounds and 
ambiguities between lexical compounds and 
syntactic compounds.  
Lexical compounds containing an ambiguous 
V2 (as in example (1)) are examined in this study. 
Semantic constraints govern the pairs of verbs which 
may be compounded. The semantic features of V1 
play a key role in identifying the meaning of V2. We 
focus on extracting commonalities of semantic 
features from V1 in order to disambiguate V2.   
On the other hand, some JCVs are ambiguous, 
because they may be either syntactic or lexical 
compounds depending on context. Syntactic 
information is important in disambiguating this type 
of JCV. Example (2) indicates that JCVs with the 
same morphology change their meanings depending 
on specific context.  
 
(2) a. Basu wa basutei o hashiri-sugita . 
     ?The bus ran past the bus stop.? 
b. Kare wa shiai no tame ni hashiri-sugita. 
  ?He ran too much because of the game.? 
 
V2 sugiru in the lexical compound in (2a) means 
path of motion (?go past?), but in the syntactic 
compound in (2b) it denotes excessiveness (?too 
much?). As sugiru is most commonly used as a 
compositional V2 (?too much?), it is difficult to 
identify the difference between (2a) and (2b). Since 
sentence (2a) includes a word indicating the place 
like basutei ?bus stop?, we can distinguish the 
difference between the lexical compound (2a) and 
the syntactic compound (2b) by co-occurring words. 
We identify the meaning of such JCVs using 
syntactic information gained from co-occurrence and 
verb complements. 
2.2 Ambiguities of V2 
We classified ambiguities of V2 into three semantic 
clusters: aspectual, spatial and adverbial (Niimi 
1987). An ambiguous V2 is defined as a word with 
multiple meanings which overlap several semantic 
clusters. This framework makes it easier to 
distinguish the difference in meaning for an 
ambiguous V2.  
We listed all the ambiguous V2, i.e. the 
following 20 words, based on the previous study 
(Himeno 2001).  
 
agaru ?go up?, ageru ?lift?, otosu ?drop?, kakeru 
?hang?, kakaru ?hang onto?, kaeru ?go back?, 
kaesu ?send back?, iru ?enter?, komu ?insert?, 
sugiru ?go past?, tatsu ?stand?, tateru ?make 
stand?, tsuku ?be attached?, tsukeru ?attach?, dasu 
?put out?, kiru ?cut?, toosu ?pierce?, nuku ?pull 
out?, tobasu ?scatter?, wataru ?go across? 
 
For the first step of analysis, we extracted 10 
ambiguous words at random, agaru ?go up?, ageru 
?lift?, otosu ?drop?, kakeru ?hang?, kakaru ?hang 
onto?, kaeru ?go back?, kaesu ?send back?, iru 
?enter?, komu ?insert? and sugiru ?go past?. Table 1 
shows examples of ambiguities of V2 as JCVs. 
 
V2 Aspectual  Spatial  Adverbial  
agaru  
?go up? 
yude-agaru 
?finish boiling?
tobi-agaru 
? jump up? 
furue-agaru 
?be terrified? 
kakaru  
?hang onto? 
ochi-kakaru 
?be dropping? 
kiri-kakaru 
?slash at? 
 
otosu   
?drop? 
 kiri-otosu 
?cut off? 
ii-otosu 
?forget to say?
kaeru 
?go back? 
 
 uchi-kaesu  
?hit back? 
waki-kaeru 
?be highly 
excitted? 
sugiru 
?go past? 
 
 toori-sugiru 
?go past? 
tabe-sugiru
?eat  too 
much? 
komu  
?insert? 
 hairi-komu 
?go into? 
fuke-komu 
?become old?
Table 1. Types of ambiguities of V2 
We are not concerned here with disambiguation 
of the meanings within a single cluster. For example, 
tabe-kakeru ?already begin to eat? and 
hashiri-kakeru ?be about to run? are both classified 
as members of the aspectual cluster. JCVs of the 
adverbial cluster which include naosu ?fix? and au 
?fit? seem to be similar cases.  Such differences 
are not analyzed in this study. 
2.3 Criteria for Classification of Semantic Cluster 
In order to classify JCVs into semantic clusters, we 
need to establish certain criteria. We define the 
syntactic roles and semantic relations between 
each constituent as criteria for classification into a 
semantic cluster. Each constituent of a JCV has 
syntactic roles such as dependency to a noun phrase 
and suffix usage. We refer to any JCV component 
verb that requires a complement as a main verb, and 
any suffixing component as a subsidiary verb.  
We also need to examine how the two verbs are 
related each other within a JCV. The semantic 
relation classes are assigned to the JCV constituents 
respectively based on Tagashira?s (1986) study. As the 
paraphrasing of V2 facilitates understanding of these 
semantic relations, we investigate them by 
paraphrasing. 
The ambiguous JCVs were classified into three 
types based on the syntactic roles of V2: 
complementation, modification and directional 
motion. In complementation, V2 plays a 
complementary role to V1, and can be paraphrased 
using other aspectual words such as hajimeru ?start? 
and owaru ?finish?. In modification, the V2 modifies, 
so we can paraphrase V2 with an adverb. Directional 
motion consists of two main verbs. The V1 expresses 
the manner of motion, and V2 the direction.  
We describe the semantic relations of JCVs as 
?SEM?, the syntactic roles of V1 as ?SYN? and the 
paraphrase as ?PAR?, with examples as follows. The 
symbol ?/? means ?or?. The criteria for classification 
into each semantic cluster are given in (3).  
 
(3) Criteria for classification 
a. Aspectual cluster 
SEM:  V1:motion/activity, V2:aspect 
SYN:  Complementation  
(V1:main verb, V2:subsidiary verb) 
PAR: ?V1 suru koto ga/o owaru/oeru/ 
hajimaru/hajimeru?  
arai-ageru= arau koto o oeru ?finish washing? 
nomi-dasu= nomu koto o hajimeru  ?start to drink? 
b. Spatial cluster 
SEM:  V1:manner, V2:motion 
SYN:  Directional motion  
(V1:main verb, V2:main verb) 
PAR:  ?V1 shite V2 suru? 
  tori-dasu = totte dasu ?take out? 
c. Adverbial cluster 
SEM: V1:motion/emotional state/activity 
V2:intensity 
SYN:  Modification/Complementation  
(V1:main verb, V2:subsidiary verb) 
PAR: ?Hijouni (other adverb) V1 suru? 
    ?V1 suru koto ga V2 suru? 
  tabe-sugiru= taberu koto ga sugiru ?eat too much? 
yomi-kaesu= mouichido yomu ?read again? 
3 Analysis of JCVs 
In order to build disambiguation rules which are 
applicable to novel JCVs, we need to examine and 
analyze frequency, types of semantic features and 
co-occurring words of JCVs not in the dictionary.    
3.1 Extraction of JCVs 
We used data from the Mainichi Shinbun (Mainichi 
1993) in order to examine JCVs not in the printed 
dictionary (Kindaichi 1999). The newspaper articles 
were tagged by the morphological analysis system 
Chasen (Matsumoto et al 2000). All occurrences of 
?Verb-Verb? JCVs and non-compounded single 
verbs were extracted from the tagged articles. Table 
2 shows the number of tokens extracted and the 
number of tokens after duplicates had been removed. 
 
 Tokens Types 
?Verb? 1,437,123 6,810
?Verb-Verb? 18,689 5,364
Table 2. Tokens and types of JCVs 
 
The ?Verb-Verb? form accounts for only 1.36% of 
the total tokens, however, this type accounts for 
44.06% of types. In addition, 3525 words 
(accounting for 65.71% of all ?Verb-Verb? tokens) 
are not registered in the dictionary. The result shows 
a rich variety of JCVs and difficulty of processing 
JCVs using a static dictionary. 829 types of 
ambiguous JCVs, using of the 10 ambiguous V2s, 
mentioned in 2.2, were found in the 3525 JCVs not 
in the dictionary. 
3.2 Semantic Features for Disambiguation of JCVs 
The semantic features are necessary for 
representing appropriate meanings of V1. We used 
Ruigo Shin Jiten (Oono and Hamanishi 1989) to 
label the semantic feature. The framework of the 
semantic feature in Ruigo Shin Jiten provides 
enough accuracy to distinguish the meaning of V1. 
For instance, Ruigo Shin Jiten defines the semantic 
feature of musu ?steam? as suiji ?kitchen work? and 
that of nageru ?throw? as dageki ?throw and hit?. 
These features can identify the different semantic 
clusters of mushi-ageru ?finish steaming? in the 
aspectual cluster and nage-ageru ?throw into the 
air? in the spatial cluster. Ruigo Shin Jiten is 
organized in three levels and constitutes 1000 
categories. The labels from the second level, which 
include 60 categories for verbs, are used in assigning 
a semantic feature to V1. If it is difficult to identify 
the meaning of V1 using the label from the second 
level, the label from the third label is applied as the 
semantic feature.  
4 Construction of Disambiguation Method  
4.1 Information for Disambiguation Rules 
We analyzed semantic features of all 328 V1s 
among 829 target words. We examined ambiguities 
of V1 based on the co-occurring nouns in a sentence 
using the syntactic information in IPAL verb 
dictionary (IPA 1987).  
In order to construct disambiguation rules, we 
took two steps. The first step was to disambiguate 
the meaning of V1. The second step was to clarify 
semantic and syntactic information for use in the 
disambiguation rules. 
As for the first step, we used the IPAL verb 
dictionary. The IPAL verb dictionary defines the 
meaning of verbs using valency patterns and assigns 
a semantic feature from Ruigo Shin Jiten to each 
entry. 
 Initially, the co-occurring nouns and verb 
complements of JCVs were extracted from a 
sentence. For the purpose of examining the 
correlation between co-occurring nouns and V1, we 
investigate the valency patterns of V1 in the IPAL 
dictionary. For example, in the case of a sentence 
like kare wa udon o uchi-ageta ?He completed 
making buckwheat noodle?, we try to find the 
sub-entry of utsu ?hit? having a complement such as 
?kare wa? and ?udon o? in IPAL dictionary. When we 
can identify the sub-entry of utsu ?hit? which fulfills 
this condition, a semantic label like seisan 
?production? is selected as the semantic feature for 
utsu ?hit?.  
The second step is to classify JCVs into 
semantic clusters based on the criteria as defined in 
2.3, and to extract commonalities of semantic 
features on V1 within the same semantic cluster. For 
example, JCVs such as yude-ageru ?finish boiling?, 
mushi-ageru ?finish steaming? and yaki-ageru 
?finish baking? classified into the aspectual cluster, 
have a common semantic feature: suiji ?house 
keeping?.  
Verb complements which are not related to V1 
and their semantic features are used as syntactic 
information in disambiguating the meaning of V2. 
For instance, unazuku ?nod? has a single meaning of 
?agreement?. In combining unazuku ?nod? with 
kakeru ?hang? as V2, unazuki-kakeru causes two 
ambiguities. The first meaning is the aspectual 
meaning such as kare wa sono kotoba ni 
unazuki-kaketa ?he was about to nod at what was 
being said.? The second meaning is a spatial one 
such as kare ni unazuki-kaketa ?I nodded at him?. In 
this case, we need semantic features and syntactic 
information including verb complements. 
4.2 Disambiguation Rules 
In order to construct of disambiguation rules, the 
JCVs were classified into two groups using the 
results of the analysis in section 4.1.  
The rules of the first group are based on the 
semantic features of V1. For example, utsu ?hit? has 
two meanings, ?hit? and ?make?. The semantic 
feature of utsu ?hit? in the first meaning is labeled as 
dageki ?hit and throw? in a specific context such as 
kare wa bouru o uchi-ageta: ?he hit the ball up?, and 
classified in spatial cluster. The second meaning is 
assigned suiji ?cooking? as a semantic feature in a 
sentence such as kare wa udon o uchi-ageta: ?he 
finished making buckwheat noodles?, and 
categorized in aspectual cluster. 
We built compounding rules for disambiguation 
utilizing the semantic features of Ruigo Shin Jiten. 
The rules are composed of the semantic features of 
V1 and verb of V2 and the corresponding semantic 
cluster.  
Examples of these disambiguation rules are 
shown as follows.  
 
Rules based on semantic information  
Rule 1: IF V1 is-a cooking and V2 is ?ageru? 
THEN class is aspectual cluster 
Example: yude-ageru ?boil-raise?  
=> aspectual cluster  
Paraphrase: yuderu-koto-o oeru  
?finish boiling? 
Rule 2: IF V1 is-a operation and V2 is ?ageru? 
THEN class is spatial cluster 
Example: uchi-ageru ?hit-raise?  
=> spatial cluster  
Paraphrase: utte-ageru ?hit upwards? 
Rule 3: IF V1 is-a emotion and V2 is ?agaru? 
THEN class is adverbial cluster 
Example: furue-agaru ?tremble-go up? 
   => adverbial cluster  
   Paraphrase: hijouni furueru  
?tremble violently? 
 
Rule based on syntactic information 
Rule 4: IF V1 is-a action and 
N1 (V1's subject) is-a human 
          and N2 (V2's dative) is-a human 
          and V2 is ?kakeru? 
THEN class is aspectual cluster 
Example:  
kare wa kanojo ni unazuki-kaketa 
  ?he TOP she Goal nod-hang? 
=> aspectual cluster 
Paraphrase:  
kare wa kanojo ni mukatte unazuita 
   ?He nodded at her? 
We extracted 829 JCVs from the newspaper articles 
as target words for the analysis. As a result of 
analyzing the 328 types of V1, 143 rules of semantic 
information and 35 rules of syntactic information 
were constructed for the disambiguation of JCVs. 
4.3 Expanding of Disambiguation Rules 
To expand the rules comprehensively in addition to 
the results in 4.1, we prepared a matrix based on our 
rules. Table 3 illustrates a part of a matrix we used.  
 
Semantic 
features 
agaru  
?go up? 
ageru 
?lift? 
kaesu 
?send back?
kaeru  
?go back?
sousa  
 ?operation? 
+ + + - 
seishin  
?mental state? 
+ - + + 
kenbun 
?communication? 
- - + - 
te no dousa 
?motion by hand? 
+ + + - 
ongaku  
 ?music? 
- + - - 
seisan  
 ?production? 
+ + - - 
hyojo  
 ?expression? 
- + + + 
Table 3. A part of a matrix of disambiguation rules 
 
The lists of V2 are shown in the row headings and 
the semantic features of V1 are described in the 
column. We verified the ability or inability of a V1 
having semantic feature shown in the column to 
combine with the V2 in the row, and marked the 
ability with ?+? and the inability with ?-?. The rules 
were compiled from the matrix and reconstructed. 
As the reconstruction reduced the number of rules, 
110 disambiguation rules were obtained.  
4.4 Disambiguation Method 
We propose a semantic analysis method for JCVs 
based on disambiguation rules. The following 6 
steps comprise our method.  
(1) Input a sentence which includes JCVs 
(2) Tag each word in the input sentence using a 
morphological analysis system called Chasen 
(3) Extract the JCVs and their syntactic information 
from the sentence 
(4) Assign a semantic feature to V1 using 
co-occurring words, referring to IPAL dictionary 
(5) Compare the semantic feature of V1 and 
syntactic information with the disambiguation 
rules 
(6) Output the semantic cluster obtained by 
application of the matching rule 
Through this procedure, we can handle novel JCVs 
not in the dictionary. 
5 Evaluation 
The JCVs in Shin Meikai Kokugo dictionary were 
selected for the evaluation of our rules, because the 
meanings of JCVs can be judged objectively from 
their definition. Before the evaluation procedure, we 
categorized JCVs from the dictionary into idiomatic, 
fused, high frequency and exception categories.  
Idiomatic JCVs are those where the meaning of 
the compound cannot be construed from the 
meaning of two verbs independently. The meaning 
of fused JCVs and high frequency JCVs can be 
inferred from each constituent. Fused JCVs are those 
which are used only in a specific context. High 
frequency JCVs can be divided into two verbs 
semantically and the case particle ?te? or ?de? can be 
inserted between the two verbs in certain cases.  
Exceptional JCVs are those with certain V2s such as 
hajimeru ?start? and tsuzukeru ?continue? which can 
be processed easily using only the definition of V2.  
Since idiomatic and fused JCVs cannot be 
processed by our method, registering such JCVs in 
the dictionary is a reasonable approach for computer 
implementation. Exceptions may also be registered 
in the dictionary. However, all high frequency JCVs 
can be treated with our method and are designated as 
target words for evaluation.  
5.1 Evaluation by using Japanese Dictionary 
We extracted all JCVs which included any of 10 
ambiguous V2s from the Japanese dictionary. Our 
target words for evaluation were all high frequency 
JCVs. In order to classify target words by semantic 
cluster, their dictionary definitions must include 
words related to some semantic cluster, such as 
owaru ?finish? in the case of the aspectual cluster, 
ue ?up? in the spatial cluster and kurikaeshi ?again? 
in the adverbial cluster, etc. 
Table 4 indicates the result of analyzing these 
JCVs. Idiomatic and fused JCVs and the name of 
semantic cluster are abbreviated in table 4, for 
example the aspectual cluster is shown as 
?ASPECT?, etc. Half of the JCVs in the dictionary 
are regarded as idiomatic and fused words.  
 
Target JCVs V2 
 
IDIOM&
FUSED ASPECT SPACE ADVERBI 
agaru ?go up? 15 3 20 8
ageru  ?lift? 41 5 21 2
iru  ?enter? 12  5 11
otosu  ?drop? 7  11 7
kaesu  ?send  back? 9  16 10
kaeru  ?go  back? 8  5 10
kakaru ?hang onto? 7  11 
kakeru ?hang? 18 3 14 
komu ?insert? 95  58 16
sugiru?go past? 3  1 5
Total 215 11 162 69
Table 4. The list of JCVs in the dictionary 
 
We took the following steps for evaluation. 
(1) Extract target JCVs for evaluation from 
Japanese dictionary. 
(2) Classify JCVs into each semantic cluster by 
referring to their definition.  
(3) Assign the semantic features of Ruigo Shin 
Jiten to the V1 of JCVs. In the case that 
syntactic information is needed, it can be 
extracted from the examples of the dictionary. 
(4) Prepare test sets including the target JCV, the 
semantic feature of V1 and the semantic 
cluster. 
(5) Compare the test sets with our rules. 
(6) Evaluate the accuracy of our rules.  
 
We evaluated 242 JCVs from the dictionary, and 
obtained 211 correct rules and 31 errors. This 
corresponds to a high accuracy rate of 87.19%. 
5.2 Discussion 
As a result of the evaluation, 31 errors are observed. 
These errors can be divided into three types, 
corresponding to the lack of rules, the problem of 
semantic features and exceptions. Lack of rules 
including the semantic features of V1 and V2 has not 
yet been registered in our rules.  
The second problem occurs where semantic 
features cannot be assigned to V1 appropriately. For 
instance, koneru ?knead? is assigned hendo 
?fluctuation? as the semantic feature of V1, but the 
verb means motion for making something. The 
difference between hendo ?fluctuation? and seisan 
?production? is important in identifying the semantic 
cluster, because kone-ageru ?complete kneading? is 
in the aspectual cluster, but maki-ageru ?roll up? is 
assigned the semantic feature of ?fluctuation? in the 
spatial cluster. We consider that such verbs should 
be rearranged in an appropriate framework.  
 The errors classified as exceptions are those 
where an unusual usage of V1 causes the wrong 
cluster to be selected by our rules. For example, 
moeru ?burn? used in moe-agaru ?flare up? is 
assigned bussho ?physical phenomena? as its 
semantic feature. Moe-agaru ?flare up? should be 
regarded as spatial cluster, because of its dictionary 
definition that something burns with rising flames. 
However, a JCV with a V1 of bussho ?physical 
phenomena? and V2 of agaru ?go up? is classified 
into the aspectual cluster by our rules, similarly to 
waki-agaru ?boil up? and atatame-ageru ?finish 
heating?. Moe-agaru ?flare up? should be registered 
in the dictionary as an exception. 
The accuracy of our rules is improved up to 
nearly 99% by the addition of 10 rules for 19 verbs 
and by rearranging the semantic features of 8 verbs. 
The result confirms the advantage of our method for 
disambiguating JCVs.  
6  Conclusions and Future Work 
We proposed a disambiguation method for JCVs 
based on disambiguation rules which make use of 
the semantic features of each constituent. We also 
clarified the characteristics of, and problems for, a 
treatment of JCVs. The obtained accuracy is 
87.19% for our rules. This result shows the 
advantage of our method.  
The disambiguation rules will be enhanced by 
analyzing the rest of the ambiguous V2 verbs shown 
in 2.3. This will complete our method for 
disambiguation. We will try to apply our method to 
a machine translation system, comparing the results 
of our study with a study of phrasal verbs in English.  
Reference 
Timothy Baldwin and Francis Bond. 2002. 
Multiword Expressions: Some Problems for 
Japanese NLP, In Eighth Annual Meeting of the 
Association of Natural Language Processing, 
Keihanna, Japan, pages 379-382.  
Masako Himeno. 1999. The Structure of Compound 
Verbs and  Semantic Usage. Hitsuji Shobo, 
Tokyo. 
Masako Himeno. 2001. The nature of Compound 
Verbs. Nihongogaku, 240(20):6-15. 
Satoru Ikehara, et al 1999. A Japanese Lexicon. 
Iwanami Shoten, Tokyo. 
IPA, 1987. Japanese basic verb dictionary IPAL. 
Taro Kageyama. 1993. Grammar and Word 
Formation. Hitsuji Shobo, Tokyo. 
Taro Kageyama. 1999. Word Formation. The 
Handbook of Japanese Linguistics. Blackwell 
Publishers, Massachusetts, USA. 
Kyosuke Kindaichi. 1999. Shin Meikai Kokugo 
Dictionary. 5th edition. Sanseido, Tokyo. 
Mainichi NewsPapers. 1993. Mainichi Shinbun sha.  
Yo Matsumoto. 1996. Complex Predicates in 
Japanese. CSLI Publications & Kurosio 
Publishers, Stanford & Tokyo. 
Yo Matsumoto. 1998. The combinatory possibilities 
in Japanese V-V lexical compounds. Gengo 
Kenkyu, The Linguistic Society of Japan, 
114:37-83.  
Yuji Matsumoto, et al 2000. Morphological 
Analysis System Chasen Version2.2.1. Users 
Manual.  
Kazuaki Niimi, Youichi Yamaura, and Tokuko 
Utsuno. 1987. Compound Verb. Aratake 
Shuppan, Tokyo. 
Susumu Oono and Masato Hamanishi. 1989. Ruigo 
Shin Jiten. Kadokawa Shoten, Tokyo. 
Ivan A. Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann 
Copestake, and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword 
expressions: A pain in the neck for NLP. In 
Proceedings of the Third International 
Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and 
Computational Linguistics: CICLING-2002, 
Mexico City, Mexico, pages 1-15. 
Satoshi Shirai, Yoshifumi Ooyama, Shinobu Takechi, 
Keiko Wakebe, and Hiroshi Aizawa. 1998. 
Compiling Japanese and English corpus for 
compound verbs of Japanese origin. In 57th 
Annual Meeting of IPSJ, Nagoya, Japan, pages 
267-268.  
Yoshiko Tagashira. 1986. Handbook of Japanese 
Compound Verbs. Hokuseido, Tokyo. 
Aline Villavicencio and Ann Copestake. 2002. 
Verb-particle constructions in a computational 
grammar of English. In Ninth International 
Conference on Head-Driven Phrase Structure 
Grammar, Seoul, South Korea. 
