Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 177?180,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Lycos Retriever: An Information Fusion Engine 
 
 
 Brian Ulicny 
 
 Versatile Information Systems, Inc.  
 5 Mountainview Drive  
 Framingham, MA 01701 USA  
 bulicny@vistology.com  
 
Abstract 
This paper describes the Lycos Retriever 
system, a deployed system for automati-
cally generating coherent topical summa-
ries of popular web query topics. 
1 Introduction 
Lycos Retriever1 is something new on the Web: a 
patent-pending information fusion engine. That is, 
unlike a search engine, rather than returning ranked 
documents links in response to a query, Lycos Re-
triever categorizes and disambiguates topics, col-
lects documents on the Web relevant to the 
disambiguated sense of that topic, extracts para-
graphs and images from these documents and ar-
ranges these into a coherent summary report or 
background briefing on the topic at something like 
the level of the first draft of a Wikipedia2 article.  
These topical pages are then arranged into a 
browsable hierarchy that allows users to find re-
lated topics by browsing as well as searching.   
2 Motivations 
The presentation of search results as ranked lists of 
document links has become so ingrained that it is 
hard now to imagine alternatives to it.  Other inter-
faces, such as graphical maps or visualizations, 
have not been widely adopted. Question-answering 
interfaces on the Web have not had a high adoption 
                                                        
1 http://www.lycos.com/retriever.html.  Work on Retriever 
was done while author was employed at Lycos.    
2 http://www.wikipedia.org 
 
 
 
rate, either: it is hard to get users to venture beyond 
the 2.5 word queries they are accustomed to, and if 
question-answering results are not reliably better 
than keyword search, users quickly return to key-
word queries.  Many user queries specify nothing 
more than a topic anyway. 
But why treat common queries exactly like 
unique queries?  For common queries we know 
that incentives for ranking highly have led to tech-
niques for artificially inflating a site?s ranking at 
the expense of useful information.  So the user has 
many useless results to sift through.  Furthermore, 
users are responsive to filtered information, as the 
upsurge in popularity of Wikipedia and An-
swers.com demonstrate. 
Retriever responds to these motivations by 
automatically generating a narrative summary that 
answers, ?What do I need to know about this 
topic?? for the most popular topics on the Web.3 
3 Lycos Retriever pages 
Figure 1 shows a sample Retriever page for the 
topic ?Mario Lemieux?.4   The topic is indicated at 
the upper left.  Below it is a category assigned to 
the topic, in this case Sports > Hockey > Ice 
Hockey > National Hockey League > Lemieux, 
Mario.  The main body of the page is a set of para-
graphs beginning with a biographical paragraph 
complete with Lemieux?s birth date, height, weight 
and position extracted from Nationmaster.com, 
followed by paragraphs outlining his career from 
                                                        
3 See (Liu, 2003) for a similarly motivated system. 
4 For other categories, see e.g. King Kong (1933): 
http://www.lycos.com/info/king-kong-1933.html,  
Zoloft: http://www.lycos.com/info/zoloft.html,  
Public-Key Cryptography: http://www.lycos.com/info/public-
key-cryptography.html ,  
Lyme Disease: http://www.lycos.com/info/lyme-disease.html, 
Reggaeton: http://www.lycos.com/info/reggaeton.html 
177
other sources.  The source for each extract is indi-
cated in shortened form in the left margin of the 
page; mousing over the shortened URL reveals the 
full title and URL.  Associated images are thumb-
nailed alongside the extracted paragraphs. 
Running down the right side of the page under 
More About is a set of subtopics.  Each subtopic is 
a link to a page (or pages) with paragraphs about 
the topic (Lemieux) with respect to such subtopics 
as Games, Seasons, Pittsburgh Penguins, Wayne 
Gretzky, and others, including the unpromising 
subtopic ice. 
4 Topic Selection 
An initial run of about 60K topics was initiated in 
December, 2005; this run yielded approximately 
30K Retriever topic pages, each of which can have 
multiple display pages.  Retriever topics that had 
fewer than three paragraphs or which were catego-
rized as pornographic were automatically deleted.  
The biggest source of topic candidates was Lycos?s 
own query logs. A diverse set of topics was chosen 
in order to see which types of topics generated the 
best Retriever pages. 
5 Topic Categorization & Disambiguation 
After a topic was input to the system, the Retriever 
system assigned it a category using a na?ve Bayes 
classifier built on a spidered DMOZ5 hierarchy.  
Various heuristics were implemented to make the 
returned set of categories uniform in length and 
depth, up-to-date, and readable. 
Once the categorizer assigned a set of cate-
gories to a topic, a disambiguator module deter-
mined whether the assigned categories could be 
assigned to a single thing using a set of disambigu-
ating features learned from the DMOZ data itself.  
For example, for the topic ?Saturn?, the assigned 
categories included ?Science/Astronomy?, ?Recrea-
tion/Autos? and ?Computers/Video Games? (Sega 
Saturn). The disambiguator detected the presence 
of feature pairs in these that indicated more than 
one topic.  Therefore, it clustered the assigned 
categories into groups for the car-, astronomy- and 
video-game-senses of the topic and assigned each 
group a discriminative term which was used to dis-
ambiguate the topic: Saturn (Auto), Saturn (Solar 
System), Saturn (Video Game).  Retriever returned 
pages only for topics that were believed to be dis-
ambiguated according to DMOZ.  If no categories 
                                                        
5 http://www.dmoz.com 
 
Figure 1 Retriever Topic Page "Mario Lemieux" 
178
were identified via DMOZ, a default Other cate-
gory was assigned unless the system guessed that 
the topic was a personal name, based on its com-
ponents. 
The live system assigns non-default categories 
with 86.5% precision; a revised algorithm achieved 
93.0% precision, both based on an evaluation of 
982 topics.  However, our precision on identifying 
unambiguous topics with DMOZ was only 83%.  
Still, this compares well with the 75% precision 
achieved on by the best-performing system on a 
similar task in the 2005 KDD Cup (Shen 2005). 
6 Document Retrieval 
After a topic was categorized and disambiguated, 
the disambiguated topic was used to identify up to 
1000 documents from Lycos? search provider.  For 
ambiguous topics various terms were added as op-
tional ?boost? terms, while terms from other senses 
of the ambiguous topic categories were prohibited.   
Other query optimization techniques were used to 
get the most focused document set, with non-
English and obscene pages filtered out 
7 Passage Extraction 
Each URL for the topic was then fetched.  An 
HTML parser converted the document into a se-
quence of contiguous text blocks.  At this point, 
contiguous text passages were identified as being 
potentially interesting if they contained an expres-
sion of the topic in the first sentence. 
When a passage was identified as being 
potentially interesting, it was then fully parsed to 
see if an expression denoting the topic was the 
Discourse Topic of the passage.  Discourse Topic 
is an under-theorized notion in linguistic theory: 
not all linguists agree that the notion of Discourse 
Topic is required in discourse analysis at all (cf. 
Asher, 2004).  For our purposes, however, we for-
mulated a set of patterns for identifying Discourse 
Topics on the basis of the output of the CMU Link 
Parser6 the system uses. 
Paradigmatically, we counted ordinary 
subjects of the first sentence of a passage as ex-
pressive of the Discourse Topic.  So, if we found 
an expression of the topic there, either in full or 
reduced form, we took that as an instance of the 
topic appearing as Discourse Topic in that passage 
                                                        
6 http://www.link.cs.cmu.edu/link/ 
and ranked that passage highly.  Of course, not all 
Discourse Topics are expressed as subjects, and the 
system recognized this. 
A crucial aspect of this functionality is to 
identify how different sorts of topics can be ex-
pressed in a sentence.   To give a simple illustra-
tion, if the system believes that a topic has been 
categorized as a personal name, then it accepted 
reduced forms of the name as expressions of the 
topic (e.g. ?Lindsay? and ?Lohan? can both be ex-
pressions of the topic ?Lindsay Lohan? in certain 
contexts); but it does not accept reduced forms in 
all cases. 
Paragraphs were verified to contain a se-
quence of sentences by parsing the rest of the con-
tiguous text.  The verb associated with the 
Discourse Topic of the paragraph was recorded for 
future use in assembling the topic report.  Various 
filters for length, keyword density, exophoric ex-
pressions, spam and obscenity were employed. A 
score of the intrinsic informativeness of the para-
graph was then assigned, making use of such met-
rics as the length of the paragraph, the number of 
unique NPs, the type of verb associated with the 
Discourse Topic, and other factors. 
Images were thumbnailed and associated with 
the extracted paragraph on the basis of matching 
text in the image filename, alt-text or description 
elements of the tag as well as the size and prox-
imity of the image to the paragraph at hand.  We 
did not analyze the image itself.  
8 Subtopic Selection and Report Assembly 
Once the system had an array of extracted para-
graphs, ranked by their intrinsic properties, we be-
gan constructing the topic report by populating an 
initial ?overview? portion of the report with some 
of the best-scoring paragraphs overall.   
First, Retriever eliminated duplicate and 
near-duplicate paragraphs using a spread-activation 
algorithm. 
Next the system applied question-
answering methodology to order the remaining 
paragraphs into a useful overview of the topic:  
first, we found the best two paragraphs that say 
what the topic is, by finding the best paragraphs 
where the topic is the Discourse Topic of the para-
graph and the associated verb is a copula or cop-
ula-like (e.g. be known as).  Then, in a similar way, 
we found the best few paragraphs that said what 
179
attributes the topic has.  Then, a few paragraphs 
that said what the topic does, followed by a few 
paragraphs that said what happens to the topic 
(how it is used, things it has undergone, and so on). 
The remaining paragraphs were then clus-
tered into subtopics by looking at the most frequent 
NPs they contain, with two exceptions.  First, su-
perstrings of the topic were favored as subtopics in 
order to discover complex nominals in which the 
topic appears.  Secondly, non-reduced forms of 
personal names were required as subtopics, even if 
a reduced form was more frequent. 
Similar heuristics were used to order para-
graphs within the subtopic sections of the topic 
report as in the overview section. 
Additional constraints were applied to stay 
within the boundaries of fair use of potentially 
copyrighted material, limiting the amount of con-
tiguous text from any one source.   
Topic reports were set to be refreshed by the 
system five days after they were generated in order 
to reflect any new developments. 
In an evaluation of 642 paragraphs, 88.8% were 
relevant to the topic; 83.4% relevant to the topic as 
categorized.  For images, 85.5% of 83 images were 
relevant, using a revised algorithm, not the live 
system.  Of 1861 subtopic paragraphs, 88.5% of 
paragraphs were relevant to the assigned topic and 
subtopic.    
9 Discussion 
Of the over 30K topical reports generated by Re-
triever thus far, some of the reports generated 
turned out surprisingly well, while many turned out 
poorly.  In general, since we paid no attention to 
temporal ordering of paragraphs, topics that were 
highly temporal did poorly, since we would typi-
cally arrange paragraphs with no regard for event 
precedence.   
There are many things that remained to be 
done with Retriever, including extracting para-
graphs from non-HTML documents, auto-
hyperlinking topics within Retriever pages (as in 
Wikipedia), finding more up-to-date sources for 
categorization, and verticalizing Retriever page 
generation for different types of topics (e.g. treat-
ing movies differently than people and both differ-
ently than diseases).  Unfortunately, the project 
was essentially discontinued in February, 2006. 
10 Related Work 
Although there have been previous systems that 
learned to identify and summarize web documents 
on a particular topic (Allen et al 1996) without 
attempting to fuse them into a narrative structure, 
we are not aware of any project that attempts to 
generate coherent, narrative topical summaries by 
paragraph extraction and ordering.  Much recent 
work focuses on multi-article summarization of 
news by sentence extraction and ordering (see for 
example, Columbia?s well-known Newsblaster 
project and Michigan?s NewsInEssence project). 
The latest DUC competition similarly emphasized 
sentence-level fusion of multi-document summa-
ries from news text (DUC, 2005). One exception is 
the ArteQuaKt project (Kim et al 2002), a proto-
type system for generating artist biographies from 
extracted passages and facts found on the Web 
aimed at different levels of readers (e.g. grade 
school versus university students).  The Artequakt 
system was to use extracted text both as found and 
as generated from facts in a logical representation. 
It is not clear how far the ArteQuaKt project pro-
gressed.   
Less legitimately, more and more ?spam 
blogs? repackage snippets from search results or in 
other ways appropriate text from original sources 
into pages they populate with pay-per-click adver-
tising.  Retriever differs from such schemes in fil-
tering out low value content and by making 
obscure sources visible.  
References  
Allen, Brad et al 1996.  WebCompass: an agent-based meta-
search and metadata discovery tool for the Web. SIGIR ?96. 
Asher,Nicholas. 2004. Discourse Topic, Theoretical Linguis-
tics. 30:2-3 
DUC. 2005  DUC Workshop. Vancouver, BC  
Kim, Sanghee et al 2002. Artequakt: Generating Talored Bi-
ographies from Automatically Annotated Fragments from 
the Web. In Proceedings of Workshop on Semantic Author-
ing, Annotation & Knowledge Markup (SAAKM?02).  
pp. 1-6, Lyon, France. 
Liu, Bing, et al 2003. Mining Topic-Specific Concepts and 
Definitions on the Web. Proceedings of the Twelfth Inter-
national World Wide Web Conference (WWW-2003),  
Shen, Dou et al Q2C@UST: Our Winning Solution to Query 
Classification in KDDCUP 2005.  ACM KDD Explora-
tions.  Vol 7, no. 2. December 2005. 
180
