Proceedings of the ACL 2007 Demo and Poster Sessions, pages 161?164,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Mapping Concrete Entities from PAROLE-SIMPLE-CLIPS to 
ItalWordNet: Methodology and Results 
Adriana Roventini, Nilda Ruimy, Rita Marinelli, Marisa Ulivieri, Michele Mammini 
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale ? CNR 
Via Moruzzi,1 ? 56124 ? Pisa, Italy 
{adriana.roventini,nilda.ruimy,rita.marinelli, 
marisa.ulivieri,michele.mammini}@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes a work in progress 
aiming at linking the two largest Italian 
lexical-semantic databases ItalWordNet and 
PAROLE-SIMPLE-CLIPS. The adopted 
linking methodology, the software tool 
devised and implemented for this purpose 
and the results of the first mapping phase 
regarding 1stOrderEntities are illustrated 
here.  
1 Introduction 
The mapping and the integration of lexical 
resources is today a main concern in the world of 
computational linguistics. In fact, during the past 
years, many linguistic resources were built whose 
bulk of linguistic information is often neither easily 
accessible nor entirely available, whereas their 
visibility and interoperability would be crucial for 
HLT applications. 
The resources here considered constitute the 
largest and extensively encoded Italian lexical 
semantic databases. Both were built at the CNR 
Institute of Computational Linguistics, in Pisa. 
The ItalWordNet lexical database (henceforth 
IWN) was first developed in the framework of 
EuroWordNet project and then enlarged and 
improved in the national project SI-TAL1. The 
theoretical model underlying this lexicon is based 
on the EuroWordNet lexical model (Vossen, 1998) 
which is, in its turn, inspired to the Princeton 
WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998). 
PAROLE-SIMPLE-CLIPS (PSC) is a four-level 
lexicon developed over three different projects: the 
                                                                                                                    
1 Integrated System for the Automatic Language Treatment. 
LE-PAROLE project for the morphological and 
syntactic layers, the LE-SIMPLE project for the 
semantic model and lexicon and the Italian project 
CLIPS2 for the phonological level and the 
extension of the lexical coverage. The theoretical 
model underlying this lexicon is based on the 
EAGLES recommendations, on the results of the 
EWN and ACQUILEX projects and on a revised 
version of Pustejovsky?s Generative Lexicon 
theory (Pustejovsky 1995). 
In spite of the different underlying principles and 
peculiarities characterizing the two lexical models, 
IWN and PSC lexicons also present many 
compatible aspects and the reciprocal 
enhancements that the linking of the resources 
would entail were illustrated in Roventini et al, 
(2002); Ruimy & Roventini (2005). This has 
prompted us to envisage the semi-automatic link of 
the two lexical databases, eventually merging the 
whole information into a common representation 
framework. The first step has been the mapping of 
the 1stOrderEntities which is described in the 
following. 
This paper is organized as follows: in section 2 
the respective ontologies and their mapping are 
briefly illustrated, in section 3 the methodology 
followed to link these resources is described; in 
section 4 the software tool and its workings are 
explained; section 5 reports on the results of the 
complete mapping of the 1stOrderEntities. Future 
work is outlined in the conclusion.  
2 Mapping Ontology-based Lexical Resources 
In both lexicons, the backbone for lexical 
representation is provided by an ontology of 
semantic types.  
2 Corpora e Lessici dell'Italiano Parlato e Scritto. 
161
The IWN Top Ontology (TO) (Roventini et al, 
2003), which slightly differs from the EWN TO3, 
consists in a hierarchical structure of 65 language-
independent Top Concepts (henceforth TCs) 
clustered in three categories distinguishing 1st 
OrderEntities, 2ndOrderEntities and 3rdOrder 
Entities. Their subclasses, hierarchically ordered by 
means of a subsumption relation, are also 
structured in terms of (disjunctive and non-
disjunctive) opposition relations. The IWN 
database is organized around the notion of synset, 
i.e. a set of synonyms. Each synset is ontologically 
classified on the basis of its hyperonym and 
connected to other synsets by means of a rich set of 
lexical-semantic relations. Synsets are in most 
cases cross-classified in terms of multiple, non 
disjoint TCs, e.g.: informatica (computer science): 
[Agentive, Purpose, Social, Unboundedevent]. The 
semantics of a word sense or synset variant is fully 
defined by its membership in a synset. 
The SIMPLE Ontology (SO)4, which consists of 
157 language-independent semantic types, is a 
multidimensional type system based on 
hierarchical and non-hierarchical conceptual 
relations. In the type system, multidimensionality is 
captured by qualia roles that define the distinctive 
properties of semantic types and differentiate their 
internal semantic constituency. The SO 
distinguishes therefore between simple (one-
dimensional) and unified (multi-dimensional) 
semantic types, the latter implementing the 
principle of orthogonal inheritance. In the PSC 
lexicon, the basic unit is the word sense, 
represented by a ?semantic unit? (henceforth, 
SemU). Each SemU is assigned one single semantic 
type (e.g.: informatica: [Domain]), which endows 
it with a structured set of semantic information.  
A primary phase in the process of mapping two 
ontology-based lexical resources clearly consisted 
in establishing correspondences between the 
conceptual classes of both ontologies, with a view 
to further matching their respective instances.  
The mapping will only be briefly outlined here 
for the 1stOrderEntity. More information can be 
found in (Ruimy & Roventini 2005; Ruimy, 2006). 
The IWN 1stOrderEntity class structures 
concrete entities (referred to by concrete nouns). Its 
main cross-classifying subclasses: Form, Origin, 
                                                          
3 A few changes were in fact necessary to allow the encoding 
of new syntactic categories.  
4 http://www.ilc.cnr.it/clips/Ontology.htm 
Composition and Function correspond to the four 
Qualia roles the SIMPLE model avails of to 
express orthogonal aspects of word meaning. Their 
respective subdivisions consist of (mainly) disjoint 
classes, e.g. Natural vs. Artifact. To each class 
corresponds, in most of the cases, a SIMPLE 
semantic type or a type hierarchy subsumed by the 
Concrete_entity top type. Some other IWN TCs, 
such as Comestible, Liquid, are instead mappable 
to SIMPLE distinctive features: e.g. Plus_Edible, 
Plus_Liquid, etc. 
3 Linking Methodology 
Mapping is performed on a semantic type-driven 
basis. A semantic type of the SIMPLE ontology is 
taken as starting point.  Considering the type?s 
SemUs along with their PoS and ?isa? relation, the 
IWN resource is explored in search of linking 
candidates with same PoS and whose ontological 
classification matches the correspondences established 
between the classes of both ontologies.  
A characteristic of this linking is that it involves 
lexical elements having a different status, i.e. 
semantic units and synsets. 
During the linking process, two different types 
of data are returned from each mapping run:  
1) A set of matched pairs of word senses, i.e. 
SemUs and synset variants with identical string, 
PoS and whose respective ontological classification 
perfectly matches. After human validation, these 
matched word senses are linked.  
2) A set of unmatched word senses, in spite of their 
identical string and PoS value. Matching failure is 
due to a mismatch of the ontological classification 
of word senses existing in both resources. Such 
mismatch may be originated by:  
a) an incomplete ontological information. As 
already explained, IWN synsets are cross-classified 
in terms of a combination of TCs; however, cases 
of synsets lacking some meaning component are 
not rare. The problem of incomplete ontological 
classification may often be overcome by relaxing 
the mapping constraints; yet, this solution can only 
be applied if the existing ontological label is 
informative enough. Far more problematic to deal 
with are those cases of incomplete or little 
informative ontological labels, e.g. 1stOrderEntities 
as different as medicinale, anello, vetrata 
(medicine, ring, picture window) and only 
classified as ?Function?;   
162
b) a different ontological information. Besides 
mere encoding errors, ontological classification 
discrepancy may be imputable to:  
i) a different but equally defensible meaning 
interpretation (e.g.: ala (aircraft wing) : [Part] vs. 
[Artifact Instrument Object]). Word senses falling 
into this category are clustered into numerically 
significant sets according to their semantic typing 
and then studied with a view to establishing further 
equivalences between ontological classes or to 
identify, in their classification schemes, descriptive 
elements lending themselves to be mapped.  
ii) a different level of specificity in the 
ontological classification, due either to the 
lexicographer?s subjectivity or to an objective 
difference of granularity of the ontologies. 
The problems in ii) may be bypassed by 
climbing up the ontological hierarchy, identifying 
the parent nodes and allowing them to be taken into 
account in the mapping process.  
Hyperonyms of matching candidates are taken 
into account during the linking process and play a 
particularly determinant role in the resolution of 
cases whereby matching fails due to a conflict of 
ontological classification. It is the case for sets of 
word senses displaying a different ontological 
classification but sharing the same hyperonym, e.g. 
collana, braccialetto (necklace, bracelet) typed as 
[Clothing] in PSC and as [Artifact Function] in 
IWN but sharing the hyperonym gioiello (jewel). 
Hyperonyms are also crucial for polysemous senses 
belonging to different semantic types in PSC but 
sharing the same ontological classification in IWN, 
e.g.: SemU1595viola (violet) [Plant] and 
SemU1596viola (violet) [Flower] vs. IWN: viola1 
(has_hyperonym pianta1 (plant)) and viola3 
(has_hyperonym fiore1 (flower)), both typed as 
[Group Plant]. 
4 The Linking Tool  
The LINKPSC_IWN software tool implemented to 
map the lexical units of both lexicons works in a 
semiautomatic way using the ontological 
classifications, the ?isa? relations and some 
semantic features of the two resources. Since the 
157 semantic types of the SO provide a more fine-
grained structure of the lexicon than the 65 top 
concepts of the IWN ontology, which reflect only 
fundamental distinctions, mapping is PSC ? IWN 
oriented. The mapping process foresees the 
following steps: 
1) Selection of a PSC semantic type and definition 
of the loading criteria, i.e. either all its SemUs or 
only those bearing a given information;   
2) Selection of one or more mapping constraints on 
the basis of the correspondences established 
between the conceptual classes of both ontologies, 
in order to narrow the automatic mapping;  
3) Human validation of the automatic mapping and 
storage of the results; 
4) If necessary, relaxation/tuning of the mapping 
constraints and new processing of the input data.  
By human validation of the automatic mapping 
we also intend the manual selection of the 
semantically relevant word sense pair(s) from the 
set of possible matches automatically output for 
each SemU. A decision is taken after checking 
relevant information sources such as hyperonyms, 
SemU/synset glosses and the IWN-ILI link. 
Besides the mapping results, a list of unmatched 
word senses is provided which contains possible 
encoding errors  and polysemous senses of the 
considered SemUs (e.g., kiwi (fruit) which is 
discarded when mapping the ?Animal? class). Some 
of these word senses proceed from an extension of 
meaning, e.g. People-Human: pigmeo, troglodita 
(pygmy, troglodyte) or Animal-Human verme, 
leone (worm, lion) and are used with different 
levels of intentionality: either as a semantic surplus 
or as dead metaphors (Marinelli, 2006). 
More interestingly, the list of unmatched words 
also contains the IWN word senses whose synset?s 
ontological classification is incomplete or different 
w.r.t. the constraints imposed to the mapping run. 
Analyzing these data is therefore crucial to identify 
further mapping constraints. A list of PSC lexical 
units missing in IWN is also generated, which is 
important to appropriately assess the lexical 
intersection between the two resources. 
5 Results  
From a quantitative point of view three main issues 
are worth noting (cf. Table 1): first, the 
considerable percentage of linked senses with 
respect to the linkable ones (i.e. words with 
identical string and PoS value); second, the many 
163
cases of multiple mappings; third, the extent of 
overlapping coverage. 
 
SemUs selected 27768  
Linkable senses 15193 54,71% 
Linked senses 10988 72,32% 
Multiple mappings 1125 10,23% 
Unmatched senses 4205 27,67% 
Table 1 summarizing data  
 
Multiple mappings depend on the more fine 
grained sense distinctions performed in IWN. The 
eventual merging of the two resources would make 
up for such discrepancy.  
During the linking process, many other 
possibilities of reciprocal improvement and 
enrichment were noticed by analyzing the lists of 
unmatched word-senses. All the inconsistencies are 
in fact recorded together with their differences in 
ontological classification, or in the polysemy 
treatment that the mapping evidenced. Some 
mapping failures have been observed due to a 
different approach to the treatment of polysemy in 
the two resources: for example, a single entry in 
PSC corresponding to two different IWN entries 
encoding very fined-grained nuances of sense, e.g.  
galeotto1 (galley rower) and galeotto2 (galley 
slave).  
Other mapping failures are due to cases of 
encoding inconsistency. For example, when a word 
sense from a multi-variant synset is linked to a 
SemU, all the other variants from the same synset 
should map to PSC entries sharing the same semantic 
type, yet in some cases it has been observed that 
SemUs corresponding to variants of the same synset 
do not share a common semantic type. 
All these encoding differences or inconsistencies 
were usefully put in the foreground by the linking 
process and are worthy of further in-depth analysis 
with a view to the merging, harmonization and 
interoperability of the two lexical resources. 
6 Conclusion and Future Work 
In this paper the PSC-IWN linking of concrete 
entities, the methodology adopted, the tool 
implemented to this aim and the results obtained 
are described. On the basis of the encouraging 
results illustrated here, the linking process will be 
carried on by dealing with 3rdOrder Entities. Our 
attention will then be devoted to 2ndOrderEntities 
which, so far, have only been object of preliminary 
investigations on Speech act (Roventini 2006) and 
Feeling verbs. Because of their intrinsic 
complexity, the linking of 2ndOrderEntities is 
expected to be a far more challenging task. 
References 
James Pustejovsky 1995. The generative lexicon. MIT Press. 
Christiane Fellbaum (ed.) 1998. Wordnet: An Electronic 
Lexical Database. MIT Press. 
Piek Vossen  (ed.) 1998. EuroWordNet: A multilingual 
database with lexical semantic networks. Kluwer 
Academic Publishers. 
Adriana Roventini et al 2003. ItalWordNet: Building a 
Large Semantic Database for the Automatic Treatment 
of Italian. Computational Linguistics in Pisa, Special 
Issue, XVIII-XIX, Pisa-Roma, IEPI. Tomo II, 745--791. 
Nilda Ruimy et al 2003. A computational semantic 
lexicon of Italian: SIMPLE. In A. Zampolli, N. 
Calzolari, L. Cignoni, (eds.), Computational 
Linguistics in Pisa, Special Issue, XVIII-XIX, (2003). 
Pisa-Roma, IEPI. Tomo II, 821-864. 
Adriana Roventini, Marisa Ulivieri and Nicoletta 
Calzolari. 2002 Integrating two semantic lexicons, 
SIMPLE and ItalWordNet: what can we gain? LREC 
Proceedings, Vol. V, pp. 1473-1477. 
Nilda Ruimy and Adriana Roventini. 2005 Towards the 
linking of two electronic lexical databases of Italian, 
In Zygmunt Veutulani (ed.), L&T'05 -  
Nilda Ruimy. 2006. Merging two Ontology-based 
Lexical Resources. LREC Proceedings, CD-ROM, 
1716-1721.  
Adriana Roventini. 2006. Linking Verbal Entries of 
Different Lexical Resources. LREC Proceedings, CD-
ROM, 1710-1715. 
Rita Marinelli. 2006. Computational Resources and 
Electronic Corpora in Metaphors Evaluation. Second 
International Conference of the German Cognitive 
Linguistics Association, Munich, 5-7 October.
 
 
 
164
Senseval-3: The Italian All-words Task 
Marisa ULIVIERI 
ILC-CNR 
Via Moruzzi 1  
Pisa, Italy, 56124 
marisa.ulivieri@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Francesca BERTAGNA 
ILC-CNR 
Via Moruzzi 1 
Pisa, Italy, 56124 
francesca.bertagna@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Elisabetta GUAZZINI 
ILC-CNR 
Via Moruzzi 1 
Pisa, Italy, 56124 
elisabetta.guazzini@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Nicoletta CALZOLARI 
ILC-CNR 
Via Moruzzi 1 
Pisa, Italy, 56124 
glottolo@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes the Italian all-words 
sense disambiguation task for Senseval-3. The 
annotation procedure and criteria together with 
the encoding of multiwords are presented. 
1 Introduction 
This paper describes the Italian all-words sense 
disambiguation task for Senseval-3: about 5000 
words were manually disambiguated according to 
the ItalWordNet (IWN) word senses. The first 
section briefly describes of the corpus and the 
lexical reference resource. The second section 
contains some general criteria adopted for the 
annotation of the corpus and illustrated by a series 
of examples. Issues connected to the treatment of 
phenomena typically found in corpora, e.g. 
abbreviations, foreign words, jargon, locutions are 
discussed. Furthermore, the encoding of 
compounds, metaphorical usages, and multiword 
units is described. Problems connected with i) the 
high granularity of sense distinctions in the lexical 
resource and ii) unsolvable ambiguities of the 
contexts are dealt with. Finally, it is evidenced how 
the annotation exercise can be of help in updating 
or tuning IWN, by adding missing senses and/or 
entries. 
2 The Corpus and the Lexical Resource 
The Italian all-words corpus consists of about 
13600 word tokens, extracted from the SI-TAL 1, 
Italian Syntactic Semantic Treebank (ISST). The 
                                                     
1 SI-TAL (Integrated System for the Automatic 
treatment of Language)  was a National Project devoted 
to the creation of large linguistic resources and software 
tools for Italian written and spoken language processing. 
ISST (Montemagni et al 2003) consists of i) a 
generic corpus of about 215,000 tokens, extracted 
from different periodicals and newspaper articles 
(La Repubblica, Il Corriere della Sera) and ii) a 
specialised corpus of about 90,000 tokens, with 
texts belonging to the financial domain (Il Sole-
24Ore). The annotated corpus consists of about 
5000 words and comprises a selection of Italian 
newspaper articles about various topics: politics, 
sport, news, etc. The common data format is XML. 
The reference lexical resource used for the 
Senseval-3 sense tagging task is the lexical-
semantic database IWN, developed within the 
framework of two different research projects: 
EuroWordNet (Vossen 1999) and SI-TAL, during 
which IWN was extended by the insertion of 
adjectives, adverbs and a subset of proper nouns. 
The IWN database contains about 64,000 word 
senses corresponding to about 50,000 synsets. It 
has inherited the EWN linguistic model (Alonge et 
al., 1998) which provides a rich set of semantic 
relations, and the first nucleus of verbs and nouns. 
IWN was structured around the notion of synset, a 
set of synonymous word meanings, and the 
information is encoded in the form of lexical-
semantic relations between pairs of synsets. The 
IWN database comprises also an Interlingual Index 
(ILI), based on the Princeton WordNet 1.5 used to 
link wordnets of different languages so that it is 
possible to go from the Italian words to similar 
words in English language. IWN has also inherited 
from EWN the Top Ontology (TO), a hierarchical 
structure of language-independent concepts, 
reflecting fundamental semantic distinctions. Via 
the ILI, all the concepts in the wordnet are linked 
to the Top Ontology. 
                                             Association for Computational Linguistics
                        for the Semantic Analysis of Text, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004
                 SENSEVAL-3: Third International Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems
3 Annotation Procedure and Criteria 
For the Italian all-words task , the annotation 
was carried out manually, word by word following 
the text. For each word, annotators were supplied 
with information about The tagging operation 
consisted in the assignment of a sense number to 
each full word or sequence of words corresponding 
to a single unit of sense, such as compounds, 
idioms, metaphorical usages, etc. The sense 
number which refers to a specific synset was 
assigned by the annotators according to the lexical 
resource IWN. The assignment of a sense number 
allows tagged words to inherit a series of semantic 
information ranging from meronymy, synonymy, 
hyperonymy, etc. up to the fundamental semantic 
distinctions of the Top Ontology. 
The annotation of the corpus was restricted to 
nouns (2583), verbs (1858), adjectives (748), a 
group of multiword expressions (97 ? verb phrases, 
adjectival phrases and noun phrases) and a set of 
general proper nouns (163). Two linguists 
disambiguated the texts. The annotators made 
every effort to match a text word to a IWN sense, 
but sometimes this could not be done, since the 
required sense was not present in the reference 
resource. Cases of difficult sense attribution and of 
disagreement between annotators were marked and 
left to further discussion and refinement. 
Frequently, a tight interaction between the IWN 
developers and the annotators was needed. By the 
way, this collaboration produced a double-sided 
effect: on the one side, the lexical resource gained 
in coverage, being enlarged through the addition of 
missing entries and/or senses and, on the other 
side, the corpus encoding has been made possible. 
3.1 Non-annotated cases 
Notwithstanding this, some cases have been left 
?empty?. They are in particular terms with not 
standard meaning, often absent from dictionaries2 
as, for example: i) abbreviations (C.T. 
Commissario Tecnico, Technical Officer); ii) 
foreign words (e.g. off limits); iii) jargon (e.g. 
fumantino adj. una persona fumantina, an irascible 
person); iv) terms semantically modified through 
evaluative suffixation (e.g. vetturetta, small car); 
v) locutions (e.g. per carit?!, for goodness? sake!; 
ci mancherebbe, that?s all we need); vi) words, or 
sequences of words, indicating human association 
groups (Caschi blu, the Blue Berets, Croce Rossa, 
Red Cross, etc.), vii) nicknames (Scarpa d'oro, lit. 
Gold Shoe ? to say a good football player, Primula 
                                                     
2 Some of them are very technical-specialistic terms 
or expressions extracted, in particular, from the soccer 
domain, e.g. andare in percussione/in sovrapposizione 
(lit. to go in percussion/in overlapping). 
Rossa, the Scarlet Pimpernel, a mafioso boss, etc.); 
viii) neologisms (e.g. komeinista berlusconiano, 
concerning Khomeini, Berlusconi). 
This type of specific neologisms or idiomatic 
expressions have a high frequency in corpora. 
Corpus texts are extracted from newspaper articles 
about politics, sports, news, etc. in which a high 
number of words currently used in the everyday 
language of media appear. Rarely a lexical 
resource contains this new-born expressions hence 
not completely meeting the requirements of 
semantic annotation. 
3.2 Fully-compositional Expressions 
It may be the case that annotators had to deal 
with complex expressions where the meaning is 
compositional, e.g. Ministero della Difesa 
(Department of Defence). Even if this sequence of 
words could be perceived by native speakers as a 
single multiword expression, the reference lexical 
resource did not present it as an independent entry. 
This is a case of fully compositional expression, 
whose interpretation depends functionally on the 
interpretation of its constituents. They were, 
therefore, decomposed and annotated according to 
their parts. 
3.3 Metaphorical Usages 
Figurative and metaphorical usages were hard to 
map to the correct sense: sometimes, it has been 
necessary to accept for them, at least, a 
compromise solution. Consider the following 
context (where bold marks the figurative usage): 
 
due lavoratori su tre sono a casa = essere 
disoccupato 
 
out of three workers, two are at home = to be 
unemployed) 
 
The interpretation of the context presupposes an 
extra-linguistic knowledge, which cannot be 
encoded at the lexical-semantic level of 
description, even if the collocation with lavoratori 
(workers) allows to correctly disambiguate. In this 
case a (at home) represents an instance of a non 
lexicalised metaphor, therefore it was not possible 
to assign the appropriate figurative sense. A 
compromise solution was adopted and the 
individual components of the phrase were 
annotated, even if the correct semantic contribution 
of the multiword expression was lost. 
Another interesting case is provided by the 
occurrences of some metaphoric uses of verbs. 
Consider these examples: 
 
? ? andata male in Spagna e non si ? 
qualificata alle ?, lit. in Spain it went badly and 
did not qualify for the 
 
? il rapporto and? avanti fino alle nozze, lit. 
the relationship went ahead until wedding 
In the first example, even if the verb is 
frequently used with this meaning, it was not 
possible to attribute a correct sense number, since 
it was not accounted for in the lexical resource. 
In the second case, the verbal locution andare 
avanti was not present in IWN. In this context, 
andare has been annotated with andare11, ?to 
progress?, which incorporates the meaning 
provided by andare plus the adverb avanti (to go 
ahead). 
All the above mentioned cases of non-annotation 
or compromise annotation evidence the 
divergences between lexicon encoding, on the one 
hand, in which senses are by necessity 
?decontextualised? to be able to capture 
generalizations (Calzolari et al 2002) and corpus 
annotation, on the other, where ?contextualization? 
plays a predominant role and, consequently, 
figurative senses, idioms, metaphorical usages, 
multiwords, are highly frequent. 
3.4 High granularity of sense distinctions 
One of the main reasons for disagreement 
between annotators could arise from the high IWN 
granularity in sense distinction. Often, when 
deciding a sense, too subtle distinctions could turn 
out to be a disadvantage for the annotators. 
Consider the verb sentire (to hear): IWN makes a 
very fine-grained distinction, where exactly 17 
senses are available. Some of them overlap or are 
so close each other to be undistinguishable for 
human annotators and may be problematic for 
systems. In the following example: 
Passano pochissimi secondi e qualcuno sente un 
urlo= ? and someone hears a cry 
 
In IWN, two senses of the verb are overlapping: 
 
sentire 1 ? percepire con l'orecchio (to hear) 
 
sentire 2 ? essere in grado di percepire suoni con 
l'orecchio (to be able to hear sounds) 
 
These distinctions are too subtle to be used in 
corpus annotation. The annotator has chosen 
sense1, but (in order to allow for the coarse-
grained scoring of automatic annotation) a 
sensemap of words, a table where the overlapping 
senses are accounted for, was provided. 
3.5 Context Ambiguity 
Corpus annotation strategy allowed to handle 
cases where synsets are numerous and present fine-
grained distinctions, not easily mappable to the 
corpus contexts or cases in which the context could 
raise a double interpretation. Annotators were not 
forced to make a totally subjective choice and 
could assign multiple senses (?and? operator). 
Lo Zaire ? uno dei paesi pi? pericolosi di tutta 
l'Africa = The Zaire is one of the most dangerous 
countries of Africa 
 
In IWN, sense distinctions are as follows: 
 
Paese1?  territorio con un governo sovrano e una 
propria organizzazione politica e amministrativa, 
(territory with its own political and administrative 
organization) 
 
Paese3? insieme di individui legati da stesse 
tradizioni storiche, lingua, costumi, (group of 
people with same historical traditions, languages 
and customs) 
 
Since annotators could not achieve a satisfactory 
disambiguation, they take into account both senses, 
sense1 and sense3. It was not clear, indeed, if the 
dangerousness refers to the country (sense1) or to 
the people (sense3). During the annotation, 
multiple senses have been assigned to about 90 
lemmas, that appeared arbitrary or impossible to 
disambiguate. 
3.6 Multiwords annotation 
The main difference between Senseval-3 and 
Senseval-2 is that in the all-words annotation task 
annotators are faced with complex lexical items 
coined, generally, with many technical terms, 
collocations, idioms, compounds, frozen 
expressions or multiwords, which were not present 
in the lexical-sample task. With the term 
multiwords we refer to all sequences of words 
whose meaning cannot be built compositionally 
from the meanings of its component words. The 
semantic contribution of individual components if 
annotated separately does not give reason of the 
final meaning of the expression which can be 
considered a sort of ?new concept?, e.g. farla 
franca (to get away with it), prendere parte (to 
take part), muro a secco (dry-stone wall). 
In IWN a set of lexicalised expressions were 
already included and the correct sense to assign 
was, hence, available: perdere i sensi (to faint), 
fare fuoco (to fire), passare in rivista (to review) 
etc. Many multiword expressions found in the 
corpus were added to IWN as semantically 
complex units, e.g. vedersela brutta (to have a 
narrow escape), essere in corso (to be in progress) 
etc. The annotation task has given, hence, the 
opportunity to establish a strong interaction 
between annotators and lexicographers in deciding 
what kind of sequences were real multiword 
expressions and, above all, which were worthwhile 
from a linguistic point of view to introduce in the 
lexical resource. 
The multiword expressions (about 60) were 
annotated with the following information: 
multiword ID; Part_of_Speech lemma; function of 
the components words: head, satellite. 
The individuation of the headword of the 
sequence has been made on the basis of a lexical 
criterion: for noun-phrases, the head of the 
sequence was considered the noun, the adjective 
for adjectival?phrases, the verb for verb-phrases. 
Once recognized the head, the other constituents 
play the role of satellites and the whole sequence 
receives the part-of-speech of the head. 
Here is an example encoded in XML: 
 
<head id="cs.morph074.mw_704" 
sats="cs.morph074.mw_706 
cs.morph074.mw_707"> 
uscita</head>clamorosamente 
<sat id="cs.morph074.mw_706">di</sat> 
<sat id="cs.morph074.mw_707">scena</sat> 
<answer head="cs.morph074.mw_704" 
senseid="uscire di scena.V.1"/> 
 
Our intention was only to provide an 
examplification of the methodology we adopted 
when trying to handle multiword expressions. 
Even if the recognition and treatment of poly- 
lexical units is obviously one of the most important 
issues emerging in the process of context 
interpretation, in this paper we did not address 
theoretical issues concerning their exact 
identification. 
References  
Alonge Antonietta, Nicoletta Calzolari, Piek 
Vossen, Laura Bloksma, Irene Castellon, Maria 
Antonia Marti and Wim Peters. 1998. The 
Linguistic Design of the EuroWordNet Database. 
Special Issue on EuroWordNet. Computers and 
the Humanities, Vol.32, N. 2-3: pag.91-115. 
Calzolari Nicoletta, Claudia Soria, Francesca 
Bertagna and Francesco Barsotti. 2002. 
Evaluating Lexical Resources Using Senseval. 
Journal of Natural Language Engineering, 
Special Issue of Senseval-2, vol.VIII(4), pag. 
375-390. 
Kilgarriff Adam, Rosenzweig Joseph. 2000. 
English Senseval: Report and Results. Proc. 
Second Conf on Language Resources and 
Evaluation Athens,  pag. 1239-1244. 
Montemagni Simonetta, Barsotti Francesco, 
Battista Marco Calzolari Nicoletta, Corazzari 
Ornella, Lenci Alessandro, Pirrelli Vito, 
Zampolli Antonio, Fanciulli Francesca; 
Massetani Maria, Raffaelli Remo, Basili 
Roberto, Pazienza Maria Teresa, Saracino Dario, 
Zanzotto Fabio, Mana Nadia, Pianesi Fabio, 
Delmonte Rodolfo. 2003. The syntactic-semantic 
Treebank of Italian. An Overview. Linguistica 
Computazionale a Pisa vol. I, pag.461-492. 
Vossen Piek (ed.) 1999. EuroWordNet General 
Document. The EWN CD-ROM (see also: 
http://www.hum.uva.nl/ ). 
 
