Abstract
AKT is a major research project
applying a variety of technologies to
knowledge management. Knowledge
is a dynamic, ubiquitous resource,
which is to be found equally in an
expert's head, under terabytes of data,
or explicitly stated in manuals. AKT
will extend knowledge management
technologies to exploit the potential
of the semantic web, covering the use
of knowledge over its entire lifecycle,
from acquisition to maintenance and
deletion. In this paper we discuss how
HLT will be used in AKT and how
the use of HLT will affect different
areas of KM, such as knowledge
acquisition, retrieval and publishing.
1 Introduction
As globalisation reduces the competitive
advantage existing between companies, the role
of proprietary information and its appropriate
management becomes all-important. A
company?s value depends more and more on
?intangible assets?1 which exist in the minds of
employees, in databases, in files and in a
multitude of documents. It is the goal of
knowledge management (KM) technologies to
make computer systems which provide access to
this intangible knowledge present in a company
or organisation.  The system must make it
possible to share, store and retrieve the
collective expertise of all the people in an
organization. At present, many companies spend
                                                     
1 A term coined by Karl-Erik Sveiby
considerable resources on knowledge
management; estimates range between 7 and
10% of revenues (Davenport 1998).
In developing a knowledge management
system, the knowledge must first be captured or
acquired in some form which is usable by a
computer. The knowledge acquisition
bottleneck, so well-known in AI, is just as
important in knowledge management. The
acquisition of knowledge does not become less
difficult in a business environment and often
requires a sea-change in company culture in
order to persuade users to accommodate to the
technology adopted, precisely because
knowledge acquisition is so difficult.
Once knowledge has been acquired, it must be
managed, i.e. modelled, updated and published.
Modelling means representing information in a
way that is both manageable and easy to
integrate with the rest of the company?s
knowledge. Updating is necessary because
knowledge is dynamic. Part of its importance
for a company or individual lies in the fact that
knowledge is ever changing and keeping up
with the change is a crucial dimension in
knowledge management. Publishing is the
process that allows sharing the knowledge
across the company. These needs have
crystallised in efforts to develop the so-called
Semantic Web. It is envisaged that in the future,
the content currently available on the Web (both
Internets and Intranets) as raw data will be
automatically annotated with machine-readable
semantic information.  In such a case, we will
no longer speak of information retrieval but
rather of Knowledge Retrieval because instead
of obtaining thousands of potentially relevant or
irrelevant documents, only the dozen or so
documents that are truly needed by the user will
be presented to them.
Using HLT for Acquiring, Retrieving and Publishing Knowledge in AKT:
Position Paper
K. Bontcheva, C. Brewster, F. Ciravegna, H. Cunningham,
L. Guthrie, R. Gaizauskas, Y. Wilks
Department of Computer Science, the University of Sheffield,
Regent Court, 211 Portobello Street, S1 4DP Sheffield, UK
Email: N.Surname@dcs.shef.ac.uk
 In this paper we present the way Human
Language Technology (HLT) is used to address
several facets of the KM problem:  acquiring,
retrieving, and publishing knowledge. The work
presented in this paper is supported by the AKT
project (Advanced Knowledge Technologies), a
multimillion pound six year research project
funded by the EPSRC in the UK. AKT, started
in 2000, involves the University of
Southampton, the Open University, the
University of Edinburgh, the University of
Aberdeen, and the University of Sheffield
together with a large number of major UK
companies. Its objectives are to develop
technologies to cope with the six main
challenges of knowledge management:
? acquisition ? reuse
? modelling ? publication
? retrieval/extraction ? maintenance
These challenges will be addressed by the
University of Sheffield in the context of AKT
by the application of a variety of human
language technologies. Here, we consider only
the contribution of HLT to the acquisition of
knowledge, its retrieval and extraction, its
publication, and finally the role of appropriate
HLT infrastructure to the completion of these
goals.
2 Knowledge Acquisition
Knowledge acquisition (KA) is concerned with
the process of turning data into coherent
knowledge for a computer program.  The need
for effective KA methods increases as the
quantity of data available electronically
increases year by year, and the importance it
plays in our society is more and more
recognised. The challenge, we believe, lies in
designing effective techniques for acquiring the
vast amounts of (largely) tacit knowledge. KA is
a complex process, which traditionally is
extremely time consuming.
Existing KA methodologies are varied but
almost always require a great deal of manual
input. One methodology, often used in Expert
Systems, involves the time-consuming process
of structured interviews (?protocols?), which are
then analysed by knowledge engineers in order
to codify and model the knowledge of an expert
in a particular domain. Even if a complex expert
system is not required, all forms of KA are very
labour intensive. Yahoo currently employs over
100 people to keep its category hierarchy up to
date (Dom 1999). Some methodologies have
started to appear to automate this process,
although still limited to some steps in the KA
process. They depend on replacing the
introspection of knowledge engineers or the
extended elicitations of the protocol methods
(Ericsson and Simon 1984) by using Human
Language Technologies, more specifically
Information Extraction, Natural Language
Processing and Information Retrieval.
 Although knowledge acquisition produces
data (knowledge) for use by a computer
program, the form and content of that
knowledge is often debated in the research
community.  Ontologies have emerged as one of
the most popular means of modelling the
knowledge of a domain.  The meaning of this
word varies somewhat in the literature, but
minimally it is a hierarchical taxonomy of
categories, concepts or words. Ontologies can
act as an index to the memory of an organisation
and facilitate semantic searches and the retrieval
of knowledge from the corporate memory as it
is embodied in documents and other archives.
Repeated research has shown their usefulness,
especially for specific domains (J?rvelin and
Kek?l?inen 2000). The process of ontology
construction is illustrated in the rest of this
section.
2.1 Taxonomy construction
We propose to introduce automation in the stage
of taxonomy construction mainly in order to
eliminate or reduce the need for extensive
elicitation of data.  In the literature approaches
to construction of taxonomies of concepts have
been proposed (Brown et al 1992, McMahon
and Smith 1996, Sanderson and Croft 1999).
Such approaches either use a large collection of
documents as their sole data source, or they can
attempt to use existing concepts to extend the
taxonomy (Agirre et al2000, Scott 1998).  We
intend to develop a semi-automatic method that,
starting from a seed ontology sketched by the
user, produces the final ontology via a cycle of
refinements by eliciting knowledge from a
collection of texts. In this approach the role of
the user should only be that of proposing an
initial ontology and validating/changing the
different versions proposed by the system.
We intend to integrate a methodology for
automatic hierarchy definition (such as
(Sanderson and Croft 1999)) with a method for
the identification of terms related to a concept
in a hierarchy (such as (Scott 1998)). The
advantage of this integration is that, as
knowledge is continually changing, we can
reconstruct an appropriate domain specific
ontology very rapidly. This does not preclude
incorporating an existing ontology and using the
tools to extend and update it on the basis of
appropriate texts. Finally an ontology defined in
this way has the particular advantage that it
overcomes the well-known ?Tennis problem?
associated with many predefined ontologies
such as WordNet, i.e where terms closely
related in a given domain are structurally very
distant such as ball and court, for example.
In addition we intend to employ classic
Information Extraction techniques (described
below) such as named entity recognition
(Humphreys et al 1998) in order to pre-process
the text, as the identification of complex terms
such as proper names, dates, numbers, etc,
allows to reduce data sparseness in learning
(Ciravegna 2000).
We plan to introduce many cycles of ontology
learning and validation. At each stage the
defined ontology can be: i) validated/corrected
by a user/expert; ii) used to retrieve a larger set
of appropriate documents to be used for further
refinement (J?rvelin and Kek?l?inen 2000); iii)
passed on to the next development stage.
2.2 Learning Other Relations
This stage proceeds to build on the skeletal
ontology in order to specify, as much as
possible without human intervention, relations
among concepts in the ontology, other than
ISAs. In order to flesh the concept relations, we
need to identify relations such as synonymy,
meronymy, antonymy and other relations. We
plan to integrate a variety of methods existing in
the literature, e.g. by using recurrences in verb
subcategorisation as a symptom of general
relations (Basili et al 1998), by using Morin?s
user-guided approach to identify the correct
lexico/syntactic environment (Morin 1999), and
by using methods such as (Hays 1997) to locate
specific cases of synonymy.
3 Knowledge Extraction
Assuming that the shape of knowledge has been
acquired and adequately modelled, it will have
to be stored in a repository from which it is
retrieved as and when needed. On the one hand
there is the problem of retrieving instances in
order to populate the resulting knowledge base.
On the other hand, considering that repositories
could become very substantial in size, there is
the necessity to navigate the repository in order
to extract the knowledge when needed. In this
section we focus on the problem of knowledge
base population, as it is in our opinion the most
challenging from the HLT point of view.
3.1 Knowledge Base  Population
Instance identification for Knowledge Base
population can be performed by HLT-based
document analysis. With the term documents,
we mean a wide variety of types of texts such as
plain texts, web pages, knowledge elicitation
interview transcriptions (protocols), etc.  For the
sake of this paper we limit our analysis to
language related tasks only, ignoring the
problem of multi-media information. As a first
step instance identification requires the
identification of relevant documents containing
citation of the interesting information
(document classification). Then it requires the
ability to identify and extract information from
documents (Information Extraction from text).
3.2 Document Classification
Text classification for IE purposes has been
explored both in the MUC conferences as well
as in some commercially oriented projects
(Ciravegna et al 2000). In concrete terms
classification is used in order to identify the
scenario to apply to a specific set of texts, while
IE will identify (i.e. index) the instances in the
texts.  In most cases of application document
classification is quite straightforward, being
limited to the Boolean classification of a
document between relevant/irrelevant (single
scenario application as in the MUC
conferences). In cases in which knowledge may
be distributed along a number of different
detailed scenarios, full document classification
is then needed. In such cases, two main
characteristics are relevant for the classification
approach: flexibility and refinability (Ciravegna
et al 1999). Flexibility is needed with respect
to both the number of the categories and the
granularity of the classification to be coped
with. Three main types of classification can be
identified: coarse-grained, fine-grained, and
content-based. Coarse-grained classification is
performed among a relatively small number of
classes (e.g., some dozens) that are sharply
different (e.g., sport vs finance). This can be
obtained reliably and efficiently by the
application of statistical classifiers. Fine-
grained classification is performed over a
usually larger number of classes that can be
very similar (e.g., discriminating between news
about private bond issues and news about public
bond issues). This type of classification
generally requires some more knowledge-
oriented approaches such as pattern-based
classification. Sometimes categories are so
similar that classification needs to be content-
based, i.e. it can be performed only by
extracting the news content (e.g., finding news
articles issued by English financial institutions
referring to amounts in excess of 100,000 Euro).
In this case some forms of shallow adaptive
Information Extraction can be used (see next
section). Refinability concerns the possibility
of performing classification in a sequence of
steps, each one providing a more precise
classification (from coarse-grained to content-
based). In the current technological situation
coarse-grained classification can be performed
quickly, while the systems available for more
fine-grained classification are much slower and
less general purpose. When the amount of
textual material is large an incremental
approach, based on some level of coarse-grained
classification further refined by successive
analysis, proves to be very effective. A refinable
classification is generally performed over a
hierarchy of classes. A refinement may revise
the categories assigned to specific texts with
more specialised classes from the hierarchy.
More complex techniques are invoked only
when needed and, in any case, within an already
detected context (Ciravegna et al 1999).
We plan to produce a number of solutions for
text classification, adaptable to different
scenarios and situations, following the criteria
mentioned above.
3.3 Information Extraction
Information extraction from text (IE) is the
process of mapping of texts into fixed format
output (templates) representing the key
information (Gaizauskas 1997). In using IE for
KM, templates represent an intermediate format
for mapping the information in the texts into
ontology instances. Templates can be semi-
automatically derived from the ontology. We
plan to use IE for a number of passes: on the
one hand, we plan to populate a knowledge base
with instances as mentioned above. On the other
hand, IE can be used to monitor relevant
changes in the information, providing a
fundamental contribution to the problem of
knowledge updating. We have a long experience
in IE from texts, Sheffield having actively
participated in the MUC conferences and in the
TIPSTER project, activities that historically
have made a fundamental contribution to
making IE as we now know it.  The new
challenge we are currently addressing is
adaptivity. Adaptivity is a major goal for
Information Extraction, especially in the case of
its application to knowledge management, as
KM is a process that has to be distributed
throughout companies. The real value of IE will
become apparent when it can be adapted to new
applications and scenarios directly by the final
user without the intervention of IE experts. The
goal for research in adaptive IE is to create
systems adaptable to new applications/domains
by using only an analyst?s knowledge, i.e.
knowledge about the domain/scenario.
There are two directions of research in
adaptive IE, both involving the use of Machine
Learning. On the one hand machine learning is
used to automate as much as possible the tasks
an IE expert would perform in application
development (Cardie 1997) (Yangarber et al
2000). The goal here is to reduce the porting
time to a new application (and hence the cost).
This area of research comes mainly from the
MUC community. Currently, the technology
makes use mainly of NLP-intensive
technologies and the type of texts addressed are
mainly journal articles.
On the other hand, there is an attempt to make
IE systems adaptable to new
domains/applications by using only an analyst?s
knowledge, i.e. knowledge about the
domain/scenario only (Kushmerick et al 1997),
(Califf 1998), (Muslea et al 1998), (Freitag and
McCallum 1999), (Soderland 1999), (Freitag
and Kushmerick 2000), (Ciravegna 2001a).
Most research has so far focused on Web-
related texts (e.g. web pages, email, etc.)
Successful commercial products have been
created and there is an increasing interest on IE
in the Web-related market.  Current adaptive
technologies make no use of natural language
processing in the web context, as extra linguistic
structures (e.g. HTML tags, document
formatting, and ungrammatical stereotypical
language) are the elements used to identify
information. Linguistically intensive approaches
are difficult or unnecessary in such cases. When
these non-linguistic approaches are used on
texts with a reduced (or no) structure, they tend
to be ineffective.
There is a technological gap between adaptive
IE on free texts and adaptive IE on web-related
texts. For the purposes of KM, such a gap has to
be bridged so to create a set of technologies able
to cover the whole range of potential
applications for different kinds of texts, as the
type of texts to be analysed for KM may vary
dramatically from case to case. We plan to
bridge this gap via the use of lazy natural
language processing. We intend to use an
approach where the system starts with a range
of potential methodologies (from shallow to
linguistically intensive) and learns from a
training corpus which is the most effective
approach for the particular case under
consideration. A number of factors can
influence the choice: from the type of texts to be
analysed to the type of information the user is
able to provide in adapting the system. In the
first case the system will have to identify what
type of task is under consideration and select the
correct level of analysis  (e.g. language based
for free texts). Formally in this case the level of
language analysis is one of the parameters the
learner will have to learn. Concerning the type
of tagging the user is able to provide: different
users are able to provide different levels of
information in training the system: IE-trained
users are able to provide sophisticated tagging,
maybe inclusive of syntactic, semantic or
pragmatic information. Na?ve users on the other
hand are only able to provide some basic
information (e.g. to spot the relevant
information in the texts and highlight it in
different colours). We plan to develop a system
able to cope with a wide of variety of situations
by starting from the (LP)2 algorithm and
enhancing its learning capabilities on free texts
(Ciravegna 2001) and developing a powerful
human-computer interface for system adaptation
(Ciravegna and Petrelli 2001).
4 Knowledge Publishing
Knowledge is only effective if it is delivered in
the right form, at the right place, to the right
person at the right time. Knowledge publishing
is the process that allows getting knowledge to
the people who need it in a form that they can
use. As a matter of fact, different users need to
see knowledge presented and visualised in quite
different ways. The dynamic construction of
appropriate perspectives is a challenge which, in
AKT, we will address from the perspective of
generating automatically such presentations
from the ontologies acquired by the KA and KE
methods, discussed in the previous sections.
Natural Language Generation (NLG) systems
automatically produce language output (ranging
from a single sentence to an entire document)
from computer-accessible data, usually encoded
in a knowledge or data base (Reiter 2000). NLG
techniques have already been used successfully
in a number of application domains, the most
relevant of which is automatic production of
technical documentation (Reiter et al 1995),
(Paris et al 1996). In the context of KM and
knowledge publishing in particular, NLG is
needed for knowledge diffusion and
documenting ontologies. The first task is
concerned with personalised presentation of
knowledge, in the form needed by each specific
user and tailored to the correct language type
and the correct level of details. The latter is a
very important issue, because as discussed
earlier, knowledge is dynamic and needs to be
updated frequently. Consequently, the
accompanying documentation which is vital for
the understanding and successful use of the
acquired knowledge, needs to be updated in
sync. The use of NLG simplifies the ontology
maintenance and update tasks, so that the
knowledge engineer can concentrate on   the
knowledge itself, because the documentation is
automatically updated as the ontology changes.
The NLG-based knowledge publishing tools
will also utilise the ontology instances extracted
from documents using the IE approaches
discussed in Section 3.3. The dynamically
generated documentation will not only include
these instances, as soon as they get extracted,
but it will also provide examples of their
occurrence in the documents, thus facilitating
users? understanding and use of the ontology.
Our approach to knowledge publishing is based
on an existing framework for generation of user-
adapted hypertext explanations (Bontcheva
2001), (Bontcheva and Wilks 2001). The
framework incorporates a powerful agent
modelling module, which is used to tailor the
explanations to the user?s knowledge, task, and
preferences. We are now also extending the
personalisation techniques to account for user
interests. The main challenge for NLG will be
to develop robust and efficient techniques for
knowledge publishing which can operate on
large-scale knowledge resources and support the
personalised presentation of diverse
information, such as speech, video, text,
graphics (see (Maybury 2001)).
The other challenge in using NLG for
knowledge publishing is to develop tools and
techniques that will enable knowledge
engineers, instead of linguists, to create and
customise the linguistic resources (e.g., domain
lexicon) at the same time as they create and edit
the ontology.  In order to allow such inter-
operability with the KA tools, we will integrate
the NLG tools in the GATE infrastructure,
discussed next.
5 HLT Infrastructure
The range and complexity of the task of
knowledge management make imperative the
need for standardisation. While there has been
much talk about the re-use of knowledge
components such ontologies, much less has
been undertaken to standardise the
infrastructure for tools and their development.
The types of data structures typically involved
are large and complex, and without good tools
to manage and allow succinct viewing of the
data we will continue to work below our
potential. The University of Sheffield has
pioneered in the Gate and Gate 2 projects the
development of an architecture for text
engineering (Cunningham et al 1997),
(Cunningham et al 2000). Given the modular
architecture and component structure of Gate, it
is natural to build on this basis to extend the
capabilities of Gate so as to provide the most
suitable possible environment for tool
development, implementation and evaluation in
AKT. The system will provide a single
interaction and deployment point for the roll-out
of HLT in Knowledge Management. We expect
Gate2 to act as the skeleton for a large range of
knowledge management activities within AKT
and plan to extend its capabilities within the life
of the AKT project by integrating with suitable
ontological and lexical databases in order to
permit the use of  the Gate system with large
bodies of heterogeneous data
6 Conclusion and Future Work
We have presented how we plan to use HLT for
helping KM in AKT. We believe that HLT can
make a substantial contribution to the following
issues in  KM:
? Cost reduction: KM is an expensive task,
especially in the acquisition phase. HLT can
aid in automating both the acquisition of the
structure of the ontology to be learnt and in
populating such ontology with instances. It
will also provide support for automatic
knowledge documentation.
? Time reduction: KM is a slow task: HLT
can help in making it more efficient by
reducing the need for the human effort;
? Subjectivity reduction: this is a main
problem in knowledge identification and
selection. Subjective knowledge is difficult
to integrate with the rest of the company?s
knowledge and its use is somehow difficult.
KM constitutes a challenge for HLT as it
provides a number of fields of application and
in particular it challenges the integration of a set
of techniques for a common goal.
Acknowledgement
This work is supported under the Advanced
Knowledge Technologies (AKT)
Interdisciplinary Research Collaboration (IRC),
which is sponsored by the UK Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council under grant
number GR/N15764/01. The AKT IRC
comprises the Universities of Aberdeen,
Edinburgh, Sheffield, Southampton and the
Open University.
References
Agirre, E. O. Ansa, E. Hovy, and  D.
Mart?nez 2000. Enriching very large ontologies
using the WWW, Proceedings of the ECAI 2000
workshop ?Ontology Learning?.
Basili, R., R. Catizone, M. Stevenson, P.
Velardi, M. Vindigni, and Y. Wilks. 1998. ?An
Empirical Approach to Lexical Tuning?.
Proceedings of the Adapting Lexical and
Corpus Resources to Sublanguages and
Applications Workshop, held jointly with 1st
LREC Granada, Spain.
Bontcheva, K. 2001. Generating adaptive
hypertext explainations with a nested agent
model.  Ph. D. Thesis, University of Sheffield.
Bontcheva, K. and Wilks, Y. 2001. Dealing
with Dependencies between Content Planning
and Surface Realisation in a Pipeline
Generation Architecture. Proceedings of the 17th
International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (IJCAI2001), Seattle.
Brown, P.F., Peter F., V. J. Della Pietra, P.
V. DeSouza, J. C. Lai, and R. L. Mercer. 1992.
Class-based n-gram models of natural language.
Computational Linguistics, 18, 467-479.
 Califf, M. E. 1998. Relational Learning
Techniques for Natural Language Information
Extraction. Ph.D. thesis, Univ. Texas, Austin,
www/cs/utexas.edu/users/mecaliff
C. Cardie, `Empirical methods in
information extraction', AI Journal,18(4), 65-
79, (1997).
F. Ciravegna, A. Lavelli, N. Mana, J.
Matiasek, L. Gilardoni, S. Mazza, M. Ferraro,
W. J. Black F. Rinaldi, and D. Mowatt.
FACILE: Classifying Texts Integrating Pattern
Matching and Information Extraction. In
Proceedings of the 16th International Joint
Conference On Artificial Intelligence
(IJCAI99), Stockholm, Sweden, 1999.
F. Ciravegna, A. Lavelli,, L. Gilardoni, S.
Mazza, W. J. Black, M. Ferraro, N. Mana, J.
Matiasek, F. Rinaldi. Flexible Text
Classification for Financial
Applications: The FACILE System. In
Proceedings of Prestigious Applications sub-
conference (PAIS2000) sub-conference of the
14th European Conference On Artificial
Intelligence (ECAI2000), Berlin, Germany,
August, 2000.
 Ciravegna, F. 2001. Adaptive Information
Extraction from Text by Rule Induction and
Generalisation. Proceedings of the 17th
International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (IJCAI2001), Seattle.
Ciravegna, F. and D. Petrelli. 2001. User
Involvement in customizing Adaptive
Information Extraction from Texts: Position
Paper. Proceedings of the IJCAI01 Workshop on
Adaptive Text Extraction and Mining, Seattle.
Cunningham, H., K. Humphreys, R.
Gaizauskas and Y. Wilks. 1997. Software
Infrastructure for Natural Language Processing.
Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Applied
Natural Language Processing (ANLP-97).
Cunningham H., K. Bontcheva, V. Tablan
and Y. Wilks. 2000. Software Infrastructure for
Language Resources: a Taxonomy of Previous
Work and a Requirements Analysis.
Proceedings of the Second Conference on
Language Resources Evaluation, Athens.
Dom, B. 1999. Automatically finding the
best pages on the World Wide Web (CLEVER).
Search Engines and Beyond: Developing
efficient knowledge management systems.
Boston, MA.
Ericsson, K. A. and H. A. Simon. 1984.
Protocol Analysis: verbal reports as data. MIT
Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Freitag, D. and A. McCallum. 1999
Information Extraction with HMMs and
Shrinkage. AAAI-99 Workshop on Machine
Learning for Information Extraction, Orlando,
FL. (www.isi.edu/~muslea/RISE/ML4IE/)
Freitag, D. and N. Kushmerick. 2000.
Boosted wrapper induction. F. Ciravegna, R.
Basili, R. Gaizauskas, ECAI2000 Workshop on
Machine Learning for Information Extraction,
Berlin, 2000, (www.dcs.shef.ac.uk/~fabio/ecai-
workshop.html)
Hays, P. R. 1997. Collocational Similarity:
Emergent Patterns in Lexical Environments,
PhD. Thesis. School of English, University of
Birmingham
Humphreys, K., R. Gaizauskas, S. Azzam, C.
Huyck, B. Mitchell, H. Cunningham and  Y.
Wilks. 1998. Description of the University of
Sheffield LaSIE-II System as used for MUC-7.
Proceedings of the 7th Message Understanding
Conference.
J?rvelin, K.  and J. Kek?l?inen. 2000. IR
evaluation methods for retrieving highly
relevant documents. Proceedings of the 23rd
Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference
on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, , Athens.
Kushmerick, N., D. Weld, and R.
Doorenbos. 1997. Wrapper induction for
information extraction. Proceedings of 15th
International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, IJCAI-97.
Manchester, P. 1999. Survey ? Knowledge
Management. Financial Times, 28.04.99.
Maybury, M.. 2001. Human Language
Technologies for Knowledge Management:
Challenges and Opportunities. Workshop on
Human Language Technology and Knowledge
Management. Toulouse, France.
McMahon, J. G. and  F. J. Smith. 1996
Improving Statistical Language Models
Performance with Automatically  Generated
Word Hierarchies. Computational Linguistics,
22(2), 217-247, ACL/MIT.
Morin, E. 1999. Using Lexico-Syntactic
patterns to Extract Semantic Relations between
Terms from Technical Corpus, TKE 99,
Innsbruck, Austria.
Muslea, I., S. Minton, and C. Knoblock.
1998. Wrapper induction for semi-structured,
web-based information sources. Proceedings of
the Conference on Autonomous Learning and
Discovery CONALD-98.
Paris, C. , K. Vander Linden. 1996.
DRAFTER: An interactive support tool for
writing multilingual instructions, IEEE
Computer, Special Issue on Interactive NLP.
Reiter, E. 1995. NLG vs. Templates.
Proceedings of the 5th European workshop on
natural language generation, (ENLG-95),
Leiden.
Reiter, E. , C. Mellish and J. Levine. 1995
Automatic generation of technical
documentation. Journal of Applied Artificial
Intelligence,  9(3) 259-287, 1995
Sanderson, M.  and B. Croft. 1999. Deriving
concept hierarchies from text. Proceedings of
the 22nd ACM SIGIR Conference, 206-213.
Scott, M. 1998. Focusing on the Text and Its
Key Words. TALC 98 Proceedings, Oxford,
Humanities Computing Unit, Oxford University.
Soderland, S. 1999. Learning information
extraction rules for semi-structured and free
text. Machine Learning, (1), 1-44.
Yangarber, R., R. Grishman, P. Tapanainen
and S. Huttunen. 2000. Automatic Acquisition
of Domain Knowledge for Information
Extraction. Proceedings of COLING 2000: The
18th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, Saarbr?cken.
