Representation and Treatment of Multiword Expressions in Basque 
I?aki Alegria, Olatz Ansa, Xabier Artola 
Nerea Ezeiza, Koldo Gojenola and Ruben Urizar 
Ixa Group 
University of the Basque Country 
649 pk E-20.080 
Donostia. Basque Country 
rubenu@sc.ehu.es 
Abstract 
This paper describes the representation of 
Basque Multiword Lexical Units and the 
automatic processing of Multiword 
Expressions. After discussing and stating 
which kind of multiword expressions we 
consider to be processed at the current 
stage of the work, we present the 
representation schema of the 
corresponding lexical units in a general-
purpose lexical database. Due to its 
expressive power, the schema can deal 
not only with fixed expressions but also 
with morphosyntactically flexible 
constructions. It also allows us to 
lemmatize word combinations as a unit 
and yet to parse the components 
individually if necessary. Moreover, we 
describe HABIL, a tool for the automatic 
processing of these expressions, and we 
give some evaluation results. This work 
must be placed in a general framework of 
written Basque processing tools, which 
currently ranges from the tokenization 
and segmentation of single words up to 
the syntactic tagging of general texts. 
1 Introduction 
2 
Most texts are rich in multiword expressions, 
which must be necessarily processed if we want 
any NLP tool to perform accurately. Jackendoff 
(1997) estimates that their number in the speakers' 
lexicon ?is of the same order of magnitude as the 
number of single words?. 
There is no agreement among authors about the 
definition of the term Multiword Expression. 
However, in this article, Multiword Expressions 
(hereafter MWE) refer to any word combinations 
ranging from idioms, over proper names, 
compounds, lexical and grammatical 
collocations? to institutionalized phrases. MWEs 
comprise both semantically compositional and 
non-compositional combinations, and both 
syntactically regular and idiosyncratic phrases, 
including complex named entities such as proper 
nouns, dates and number expressions (see section 
2). 
In contrast, Multiword Lexical Units (hereafter 
MWLU) comprise lexicalized phrases ?
semantically non-compositional or syntactically 
idiosyncratic word combinations? which are 
represented and stored in the lexical database of 
Basque (EDBL). 
The remaining sections are organized as 
follows. Section 2 presents the main features of 
MWEs in Basque, and defines which are currently 
considered for automatic processing. Section 3 
describes the representation of MWLUs in the 
lexical database. Section 4 is devoted to the 
description and evaluation of the automatic 
treatment of MWEs by means of HABIL. Section 
5 summarizes future work. And, finally, section 6 
outlines some conclusions. 
Multiword Expressions in the 
processing of real texts in Basque 
The definition of the term Multiword Expression 
and the types of such MWEs to be treated in NLP 
may vary considerably depending on the purposes 
or "the depth of processing being undertaken" 
(Copestake et al, 2002). Multiword itself is a 
Second ACL Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Integrating Processing, July 2004, pp. 48-55
vague term. At text level, a word could be defined 
as "any string of characters between two blanks" 
(Fontenelle et al, 1994). This is not applicable to 
languages as Japanese, which are typically written 
without spaces. Besides, a great number of MWEs 
that in uninflected languages would be multiword, 
constitute a single typographic unit in agglutinative 
languages such as Basque (ziurrenik 'most 
probably', aurrerantzean 'from now on', aurretiaz 
'in advance'). Therefore, we consider them single 
words and they are included in the lexical database 
as such (or recognized by means of morphological 
analysis). 
In our case, when deciding which Basque 
MWEs to include in the database, we mostly rely 
on lexicographers' expertise since we consider 
lexicalized phrases have a top priority for both 
lemmatizing and syntactic purposes. So, the 
MWEs dealt with in the database comprise fixed 
expressions, which admit no morphosyntactic or 
internal modification ?including foreign 
expressions such as in situ, a priori, strictu sensu, 
etc.?, idioms, both decomposable and non-
decomposable, and lexicalized compounds. We 
also consider light verb constructions when they 
are syntactically idiosyncratic.  
However, currently we do not treat open 
collocations, proverbs, catch phrases and similes. 
Mostly, we don't include proper names in the 
database either, since complex named entities are 
given a separate treatment. Apart from proper 
nouns, also dates and number expressions are 
treated separately (see 4.1). 
So far we have described 2,270 MWLUs in our 
database. This work has been carried out in two 
phases. For the first phase, we made use of the 
Statistical Corpus of 20th Century Basque 
(http://www.euskaracorpusa.net) that contains 
about 4.7 million words. As a starting point, we 
chose the MWLUs that occurred more than 10 
times in this manually lemmatized corpus. This 
amounted to about 1,300 expressions. For the 
second phase, this list has been enlarged using the 
Hiztegi Batua, a dictionary of standard Basque that 
the Basque Language Academy updates regularly 
(http://www2.euskaltzaindia.net/hiztegibatua). 
2.1 
3 
Main features of lexicalized phrases 
Many of the lexicalized phrases are semantically 
non-compositional (or partially compositional), i.e. 
they can hardly be interpreted in terms of the 
meaning of their constituents (adarra jo 'to pull 
someone's leg', literally 'to play the horn'). 
Often, a component of these sequences hardly 
occurs in any other context and it is difficult to 
assign it a part of speech. For example, the word 
noizik is an archaism of modern noiztik 'from 
when', which occurs just in the expressions noizik 
behin, noizik behinean, noizik noizera, and noizik 
behinka all meaning 'once in a while'. Besides, it is 
not clear which is the part of speech of the words 
laprast in laprast egin 'to slip' or dir-dir in dir-dir 
egin 'to shine'. 
From a syntactic point of view, many of these 
MWEs present an unusual structure. For example, 
many complex verbs in Basque are light verb 
constructions, being the meaning of the compound 
quite compositional, e.g. lo egin 'to sleep' literally 
'to make (a) sleep' or lan egin 'to work' literally 'to 
make (a) work'. However, lo egin and lan egin can 
be considered 'syntactically idiomatic' since the 
nouns in these expressions, lo and lan, take no 
determiner, which would be completely 
ungrammatical for a noun functioning as a regular 
direct object (*arroz jan nuen 'I ate rice'). 
Morphosyntactic flexibility, being significant in 
this type of constructions in Basque, may vary 
considerably. For example in lo egin 'to sleep' the 
noun lo admits modification (lo asko egin zuen 'he 
slept very much') and may take the partitive 
assignment (ez dut lorik egin 'I haven't slept') while 
the verb egin can be subject to focalization (egin 
duzu lorik bart? 'did you sleep at all last night?'); 
besides, the components of the construction may 
change positions and some elements and phrases 
may be placed between them (mendian egin omen 
zuen lasai lo 'it is said that he slept peacefully in 
the mountain'). In contrast, alde egin 'to escape' is 
morphosyntactically quite rigid. In all the cases, 
the verb egin can take any inflection. 
For our database, we have worked out a single 
representation that covers all MWLUs ranging 
from fixed expressions to these of highest 
morphosyntactic flexibility. 
Representation of MWLUs in the lexical 
database 
In this section we explain how MWLUs are 
represented in EDBL (Aldezabal et al, 2001), a 
lexical database oriented to language processing 
that currently contains more than 80,000 entries, 
out of which 2,270 are MWLUs. Among these: 
? ~69% are always unambiguous. The average 
number of Surface Realization Schemas 
(SRS, see section 3.2) is 1.02. 
? ~23% are sometimes unambiguous and have 
3.6 SRSs in average, half of them 
ambiguous. 
? ~8% are always ambiguous and have 1.2 
SRSs in average. 
We want to point out that almost all of the 
unambiguous MWLUs have only one SRS, their 
components appearing in contiguous positions and 
always in the same order. About half of them are 
inflected, so, even if we discard the interpretations 
of the components, there is still some 
morphosyntactic ambiguity left. However, the 
identification of these MWLUs helps in 
disambiguation, as the input of tagging is more 
precise. 
 
The description of MWLUs within a general-
purpose lexical database must include, at least, two 
aspects (see Figure 1): (1) their composition, i.e. 
which the components of the MWLU are, whether 
each of them can be inflected or not, and according 
to which one-word lexical unit (OWLU 1 ) it 
inflects; and (2), what we call the surface 
realization, that is, the order in which the 
components may occur in the text, the mandatory 
or optional contiguousness of components, and the 
inflectional restrictions applicable to each one of 
the components. 
3.1 
                                                          
Composition 
As it has just been said, the description of the 
composition of MWLUs in EDBL gathers two 
aspects: on the one side, it depicts which the 
individual components of a MWLU are; on the 
other side, it links the inflectable components of a 
MWLU to the corresponding OWLU according to 
which each of them inflects. 
In Figure 1, we can see that the composed of 
relationship links every MWLU to up to 9 
individual components (MWLU_Components). 
Each component is characterized by the following 
attributes: 
1 We consider OWLUs lexical units with no spaces within its 
orthographical form; so, we also take hyphenated compounds 
as OWLUs. 
? Component_Position: this indicates 
the position of the component word-form in 
the canonical form of the MWLU. 
? Component_Form: i.e. the word-form 
itself as it appears in the canonical form of 
the MWLU. 
? Conveys_Morph_Info?: this is a 
Boolean value, indicating whether the 
component inflection conveys the 
morphological information corresponding to 
the whole MWLU or not2. 
(0,n)
(1,1)
(1,1)
(1,n)
(2,9)
(1,1)
 
MWLUs
Surface_Realization_Schemas
Order_Contiguousness
Sureness
Inflection_Restrictions
MWLU_Components
Component_Position
Component_Form
Conveys_Morph_Info?
OWLUs
corresp.
SR schemas
inflects
according to
composed of
Figure 1. Composition and surface realization of 
MWLUs. 
Moreover, the components of a MWLU are 
linked to its corresponding OWLU (according to 
which it inflects). This is represented by means of 
the inflects according to relationship 
(see Figure 1). 
                                                          
2 The morphological information that the attribute refers to is 
the set of morphological features the inflection takes in the 
current component instance. 
These two aspects concerning the composition 
of a MWLU are physically stored in a single table 
of the relational database in which EDBL resides.  
The columns of the table are the following: 
Entry, Homograph_Id, Component_ 
Position, Component_Form, Conveys_ 
Morph_Info?, OWLU_Entry, and OWLU_ 
Homograph_Id. In the example below, the 
composition of the MWLU begi bistan egon 'to be 
evident' is described. Note that one row is used per 
component: 
<begi bistan egon, 0, 1, begi, -, begi, 2> 
<begi bistan egon, 0, 2, bistan, -, bista, 1> 
<begi bistan egon, 0, 3, egon, +, egon, 1> 
This expression allows different realizations 
such as begi bistan dago 'it is evident' (literally 'it 
is at reach of the eyes'), begi bistan daude 'they are 
evident', begien bistan egon, 'to be evident', etc. In 
the table rows above, it can be seen that the last 
component egon 1 'to be' conveys the 
morphological information for the whole MWLU 
(+ in the corresponding column). 
3.2 Surface realization 
As for surface realization, we have already 
mentioned that the components of a MWLU can 
occur in a text either contiguously or dispersed. 
Besides, the order of the constituents may be fixed 
or not, and they may either inflect or occur in an 
invariable form. In the case of inflected 
components, some of them may accept any 
inflection according to its corresponding OWLU, 
whilst others may only inflect in a restricted way. 
Moreover, some MWLUs are unambiguous and 
some are not, since it cannot be certainly assured 
that the very same sequence of words in a text 
corresponds undoubtedly to a multiword entry in 
every context. For example, in the sentence Emilek 
buruaz baiezko keinu bat egin zuen 'Emile nodded 
his head' the words bat and egin do not correspond 
to the complex verb bat egin 'to unite' but to two 
separate phrases. 
According to these features, we use a formal 
description where different realization patterns 
may be defined for each MWLU. The corresp. 
SR schemas relationship in Figure 1 links every 
MWLU to one or more Surface_Realiza-
tion_Schemas. Each SRS is characterized by 
the following attributes: 
? Order_Contiguousness: an expression 
that indicates both the order in which the 
components may appear in the different 
instances of the MWLU and the 
contiguousness of these components. In 
these expressions the position of the digits 
indicate the position each component takes 
in a particular SRS, * indicates that 0 or 
more words may occur between two 
components, and ? indicates that at most 
one single word may appear between two 
given components of the MWLU. 
? Unambiguousness: a Boolean value, 
indicating whether the particular SRS 
corresponds to an unambiguous MWLU or 
not. It expresses whether the sequence of 
words matching this SRS must be 
unambiguously analyzed as an instance of 
the MWLU or, on the contrary, may be 
analyzed as separate OWLUs in some 
contexts. 
? Inflection_Restrictions: an 
expression that indicates the inflection 
paradigm according to which the MWLU 
may inflect in this specific SRS. In these 
expressions each component of the MWLU 
is represented by one list component (in the 
same order as the components of the 
MWLU appear in its canonical form): % 
indicates that the whole inflection paradigm 
of the corresponding inflectable component 
may occur; the minus sign (-) is used for 
non-inflectable components (no inflection at 
all may occur); finally, a logical expression 
(and, or, and not are allowed) composed 
of attribute-value pairs is used to express the 
inflectional restrictions and the 
morphotactics the component undergoes in 
this particular SRS of the MWLU (in 
brackets in the examples below). 
In the examples below, it can be seen that one 
row is used per SRS. The columns of the table are 
the following: Entry, Homograph_Id, Or-
der_Contiguousness, Unambiguousness, 
and Inflection_Restrictions: 
<begi bistan egon, 0, 123, +, 
 (((CAS=ABS) and (DEF=-)) or 
  ((CAS=GEN) and (NUM=PL)), -, %)> 
<begi bistan egon, 0, 312, +, 
 (((CAS=ABS) and (DEF=-)) or 
  ((CAS=GEN) and (NUM=PL)), -, %)> 
<begi bistan egon, 0, 3?12, +, 
 (((CAS=ABS) and (DEF=-)), -, %)> 
 
The first SRS matches occurrences such as begi 
bistan dago hau ez dela aski 'it is evident that it is 
not enough' or begien bistan zegoen honela 
bukatuko genuela 'it was evident that we would 
end up this way', where the components are 
contiguous and the analysis as an instance of the 
MWLU would be unambiguous. This SRS allows 
the inflection of the first component as absolutive 
case (non-definite) or as genitive (plural), and the 
whole set of inflection morphemes of the third one. 
The third SRS matches occurrences such as ez 
dago horren begi bistan 'it is not so evident', where 
the components are not contiguous (at most one 
word is allowed between the ?third? component 
and the ?first one?) and they occur in a non-
canonical order: 3?12. In this case, the 
interpretation as an instance of the MWLU would 
also be unambiguous. However, this SRS only 
allows the inflection of the first component as 
absolutive case (non-definite). 
3.3 
4 
Different information requirements in 
lemmatization and syntax processing 
The first prototype for the treatment of MWEs in 
Basque HABIL (Ezeiza et al, 1998; Ezeiza, 2003) 
was built for lemmatization purposes. However, 
we are nowadays involved in the construction of a 
deep syntactic parser (Aduriz et al, 2004) and the 
MWEs seem to need a different treatment. The fact 
that many MWEs may be syntactically regular but, 
above all, that an external element may have a 
dependency relation with one of the constituents, 
forces us to analyze the elements independently. 
For example, in the verb beldur izan 'to be afraid 
(of)' an external noun phrase may have a modifier-
noun dependency relation with beldur 'fear' as in 
sugeen beldur naiz 'I'm afraid of snakes'. In loak 
hartu 'to fall asleep' there is a subject-verb relation 
as in loak hartu nau 'I have fallen asleep', literally 
'sleep has caught me'; therefore subject-auxiliary 
verb agreement would fade if both components 
were analyzed as one. 
The MWLU representation we have adopted 
allows us to lemmatize the word combination as a 
unit and yet to parse the components individually 
whenever necessary. In order to do so, when 
describing each MWLU, we specify whether the 
elements in the MWLU must be analyzed 
separately or not3. 
Treatment of multiword expressions 
MWEs could be treated at different stages of the 
language process. Some approaches treat them at 
tokenization stage, identifying fixed phrases, such 
as prepositional phrases or compounds, included in 
a list (Carmona et al, 1998; Karlsson et al, 1995). 
Other approaches rely on morphological analysis 
to better identify the features of the MWE using 
finite state technology (Breidt et al, 1996). 
Finally, there is another approach that identifies 
them after the tagging process, allowing the 
correction of some tagging errors (Leech et al, 
1994). 
All of these approaches are based on the use of 
a closed set of MWLUs that could be included in a 
list or a database. However, some groups of MWEs 
are not subject to be included in a database, 
because they comprise an open class of 
expressions. That is the case of collocations, 
compounds or named entities. The group of 
collocations and compounds should be delimited 
using statistical approaches, such as Xtract 
(Smadja, 1993) or LocalMax (Silva et al, 1999), 
so that only the most relevant?those of higher 
frequency? are included in the database.  
Named entity recognition task has been solved 
for a large set of languages. Most of these works 
are linked to the Message Understanding 
Conference (Chinchor, 1997). There is a variety of 
methods that have been used in NE recognition, 
such as HMM, Maximum Entropy Models, 
Decision Trees, Boosting and Voted Perceptron 
(Collins, 2002), Syntactic Structure based 
approaches and WordNet-based approaches 
(Magnini et al, 2002; Ar?valo, 2002). Most 
references on NE task might be accessed at 
http://www.muc.saic.com. 
4.1 
                                                          
Processing MWEs with HABIL 
We have implemented HABIL, a tool for the 
treatment of multiword expressions (MWE), based 
3  Currently we are studying the MWLUs in the lexical 
database in order to determine which of them deserve to be 
parsed as separate elements. We have not defined yet how this 
will be formally represented in the database. 
on the features described in the lexical database. 
The most important features of HABIL are the 
following: 
? It deals with both contiguous and split 
MWEs. 
? It takes into account all the possible orders 
of the components (SRS). 
? It checks that inflectional restrictions are 
complied with. 
? It generates morphosyntactic interpretations 
for the MWE. 
This tool has two different components: on the 
one hand, there is a searching engine that identifies 
MWEs along the text, and, on the other hand, there 
is a morphosyntactic processor that assigns the 
corresponding interpretations to the components of 
the MWE. 
The morphosyntactic processor generates the 
interpretations for MWEs using category and 
subcategory information in the lexical database. 
When one of the components adds information to 
the MWE, the processor applies pattern-matching 
techniques to extract the corresponding 
morphological features of the analyses of that 
component, and these features are included in the 
interpretation of the MWE. Then, it replaces all the 
morphosyntactic interpretations of the components 
of unambiguous MWEs with the MWE 
interpretations. When MWEs are ambiguous, the 
new interpretations are added to the existing ones. 
HABIL also identifies and treats dates and 
numerical expressions. As they make up an open 
class, they are not obviously included in the lexical 
database. Furthermore, their components are 
always contiguous, have a very strict structure, and 
use a closed lexicon. Thus, it is quite easy to 
identify them using simple finite state transducers. 
For the morphosyntactic treatment of dates and 
numerical expressions, we use the morphosyntactic 
component of HABIL. These expressions may 
appear inflected and, in this case, the last 
component adds morphosyntactic features to the 
MWE. Finally, as they are unambiguous 
expressions, the processor discards the 
interpretations of the components and assigns them 
all the interpretations of the whole expression. 
4.2 Evaluation 
We performed several experiments using 650 
unambiguous, contiguous and ordered MWEs. We 
treated a reference corpus of around 36,000 tokens 
and there were 386 instances of 149 different 
MWEs. We also applied this process to a small test 
corpus of around 7,100 tokens in which there were 
87 instances of 45 MWEs. Taking both corpora 
into account, there were 473 instances of 167 
different MWEs, which amounted to 25% of the 
expressions considered, and 50% of the instances 
were ambiguous. Besides, only 14 dates and 12 
numerical expressions were found in the reference 
corpus, and 18 dates and 9 numerical expressions 
in the test corpus. 
 
  Ambiguity 
Rate 
Interpretations 
per Token 
Recall
word-
forms: 
before
after 
81.78% 
79.83% 
3.37 
3.30 
99.31%
99.31%
all 
tokens: 
before
after 
67.47% 
65.86% 
2.96 
2.89 
99.43%
99.43%
Table 1. Results of HABIL. 
The ambiguity measures of the test corpus are 
shown in Table 1. The ambiguity rate of word-
forms decreases by 2% and the average ambiguity 
rate by 1.5% after the processing of MWEs. It is 
important to point out that no error is made along 
the process. Furthermore, some important MWEs, 
more specifically, some complex sentence 
connectors that have highly ambiguous 
components, are correctly disambiguated. 
Bearing in mind the proportion of words treated 
by HABIL, these results help significantly in 
improving precision results of tagging and 
avoiding almost 10% of the errors, as shown in 
Table 2.  
 
 Precision Error 
before MWE processing 94.96% 5.04% 
after MWE processing 95.42% 4.58% 
Table 2. Tagging results. 
5 Future work 
After confirming the viability of the system and the 
good results in POS tagging, our main goal is to 
increase the number of MWLUs in the database, 
which will improve the identification of MWEs in 
corpora. 
A remaining difficulty that we are facing is the 
problem of ambiguous split MWEs. At present, we 
are creating a disambiguation grammar that will 
discard or select the multiword interpretations in 
ambiguous MWLUs. We are developing similar 
rules using both the Constraint Grammar 
formalism and finite state transducers (XFST tools, 
Kartunnen et al 1997). The very first rules seem to 
be quite effective. Soon, we will be assessing the 
first results, and then we will be able to choose the 
method that performs best with a lesser effort. 
Once we have chosen the best formalism, we 
intend to develop a comprehensive grammar that 
will disambiguate as many ambiguous MWLUs as 
possible. 
In addition, we are developing new processes 
after POS tagging in order to identify complex 
named entities and terminological units. These 
units constitute an open class and so their 
exhaustive inclusion in a database would not be 
viable. 
6 Conclusion 
7 
In this paper we have described a whole 
framework for the representation and treatment of 
MWEs, which is being currently used at the IXA 
Research Group to process this kind of expressions 
in general texts. Although it has been conceived 
and so far used for Basque, a highly inflected 
language, we think that it is general enough to be 
applied to other languages. 
A general representation schema for MWLUs at 
the lexical level has been proposed. This schema 
allows us to state which components a MWLU has 
and to formally encode all the different surface 
realizations it can adopt in the text. 
The problems that diverse information require-
ments in lemmatization and syntactic processing 
can eventually pose have been explained, and a 
possible solution for the representation of these 
phenomena has also been outlined. 
As for the processing aspects, we have 
described HABIL, the tool for the treatment of 
MWEs. HABIL processes MWEs based on their 
description in the lexical database, dealing also 
with some types of open class MWEs. 
One of the remaining problems when split and 
ambiguous MWEs are to be tagged is related with 
disambiguation procedures using Hidden Markov 
Models, which are not able to manage different 
paths with variable lengths. This problem can be 
solved using rule-based methods or lattice 
structures for tagging. 
Acknowledgements 
This research is being partially funded by the 
European Commission (MEANING project, IST-
2001-34460) and the Basque Government 
(Etortek-Hizking, Saiotek-Ihardetsi). 
References 
Aduriz I., Aranzabe M., Arriola J., D?az de Ilarraza A., 
Gojenola K., Oronoz M., Uria L. 2004. A cascaded 
syntactic analyser for Basque. Fifth International 
Conference on Intelligence Text Processing and 
Computational Linguistics (CICLing2004). Seoul, 
Korea. 
Aldezabal I., Ansa O., Arrieta B., Artola X., Ezeiza N., 
Hern?ndez G., Lersundi M. 2001. EDBL: a General 
Lexical Basis for the Automatic Processing of 
Basque. IRCS Workshop on Linguistic Databases. 
Philadelphia. 
Ar?valo M. 2002. MICE, un recurso para la resoluci?n 
de la an?fora. International Workshop on 
Computational Linguistics. http://www.lsi.upc.es/ 
~nlp/iwcl02. 
Breidt E., Segond F., Valetto G. 1996. Local grammars 
for the description of multi-word lexemes and their 
automatic recognition in texts. Proceedings of 
COMPLEX'96, 19-28. Budapest. 
Carmona J., Cervell S., M?rquez L., Mart? M.A., Padr? 
L., Placer R., Rodr?guez H., Taul? M., Turmo J. 
1998. An environment for morphosyntactic 
processing of unrestricted Spanish text. Proceedings 
of LREC'98. 915-922. 
Chinchor N. 1997. MUC-7 Named Entity Task 
Definition. Version 3.5. http://www.itl.nist.gov/iaui/ 
894.02/related_projects/muc/  
Collins M. 2002. Ranking Algorithms for Named-Entity 
Extraction: Boosting and the Voted Percetron. 
Proceedings of ACL-2002. 
Collins M., Singer Y. 1999. Unsupervised Models for 
Named Entity Classification. Proceedings of the 
Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing and Workshop on Very Large 
Corpora (EMNLP-VLC-99). 
Copestake A., Lambean F., Villavicencio A., Bond F., 
Baldwin T., Sag I., Flickinger D. 2002. Multiword 
Expressions: linguistic precision and reusability. 
Proceedings of the Third International Conference 
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 
2002), Las Palmas, pp. 1941-7. 
Ezeiza N. 2003. Corpusak ustiatzeko tresna 
linguistikoak. Euskararen etiketatzaile sintaktiko 
sendo eta malgua. PhD thesis, University of the 
Basque Country. 
Ezeiza N., Aduriz I., Alegria I., Arriola J.M., Urizar R.  
1998. Combining Stochastic and Rule-Based 
Methods for Disambiguation in Agglutinative 
Languages. COLING-ACL'98, Montreal (Canada). 
Fontenelle T., Adriaens G., De Braekeleer G. 1994. The 
Lexical Unit in the Metal? MT System, MT. The 
Netherlands. v9. 1-19. 
Jackendoff R. 1997. The Architecture of the Language 
Faculty. Cambridge, MA MIT Press. 
Karlsson F., Voutilainen A., Heikkila J,. Anttila A. 
1995. Constraint Grammar: A Language-
independent System for Parsing Unrestricted Text. 
Mouton de Gruyter. 
Karttunen L., Chanod J-P., Grefenstette G., Schiller A. 
1997. Regular expressions for language engineering. 
Natural Language Engineering, Cambridge 
University Press. 
Leech G., Garside R., Bryan M. 1994. CLAWS4: The 
tagging of the British National Corpus. Proceedings 
of COLING-94, 622-628. 
Magnini B., Negri M., Prevete R., Tanev H. 2002. A 
WordNet Approach to Named Entities Recognition. 
Proceeding of the Workshop SemaNet'02: Binding 
and Using Semantic Networks. 
Silva J., Dias G., Guillor? S., Lopes G. 1999. Using 
localmaxs algorithm for the extraction of contiguous 
and non-contiguous multiword lexical units. 
Proceedings of 9th Portuguese Conference in 
Artificial Inteligence, 21-24. 
Smadja F. 1993. Retrieving Collocations from Text: 
Xtract. Computational Linguistics, 19(1), 143-177. 
