Using Summarization for Automatic Briefing Generation 
Inderjeet Mani 
. Kristian Concepcion 
Linda Van Guilder 
The MITRE Corporation, W640 
11493 Sunset Hills Road 
Reston, VA 22090, USA 
{imani,kjc9,1cvg}@mitre.org 
Abst rac t  
We describe a system which automatically 
generates multimedia briefings from high- 
level outlines. The system uses 
summarization in content selection and 
creation, and in helping form a coherent 
narrative for the briefing. The approach does 
not require a domain knowledge base. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Document production is an important function in 
many organizations. In addition to instruction 
manuals, reports, courseware, system 
documentation, etc., briefings are a very 
common type of document product, often used 
in slide form as a visual accompaniment to a 
talk. Since so much time is spent by so many 
people in producing briefings, often under 
serious time constraints, any method to reduce 
the amount of time spent on briefing production 
could yield great gains in productivity. 
Briefings involve a high degree of condensation 
of information (e.g., no more than a few points, 
perhaps bul,leted, per slide), and they typically 
contain multimedia information. Many briefings 
have a stereotypical structure, dictated in part by 
the business rules of the organisation. For 
example, a commander may present a daily or 
weekly brief to her superiors, which is more in 
the nature of a routine update of activities ince 
the last briefing; or she may provide an action 
brief, which is triggered by a particular situation, 
and which consists of a situation update 
followed by arguments recommending a 
particular course of action. Further, the process 
of constructing a briefing may involve certain 
stereotypical activities, including culling 
information from particular sources, such as 
messages, news, web pages, previous briefings, 
etc. Thus, while part of the briefing content may 
be created anew by the briefing author 1, other 
parts of the briefing may be constructed from 
existing information sources. However, 
information in those sources need not 
necessarily be in the same form as needed by the 
briefing. 
All these characteristics of briefings make them 
attractive as an application of automatic 
summarization, which is aimed at producing a 
condensed, task-tailored representation f salient 
content in information sources. Often, the 
background information being used in a slide is 
quite considerable; the author needs to identify 
what's salient, presenting it in a succinct manner 
so as to fit on the slide, perhaps creating a 
graphic or other multimedia clip to do so. 
Automatic summarization; by definition, has a 
clear role to play here. A briefing usually 
involves a sequence of slides; as the summary 
becomes longer, it needs to form a coherent 
narrative, built around the prescribed structure. 
Finally, a briefing must strive, to the extent 
possible, to be persuasive and vivid, so that the 
point gets across. This in turn presents a further 
challenge for summarization: the ability to 
generate smoothly narrated, coherent 
summaries. 
I The noun "author" is used throughout the paper to 
designate a human author. 
_ 99  
It is therefore worthwhile investigating whether 
combining automatic summarization with 
intelligent multimedia presentation techniques 
can make the briefing generation amenable to 
full automation. In other words, the author 
should be able to use a computer program to 
generate an initial briefing, which she can then 
edit and revise as needed. The briefing can then 
be presented by the author if desired, or else 
directly by the computer (particularly useful if 
the briefing is being sent to someone lse). The 
starting point for this process would be a high- " 
level outline of the briefing on the part of the 
author. The outline would include references to
particular information sources that had to be, 
summarized in particular ways. If a program 
were able to take such outlines and generate 
briefings which didn't require extensive post- 
editing to massage into a state deemed 
acceptable for the task at hand, the program 
could be regarded as a worthwhile time saving 
tool. 
2 Approach 
Our work forms part of a larger DARPA-funded 
project aimed at improving analysis and 
decision-making in crisis situations by providing 
tools that allow analysts to collaborate to 
develop structured arguments in support of 
particular conclusions and to help predict likely 
future scenarios. These arguments, along with 
background evidence, are packaged together as 
briefing s to high-level decision-makers. In 
leveraging automatic methods along the lines 
suggested above to generate briefings, our 
approach needs to allow the analyst to take on as 
much of the briefing authoring as she wants to 
(e.g., it may take time for her to adapt o or trust 
the machine, or she may want the machine to 
present just part of the briefing). The analyst's 
organisation usually will instantiate one of 
several templates dictating the high-level 
structure of a briefing; for example, a briefing 
may always have to begin with an executive 
summary. The summarization methods also need 
to be relatively domain-independent, given that 
the subject matter of crises are somewhat 
unpredictable; an analyst in a crisis situation is 
likely to be inundated with large numbers of 
crisis-related news and intelligence r ports from 
many different sources. This means that we 
cannot require that a domain knowledge base be 
available to help the briefing generation process. 
Given these task requirements, we have adopted 
an approach that is flexible about 
accommodating different degrees of author 
involvement, that is relatively neutral about the 
rhetorical theory underlying the briefing 
structure (since a template may be provided by 
others), and that is domain-independent. I  our 
approach, the author creates the briefing outline, 
which is then fleshed out further by the system 
based on information i  the outline. The system 
fills out some content by invoking specified 
summarizers; it also makes decisions, when 
needed, about output media type; it introduces 
narrative lements to improve the coherence of 
the briefing; and finally, it assembles the final 
presentation, making decisions about spatial 
layout in the process. 
A briefing is represented asa tree. The structure 
of the tree represents he rhetorical structure of 
the briefing. Each node has a label, which offers 
a brief textual description of the node. Each leaf 
node has an associated goal, which, when 
realized, provides content for that node. There 
are two kinds of goals: content-level goals and 
narrative-level goals. Content-level goals are 
also of two kinds: retrieve goals, which retrieve 
existing media objects of a particular type (text, 
audio, image, audio, video) satisfying some 
description, and create goals, which create new 
media objects of these types using programs 
(called summarization filters). Narrative-level 
goals introduce descriptions of content at other 
nodes: they include captions and running text for 
media objects, and segues, which are rhetorical 
moves describing a transition to a node. 
Ordering relations reflecting temporal and 
spatial ayout are defined on nodes in the tree. 
Two coarse-grained relations, seq for 
precedence, and par for simultaneity, are used to 
specify a temporal ordering on the nodes in the 
tree. As an example, temporal constraints for a 
(tiny) tree of 9 nodes may be expressed as: 
<ordering> <seq> 
<par>7</par> 
<par>8</par> 
<par>3</par> 
<par>4 5</par> 
<par>6</par> 
100 
<par>l 9</par> 
<par>2</par> 
</seq> </ordering> 
The tree representation, along with the temporal 
constraints, can be rendered in text as XML; we 
refer to the XML representation as a script. 
@ 
Player i~ 
User 
Interface 
~ Tem~t~ 
r I Vail dator \[ 
Co 
Cr~ ~ 
C~ound ~t  
ixe utor I 
XMI1 resentati.on \[ 
~k~ Generator / ,  
' Brid"mg 
Generator 
Figure 1: System Architecture 
The overall architecture of our system is shown 
in Figure 1, The user creates the briefing outline 
in the form of a script, by using a GUI. The 
briefing generator takes the script as input. The 
Script Validator applies an XML parser to the 
script, to check for syntactic orrectness. It then 
builds a tree representation for the script, which 
represents the briefing outline, with temporal 
constraints attached to the leaves of the tree. 
Next, a Content Creator takes the input tree and 
expands it by introducing narrative-level goals 
including segues to content nodes, and rtmning 
text and captions describing media objects at 
content nodes. Running text and short captions 
are generated from meta-information associated 
with media objects, by using shallow text 
generation methods (canned text). The end result 
of content selection (which has an XML 
representation callod a ground script) is that the 
complete tree has been fully specified, with all 
the create and retrieve goals fully specified , 
with all the output media types decided. The 
Content Creator is thus responsible for both 
content selection and creation, in terms of tree 
structure and node content. 
Then, a Content Executor executes all the create 
and retrieve goals. This is a very simple step, 
resulting in the generation of all the media 
objects in the presentation, except for the audio 
files for speech to be synthesized. Thus, this step 
results in realization of the content at the leaves 
of the tree. 
Finally, the Presentation Generator takes the 
tree which is output from Content Execution, 
along with its temporal ordering constraints, and 
generates the spatial ayout of the presentation. 
If no spatial ayout constraints are specified (the 
default is to not specify these), the system 
allocates pace using a simple method based on 
the temporal layout for nodes which have spatial 
manifestations. Speech synthesis is also carried 
out here. Once the tree is augmented with spatial 
layout constraints, it is translated by the 
Presentation Generator into SMIL 2 
(Synchronized Multimedia Integration 
Language) (SMIL 99), a W3C-developod 
extension of HTML that can be played by 
standard multimedia players (such as Real 3 and 
Grins 4. This step thus presents the realized 
content, synthesizing it into a multimedia 
presentation laid out spatially and temporally. 
This particular architecture, driven by the above 
project requirements, does not use planning as 
an overall problem-solving strategy, as planning 
requires domain knowledge. It therefore differs 
from traditional intelligent multimedia 
presentation planners, e.g., (Wahlster etal. 93). 
Nevertheless, the system does make a number o f  
intelligent decisions in organizing and 
coordinating presentation decisions. These are 
discussed next, after which we turn to the main 
point of the paper, namely the leveraging of 
summarization in automatic briefing generation. 
2 h. ttp://www.w3.org/AudioVideo/ 
3 www.real.com 
4 www.oratrix.com 
_ J  
101 
3 Intelligent Multimedia Presentation 
Generation 
The author of a briefing may choose to flesh out 
as little of the tree as desired, with the caveat 
that the temporal ordering relations for non- 
narrative nodes need to be provided by her. 
When a media object is generated at a node by a 
create goal, the running text and captions are 
generated by the system. The motivation for this 
is obvious: when a summarization filter (which 
is a program under our control) is generating a
media object, we can often provide sufficient 
recta-information about hat object o generate a
short caption and some running text. By default, 
all segues and spatial layout relations are also 
specified by the system, so the author does not 
have to know about these unless she wants to. 
Finally, the decision as to when to produce 
audio, when not specified by the author, is left to 
the system. 
When summarization filters are used (for create 
goals), the media type of the output is specified 
as a parameter to the filter. This media type may 
be converted to some other type by the system, 
e.g., text to speech conversion using Festival 
(Taylor et al 98). By default, all narrative nodes 
attempt to realize their goals as a speech media 
type, using rules based on text length and 
tnmcatability to less than 250 bytes to decide 
when to use text-to-speech. The truncation 
algorithm is based on dropping syntactic 
constituents, using a method similar to (Mani et 
al. 99). Captions are always realized, in addition, 
as text (i.e., they have a text realization and a. 
possible audio realization). 
Spatial layout is decided in the Presentation 
Generator, after all the individual media objects 
are created along with their temporal constraints 
by the Content Executor. The layout algorithm 
walks through the temporal ordering in 
sequence, allocating a segment o each set of 
objects that is designated to occur 
simultaneously (grouped by par in the temporal 
constraints). Each segment can have up to 4 
frames, in each of which a media object is 
displayed (thus, no more than 4 media objects 
can be displayed at the same time). Since media 
objects declared to be simultaneous (using par) 
in the temporal constraints will go together in a 
separate segment, the temporal constraints 
determine what elements are grouped together in 
a segment. The layout within a segment handles 
two special cases. Captions are placed directly 
undemeath their associated media object. 
Running text, when realized as text, is placed 
beside the media object being described, so that 
they are paired together visually. Thus, 
coherence of a segment is influenced mainly by 
the temporal constraints (which have been 
fleshed out by the Content Creator to include 
narrative nodes), with further handling of special 
cases. Of course, an individual summarization 
filter may choose to coordinate component 
multimedia objects in particular ways in the 
course of generating a composite multimedia 
object. 
Details such as duration and onset of particular 
frames are specified in the translation to SMIL. 
Duration is determined by the number of frames 
present in a segment, unless there is an audio 
media object in the segment (this media object 
may have a spatial representation, e.g., as an 
audio icon, or it may not). If an audio media 
object occurs in a frame, the duration of all 
media objects in that frame is equal to the length 
of all the audio files in the segment. If there is 
no audio present in a segment, he duration is ot 
seconds (or has a default value of 5) times the 
number of frames created. 
4 Summarization Filters 
As mentioned above, create goals are satisfied 
by summarization filters, which create new 
media objects ummarizing information sources. 
These programs are called summarization filters 
because in the course of condensing information, 
they take input information and turn it into some 
more abstract and useful representation, filtering 
out unimportant information. Such filters 
provide a novel way of carrying out content 
selection and creation for automated 
presentation generation. 
Our approach relies on component-based 
software composition, i.e., assembly of software 
units that have contractually specified interfaces 
that can be independently deployed and reused. 
The idea of assembling complex language 
processing programs out of simpler ones is 
102 
hardly new; however, by employing current 
industry standards to specify the interaction 
between the components, we simultaneously 
increase the robustness of the system, ensure the 
reusability of individual components and create 
a more fully plug-and-play capability. Among 
the core technology standards that support his 
plug-and-play component assembly capability 
are (a) Java interfaces, used to specify functions 
that all summarization components must 
implement in order to be used in the system, (b) 
the JavaBeans standard, which allows the 
parameters and methods of individual 
components o be inspected by the system and 
revealed to the users (c) the XML markup 
standard, which we have adopted as an inter- 
component communication language. Using 
these technologies, legacy or third-party 
summarizers are incorporated into the system by 
"wrapping" them so as to meet the interface 
specification of the system. These technologies 
also make possible a graphical environment to 
assemble and configure complex summarization 
filters from individual summarization 
components. 
Among the most important wins over the 
traditional "piping" approach to filter assembly 
is the ability to impose build-time restrictions on 
the component assembly, disallowing "illegal" 
compositions, e.g. component X cannot provide 
input to component Y unless X's output type 
corresponds to Y's input type. Build-time 
restrictions uch as these play a clear role in 
increasing the overall robustness of the run-time 
summarization system. Another build-time win 
lies in the ability of JavaBeans to be serialized, 
i.e., written to disk in such a way as to preserve 
~he state of its parameters settings, ensuring that 
every component in the system can be 
configured and run at different times 
independently of whether the component 
provides aparameter file facility. 
Establishing the standard functions required of a 
summarization filter is challenging on several 
fronts. One class of functions required by the  
interface is necessary to handle the technicalities 
of exchanging information between otherwise 
discrete components. This set includes 
functions for discovering a component's input 
and output types, for handling messages, 
exceptions and events passed between 
components and for interpreting XML based on 
one or more system-wide document type 
definitions (DTDs). The other, more interesting 
set of functions gets to the core of 
summarization functionality. Selecting these 
functions involves identifying parameters likely 
to be broadly applicable across most or all 
summarizers and finding ways to group them 
and/or to generalize them. This is desirable in 
order to reduce the burden on the end user of 
understanding the subtle differences between the 
various settings in the summarizers available to 
her. 
An. example of the difficulty inherent in this 
endeavor is provided by the compression 
(summary length divided by source length) vs. 
reduction (l's complementof compression) vs. 
target length paradigm. Different summarizers 
will implement one or more of these. The 
wrapper maps from the high-level interface 
function, where the application/user can specify 
either compression ortarget length, but not both, 
to the individual summarizer's representation. 
Thus, a user doesn't need to know which 
representation(s) a particular summarizer uses 
for reduction/compression. 
A vanilla summarization Bean includes the 
following functionality, which every summarizer 
must be able to provide methods for: 
source: documents to be summarized 
(this can be a single document, or a 
collection) 
reduction-rate: either summary 
size/source size, or target length 
audience: user-focused or generic 
(user-focused requires the specification 
of a bag of terms, which can be of 
different types) 
output-type: specific data formats 
(specified by DTDs) 
The above are parameters which we expect all 
summarizers to support. More specialized 
summarizer beans can be constructed to reflect 
groupings of summarizers. Among other 
parameters are output-fluency, which specifies 
whether a textual summary is to be made up of 
passages (sentences, paras, blocks), named 
entities, lists of words, phrases, or topics, etc. 
Given that definitions of summarization i more 
103 
theoretical terms have not been entirely 
satisfactory (Mani 2000), it is worth noting that 
the above vanilla Bean provides an operational 
definition of what a summarizer is. 
text, and segues. The captions and running text, 
when not provided by the filters, are provided by 
the script input. In the case of retrieve goals, the 
objects may not have any meta-information, i  
which case a default caption and running-text is
generated. Clearly, a system's explanatory 
narrative will be enhanced by the availability of 
rich meta-information. 
The segues are provided by the system. For 
example, an item with a label "A biography of 
bin Laden" could result in a generated segue 
"Here is a biography of bin Laden". The 
Content Creator, when providing content for 
narrative nodes, uses a variety o f  different 
canned text patterns. For the above example, the 
pattern would be "Here is @6.label", where 6 is 
the number of a non-narrative node, with label 
being its label. 
Figure 2: Summarization Filter 
Composition 
In addition to its practical utility in the ability to 
assimilate, combine and reuse components in 
different combinations, and to do so within a 
GUI, this approach is interesting because it 
allows powerful summarization functions to be 
created by composing together simpler tools. 
(Note that this is different from automatically 
finding the best combination, which our system 
does not address). For example, Figure 2 
illustrates a complex filter created by using a 
GUI to compose together a named entity 
extractor, a date extractor, a component which 
discovers significant associations between the 
two and writes the result to a table, and a 
visualizer which plots the results as a graph. The 
resulting summarizer takes in a large collection 
of documents, and produces as a summary a 
graph (a jpeg) of salient named entity mentions 
over time. Each of its components can be easily 
reused within the filter composition system to 
build other summarizers. 
5 Narrative Summarization 
Peru Action Brief 
1 Preamble 
2 Situation Assessment 
2.1 Chronology of Events 
2.1.2 Late st document summary 
create C'summarize -generic 
-compression. 1 ~peru~p32") 
2.2 Biographies 
2.2.1 Biography of Victor Polay 
2.2.1.1 Picture of @2.2.2.percon 
retrieve("\]) Arawdata~,polay.jpg ") 
2.2.1.2 Biography of @~2.2.2.person 
create("summarize -bio -length 350 
-span multi -person 
@_~2.2.2.person - ut table 
/peru/* ") 
3 Coda 
"This briefing has aszessed aspects of the 
situation in Peru. Overall, the crisis 
appears to be worsening." 
Figure 3: Input Script 
As mentioned above, the system can construct a
narrative to accompany the briefing. Narrative 
nodes are generated to cover captions, running 
104 
Peru Action Brief 
1 Preamble 
audio -- "ln this briefin~ 1 will go over 
the @2.1abel. This ~?ill cover 
@2.1.1abel and @,2. 3.1.1aber" 
2 Situation Assessment 
2. l "An overvie~? of the ~2.2.label" 
(Meta-2.2) 
2.2 C-'hfonology of Events 
2.2.1 audio = "Here is the @2.2.2.laber" 
(1VIeta- 2.2.2) 
2.2.2 text = "Latest document summary" 
audio = text = 
create ("automatize -generic 
-compression .1/reru/p32") 
2.3 Biographies 
2.3.1 audio = 
"A profile of @2. 3.2.person" 
('NIeta-2.3.2) 
2.3.2 Biography of Victor~olay 
2.3.2.1 audio = text = 
"A file photo of 
@,2.3.2.person" 
(Meta-2.3.2.2) 
2.3.2.2 Picture of @,2.&2.person 
image = 
retrie ve("D Arawdata~polay.jpg") 
2.3.2.3 audio = text = 
"ProJile of @2. 3. 2.person" 
(Meta- 2.3.2.3) 
2.3.2.4 Biography of @2. 3.2.person 
audio = text = 
create(%-ummarize-bio length 350 
-span multi -person 
@_r2.Z 2.person -out tab& 
/rend* ") 
3 Coda 
audio = "This briefing has assessed 
a~79ect~r of the situation in Peru. Overall, 
the crisis appears to be ~orr"ening." 
<seq> 
</seq> 
<par> 1 </par> 
<par>2.2.1 2.2.2</par> 
<par>2.3.1 <lpar> 
<par>2.3.2.1 2.3.2.2 
2.3.2.3 2.3.2.4</par> 
<par~3</par> 
Figure 4: Ground Script 
All segue nodes are by default generated 
automatically by the system, based on node 
labels. We always introduce a segue node at the 
beginning of the presentation (called a preamble 
node), which provides a segue covering the 
"crown" of the tree, i.e., all nodes upto a 
particular depth d from the root (d=2) are 
marked with segue nodes. A segue node is also 
produced at the end (called a coda). (Both 
preamble and segue can of course be specified 
by the author if desired). 
For introducing intervening segue nodes, we use 
the following algorithm based on the distance 
between odes and the height in the tree, We 
traverse the non-narrative l aves of the tree in 
their temporal order, evaluating each pair of 
adjacent nodes A and B where A precedes B 
temporally. A segue is introduced between 
nodes A and B if either (a) the maximum of the 
2 distances from A and B to their least common 
ancestor isgreater than 3 nodes or (b) the sum of 
the 2 distances from A and B to the least 
common ancestor isgreater than 4 nodes. This is 
less intrusive than introducing segues at random 
or between every pair of successive nodes, and 
appears to perform better than introducing a
segue at each depth of the tree. 
6 An Example 
We currently have a working version of the 
system with a variety of different single and 
multi-document summarization filters. Figure 3 
shows an input script created by an author (the 
scripts in Figure 3 and 4 are schematic 
representations of the scripts, rather than the raw 
XML). The script includes two create goals, one 
with a single-document generic summarization 
filter, the other with a multi-document user- 
focused summarization filter. Figure 4 shows the 
ground script which was created automatically 
by the Content Creator component. Note the 
addition of media type specifications, the 
introduction of narrative nodes, and the 
extension of the temporal constraints. The final 
presentation generated is shown in Figure 5. 
Here we show screen dumps of the six SMIL 
segments produced, with the audio if any for 
each segment indicated in this paper next to an 
audio icon. 
105 
7 Status 
The summarization filters have incorporated 
several summarizers, including some that have 
been evaluated in the DARPA SUMMAC 
conference (Mani et al 99-1). These carry out 
both single-document and multi-document 
summarization, and include a preliminary 
biographical summarizer we have developed. 
The running text for the biography table in the 
second-last segment of Figure 5 is produced 
from meta-information i the table XML 
generated by the biographical summarizer. The 
production method for running text uses canned 
text which should work for any input table 
conforming to that DTD. 
The summarization filters are. being tested as 
part of a DARPA situated test with end-users. 
The briefing generator itself has been used 
internally to generate numerous briefings, and 
has been demonstrated aspart of the DARPA 
system. We also expect to carry out an 
evaluation to assess the extent to which the 
automation described here provides efficiency 
gains in briefing production. 
8 Related Work 
There is a fair amount of work on automatic 
authoring of multimedia presentations, e.g., 
(Wahlster et al 93), (Dalai et al 96), (Mittal et 
al. 95), (Andre and Rist 97) 5. These efforts 
differ from ours in two ways: first, unlike us, 
they are not open-domain; and, second, they 
don't use summarization components. While 
such efforts are extremely sophisticated 
compared to us in multimedia presentation 
planning and fine-grained coordination and 
synchronization capabilities, many of the 
components used in those efforts are clearly 
applicable to our work. For example, (Andre and 
Rist 96) include methods for leveraging lifelike 
characters in this process; these characters can 
be leveraged in our work as well, to help 
personify the computer narrator. In addition, our 
captions, which are very short, rely on canned 
text based on node labels in the initial script, or 
based on shallow meta-information generated by 
the summarization filter (in XML) along with 
the created media object. (Mittal e t  al. 95) 
describe avariety of strategies for generation of 
longer, more explanatory captions, some of 
which may be exploited in our work by 
deepening the level of recta-information, at least 
for summarization components developed by us. 
In our ability to leverage automatic 
summarization, our work should be clearly 
distinguished from work which attempts to 
format a summary (from an XML 
representation) into something akin to a 
Powerpoint briefing, e.g., (Nagao and Hasida 
98). Our work, by contrast, is focused on using 
summarization i  generating briefings from an 
abstract outline. 
9 Conclusion 
We have described methods for leveraging 
automatic summarization in the automatic 
generation of multimedia briefings. This work 
has taken an open-domain approach, in order to 
meet the requirements of the DARPA 
application we are involved with. We believe 
there is a stronger role that NL generation can 
play in the narrative aspects of our briefings, 
which currently rely for the most part on canned 
text. Our future work on description merging in 
biographical summaries, and on introducing 
referring expressions into the narrative nodes, 
would in effect ake advantage of more powerful 
generation methods, without sacrificing open- 
domain capabilities. This may require much 
richer meta-information specifications than the 
ones we currently use. 
Finally, we have begun the design of the Script 
Creator GUI (the only component in Figure l 
remaining to be built). This will allow the author 
to create scripts for the briefing generator 
(instead of editing templates by hand), by laying 
out icons for media objects in temporal order. A 
user will be able to select a "standard" briefing 
template from a menu, and then view it in a 
briefing/template structure ditor. The user can 
then provide content by adding annotations to 
any node in the briefing template. The user will 
have a choice of saving the edit version in 
template form, or in SMIL or possibly Microsoft 
Powerpoint format. 
106 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Peru Act ion  Br ie f  ! ;! 
? Exeeadv? Smmmu'y  
o Hypothes is  
? S i tuat ion  Assessmml  :i 
o Ehromdo.e~ o f  \]~','?nls i i  
o B iograph les  :,~ 
? SWuctm-ed A~,mneats  :~ 
? .4 Jtentadve V iews  ' i  
? Der i s ion ,  ~:i 
.<e In this briefing I will go over the situation 
assessment. This will cover an overview of the 
chronology of  events and a profile of Victor 
Polay. 
"e Next, a biography of Victor Polay. 
::. Here is an overview of the chronology of 
events. 
I I III I II Illlll i 
I :  (3qN-  Peruv ian  cebe l~ re leet~e 2 bo , tages  - Dec.  IS~h ~i i  
3; JUOOUC ZOO hOS~flge~ ~.1~ d tn51cle the  h~ 0 ~' Japeme:~e ::~ 
J t~loan=edor Boc lh l=a kok i ,  vhece  Tupec  Jtz~l~u rebe l= were  ~! 
Victor Polay, also known as Comandante 
Rolando, is the Tupac Amaru founder, a
Peruvian guerrilla commander, a former ebel 
leader, and the Tupac Amaru rebels' top leader. 
He studied in both France and Spain. His wife is 
Rosa Polay and his mother is Otilia Campos de 
Polay. His associates include Alan Garcia. 
Here is the latest document summary. 
This briefing has assessed aspects of  the 
situation in Peru. Overall, the crisis appears to 
be worsening. 
Figure 5: Presentation 
107 
References 
Andre, E. and Rist, T. (1997) Towards a New 
Generation of Hypermedia Systems: Extending 
Automated Presentation Design for Hypermedia. 
L. Dybkjaer, ed., Proceedings of the Third Spoken 
Dialogue and Discourse Workshop, Topics in 
Natural Interactive Systems 1. The Maersk Me- 
Kinney Moiler Institute for Production 
Technology, Odense University, Denmark, pp. 10- 
27. 
Dalai, M., Feiner, S., McKeown, K., Pan, S., Zhou, 
M., Hollerer, T., Shaw, J., Feng, Y., and Fromer, J. 
(1996) Negotiation for Automated Generation of 
Temporal MultimediaPresentations. Proceedings 
of ACM Multimedia '96. 
Mani, 1., Gates, B., and Bloedorn, E. (1999) 
Improving Summaries by Revising Them. 
Proceedings of the 37 ~ Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Lihguistics, College 
Park, MD, pp. 558-565. 
Mani, 1., Firmin, T., House, D., Klein, G., Sundheim, 
B., and Hirschman, L. (1999) The TIPSTER 
SUMMA C Text Summarization Evaluation. 
Proceedings of EACL'99, Bergen, Norway, pp. 77- 
85. 
Mani, 1. (2000)Automatic Text Summarization. John 
Benjamins Publishing Company. To appear. 
Mittal, V., Roth, S., Moore, J., Mattis, J., and 
Carenini, G. (1995) Generating Explanatory 
Captions for Information Graphics. Proceedings of 
the International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence (IJCAr95), pp. 1276-1283. 
Nagao, K. and K. Hasida, K. (1998) Automatic Text 
Summarization Based on the Global Document 
Annotation. Proceedings of COLING'98, Montreal, 
pp. 917-921. 
Power, R. and Scott, D. (1998) Multilingual" 
Authoring using Feedback Texts. Proceedings of 
COLING'98, Montreal, pp. 1053-1059. 
Taylor, P., Black, A., and Caley, R. (1998) The 
architecture of the Festival Speech Synthesis 
System. Proceedings of the Third ESCA Workshop 
on Speech Synthesis, Jenolan Caves, Australia, pp. 
147-151. 
Wahlster, W., Andre, E., Finkler, W., Profitlich, H.- 
J., and Rist, T. (1993) Plan-Based Integration of 
Natural Language and Graphics Generation. AI 
Journal, 63. 
108 
I 
l 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
