A Dynamic Programming Approach to  
Document Length Constraints 
 
Keith Vander Linden 
Department of Computer Science 
Calvin College 
Grand Rapids, MI 49546, USA 
kvlinden@calvin.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
Natural language generation (NLG) applica-
tions must occasionally deliver rhetorically 
coherent output under length constraints. For 
example, certain types of documents must fit 
on a single webpage, on a cell phone screen, 
or into a fixed number of printed pages.  To 
date, applications have achieved this goal by 
structuring their content as a rhetorical tree 
and using a greedy algorithm to pick the dis-
course elements to include in the final docu-
ment.  Greedy algorithms are known to pick 
sub-optimal solutions. This paper presents an 
alternate approach based on dynamic pro-
gramming.  
1 Document Length Constraints 
A number of language engineering applications 
have addressed the issue of generating coherent 
documents under length constraints, including 
NLG applications, e.g., SciFly (Paris, et al 2008), 
STOP (Reiter, 2000), ILEX (O'Donnell, 1997), and 
summarization applications, e.g., Daniel Marcu 
(1999). These applications all address the issue by 
representing the content to be delivered as a rhetor-
ical tree and using some formulation of a greedy 
algorithm that satisfies the length constraints by 
either selecting the most important elements of the 
tree or pruning the least important elements.1 
As an example, consider the two sample outputs 
shown in Figure 1.  Both outputs were produced by 
                                                          
1 The STOP system identifies the problem as a bin-packing 
problem but then describes its mechanism using terms com-
mon to greedy algorithms (Reiter, 2000). 
a prototype that delivers information about a com-
puter science department to prospective students 
via email; cf. (Paris, et al 2008). The output is 
composed of coarse-grained elements (e.g., im-
ages, phrases and paragraphs) and is formatted in 
post-card size using HTML and includes hyper-
links to related pages on the main department web-
site. The goal is to get the prospective student to 
visit the main website. The key difference between 
the two examples is their length.  The one on the 
left, which is shorter, was generated using a greedy 
algorithm.  The one on the right, which uses the 
space more fully, was generated using a dynamic 
programming algorithm. The greedy algorithm 
included the ?FAQ? section because it fit at the 
time; the dynamic algorithm realized that waiting 
to include the ?News? and the ?Alumni? sections 
would be a more effective use of the space. 
This paper discusses the mechanisms used to 
generate these two examples.  It starts with a dis-
cussion of the rhetorical tree used as input for both 
sample outputs, and then details the algorithms 
used to satisfy the length constraint. The length 
constraint problem is viewed as a precedence-
constrained 0-1 knapsack problem, and the algo-
rithm is formulated using dynamic programming. 
2 Rhetorical Structure Trees 
Researchers have long viewed rhetorical trees 
as a means of structuring textual output and of dis-
tinguishing those elements that should be ex-
pressed (often called nuclei) from those that could 
be omitted (often called satellites) (Spark-Jones, 
1993), and there is psycholinguistic evidence that 
this view is valid (Marcu, 1999). This paper will 
177
build its trees using Rhetorical Structure Theory 
(RST), the most common of the theories deployed 
for rhetorical structuring (Mann & Thompson, 
1988). 
Figure 2 shows the annotated RST tree used as 
the basis for generating both of the sample outputs 
shown in Figure 1. The highest level of the tree 
shows a template that affixes the header image as a 
preparation satellite and the footer as a background 
satellite.  The next level down shows the structure 
of the content of the email.  Each node is asso-
ciated with a block of text or an image in the out-
put.  The initial line (i.e., ?Ima Sample??) is 
represented as a satellite setting the context for the 
main content in the nucleus (i.e., ?Thanks for your 
interest??).  There then follows a set of six elabo-
ration satellites, each with internal structures of its 
own (i.e., an image/caption pair, which is not rea-
lized in either sample output because of its cost, 
and a set of five topic/hyperlink pairs).  
Each expressible node in the figure has an esti-
mated length, denoted as a cost c measured in pix-
els, and an estimated importance, denoted as a 
benefit b. The cost of an expressible node is esti-
mated based on the size of the text/image and spe-
cified format.  Generally, the leaves are the 
expressible nodes, but in the case where multiple 
leaves should be expressed together, the RST tree 
places a combined cost value in the parent node 
(e.g., the header and footer should be expressed 
together or not at all, so their parent node shows 
their combined cost of 100 pixels). 
The benefit setting, denoted b(n,D), for a node n 
in a discourse tree D is formulated as follows: 
 
 
 
Here, P(n) denotes the parent of node n and W(r) 
denotes the weight of the satellite?s rhetorical rela-
tion (e.g., in this paper, more important relations 
like context have weight 0.5 and less important 
relations like preparation, elaboration, background 
have weight 0.4). This formulation gives higher 
benefit values to nuclei.  No penalty is placed on 
nodes lower in the tree. This formulation is imple-
mented as a recursive decent algorithm whose val-
ues for the samples can be seen in Figure 2. 
The tree is produced by a Moore and Paris-
styled text planner (Moore & Paris, 1993).  Select-
ing the appropriate content from a content man-
agement system, structuring it appropriately and 
estimating the cost/benefit of each node are inter-
esting problems, but are not the focus of this paper.   
In preparation for the length constraint algo-
rithm, the system creates a queue of expressible 
nodes, each with its cost and benefit values.  Nuc-
lei are queued before satellites. 
 
Figure 1. Two Sample Outputs ? The greedy output is on the left, the dynamic is on the right. 
 
 
178
3 A Length Constraint Algorithm 
This paper views the length constraint problem as a 
precedence-constrained 0-1 knapsack problem 
(Samphaiboon & Yamada, 2000); the output im-
ages/paragraphs are viewed as items for the knap-
sack, their length in pixels is viewed as their cost, 
and their rhetorical importance is viewed as their 
benefit. The prohibition against expressing a satel-
lite without also expressing its governing nuclei is 
viewed as a precedence constraint on the items. 
A common formulation for this problem is to 
define the solution in terms of the maximum bene-
fit for a subset of the first k nodes given a maxi-
mum cost c as follows: 
 
 
 
Here,  and  are the benefit and cost of node k 
respectively, and  is defined by b(n, D) above. If 
the node k will fit within the maximum cost con-
straint c, then B(k, c) is defined as the maximum of 
either the:  
 previous solution for the first k-1 nodes not 
including node k; or  
 previous solution with space for  node k. 
A dynamic programming algorithm that imple-
ments this formulation can be specified as follows: 
 
Function: format(C, Q, T) 
Input:  
 A positive integer maximum cost limit C 
 A queue Q of N nodes with positive integer 
cost (ci) and real benefit (bi) settings  
 A tree T specifying rhetorical relationships 
Output: 
 A 2-D array B[n+1, c+1] specifying the val-
ues for B(k,c) as defined above 
 
for c ? 0 to C   
B[0,c] ? 0 
for k ? 1 to N 
for c ? 0 to C  
B[0,c] ? B[0,c-1] 
for c ? ck to C 
if (not unexpressedNucleus(B,c,k,T) and 
     B[k-1,c-ci] + bi > B[k-1,c]) 
B[k,c] ? B[k-1,c-ci] + bi 
 
The format(C, Q, T) algorithm declares a 2-D array 
of maximum benefit values and sets the first row to 
0s. For each expressible node k in Q (rows 1 
through N), it copies the previous row of benefit 
values and then, for each cost value above the cost 
of the current node (columns ck through C), it ei-
ther keeps the previous benefit value without node 
k or inserts the benefit that includes node k.  
Given the array of maximal benefit values out-
put by format(C, Q, T), the following algorithm 
will compute set of nodes corresponding to a given 
benefit value: 
 
Figure 2. Sample Discourse Tree for the Output in Figure 1 with Cost/Benefit Settings 
 
179
Function: output(B, k, c) 
Input:  
 An array B of maximal benefit values 
 A node number k  
 B?s maximum cost value c. 
Output: 
 The set of nodes with total cost c and total 
benefit B(k, c). 
 
while k,c > 0 
if B[k,c] ? B[k-1,c] 
include nodek 
c ? c - ck 
k ? k - 1 
 
The use of unexpressedNucleus(B,c,k,T) in the 
format(C, Q, T) if-condition is an extension of the 
standard algorithm for the 0-1 knapsack problem 
that addresses rhetorical precedence constraints. In 
RST-based NLG, satellites are not expressed with-
out their nuclei. For example, we would not want 
to include the context expression (i.e., ?Ima Sam-
ple??) without also including its nucleus (i.e., 
?Thanks for??).  Note that these ?governing? nuc-
lei are not always at the same level in the tree (e.g., 
the header image satellite is dependent upon the 
?Thanks for?? nucleus one level down).  
The unexpressedNucleus(B,c,k,T) condition im-
plements this constraint by requiring that 
 before including any 
node n, where G(n,T) is the set of governing nuclei 
for n in tree T and is formulated as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Here, G+() looks up the tree, G-() looks down the 
tree, P(n) is n?s parent node, and NC(n) is the set 
of n?s nucleus children. G() includes only express-
ible nodes.  G() can be implemented by a set of 
three mutually recursive functions and can be me-
moized to improve efficiency.  
The greedy algorithm used for the output in Fig-
ure 1 uses the same input and a precedence queue 
of expressible nodes ordered by decreasing benefit. 
4 Analysis and Conclusions 
The dynamic programming algorithm will always 
perform at least as well as the greedy algorithm, 
and sometimes better. For example, given a total 
cost maximum of 325, the greedy algorithm?s out-
put in Figure 1 has total cost/benefit: 297/3.7, 
while the dynamic algorithm?s output has 316/4.1. 
Dynamic programming algorithms are noto-
riously expensive in terms of space and time re-
quirements.  They are pseudo-polynomial time, 
O(NC), but if N and C are ?small? they can work 
in practice. Typical document formatting problems 
with dozens of expressible nodes and hundreds of 
pixels of length are tractable. 
Further work on this project will follow a num-
ber of directions, including: (1) doing a more com-
plete quantitative analysis of the algorithm; (2) 
figuring out a more principled way to assign bene-
fit values; (3) generalizing the problem to two di-
mensions and multiple pages; (4) drawing the 
content from a content management system.  
References 
Mann, W. C., & Thompson, S. A. (1988). Rhetorical 
structure theory: Toward a functional theory of text 
organization. Text , 8 (3), 243-281. 
Marcu, D. (1999). Discourse trees are good indicators of 
importance in text. In I. Mani, & M. Maybury (Ed.), 
Advances in Automatic Text Summarization (pp. 
123-136). MIT Press. 
Moore, J. D., & Paris, C. L. (1993). Planning text for 
advisory dialogues: Capturing intentional and 
rhetorical information. Computational Linguistics , 
19 (4), 651-694. 
O'Donnell, M. (1997). Variable Length On-Line 
Document Generation. Proceedings of the Sixth 
European Workshop on NLG. Duisburg, Germany: 
Gehard Mercator University. 
Paris, C. L., Colineau, N., Lampert, A., & Giralt Duran, 
J. (2008). Generation under Space Constraints. 
Sydney: CSIRO. 
Reiter, E. (2000). Pipelines and Size Constraints. 
Computational Linguistics , 26 (2), 251-259. 
Samphaiboon, N., & Yamada, T. (2000). Heuristic and 
Exact Algorithms for the Precedence-Constrained 
Knapsack Problem. Journal of Optimization Theory 
and Applications , 105 (3), 659-676. 
Spark-Jones, K. (1993). What might be in a summary? 
In Knorz, Krause, & Womser-Hacker (Ed.), 
Proceedings of Information Retrieval 93: Von der 
modellierung zur anwendung (pp. 9-26). 
Universitatsverlag Konstanz. 
180
