Book Review
Introduction to Information Retrieval
Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hinrich Schu?tze
(Stanford University, Yahoo! Research, and University of Stuttgart)
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008, xxi+482 pp; hardbound,
ISBN 978-0-521-86571-5, $60.00
Reviewed by
Olga Vechtomova
University of Waterloo
Introduction to Information Retrieval by Manning, Raghavan, and Schu?tze is an up-to-
date, thorough, and systematic introduction to information retrieval (IR) from a com-
puter science perspective. Written as a textbook, its main audience is graduate and
senior undergraduate students taking IR courses. The book will also be valuable to
researchers in other computer science fields, such as computational linguistics, as well
as to professional practitioners wishing to delve into the IR field.
The book is structured into 21 chapters, which gradually unfold the subject of infor-
mation retrieval, starting with the fundamentals (such as Boolean retrieval, document
indexing, vector-space model, and evaluation in IR) and moving on to more advanced
topics (such as probabilistic models, XML retrieval, text classification, machine learning
for IR, document clustering, and Web retrieval). Pedagogical features of the book in-
clude short exercises at the end of each section and brief overviews of related research
literature at the end of each chapter. Some of the major strengths of the book are its
accessibility, clarity, and good balance between theory and practice. There are many
concrete examples throughout the book that facilitate understanding of complex topics.
Although the book covers a broad selection of the major established and emerging
topics in IR, it largely bypasses two important subjects, in my opinion: natural language
processing techniques in IR and interactive information retrieval. Although the authors
refer to some research done in these areas in various chapters, they do not give them
the same thorough treatment given to other topics in the book. To compensate, in the
preface the authors provide references to the detailed coverage of these and some other
topics in other textbooks. It also might have been useful if the authors introduced some
specialized IR tasks, such as opinion retrieval or enterprise search, which might benefit
from more advanced NLP techniques.
Chapter 1 gives a succinct and focused introduction to the main concepts in IR,
such as term, index, document, query, recall, precision, and so on. It outlines the main
principles of Boolean retrieval, briefly criticizes it, and compares it to ranked retrieval.
The authors also present a good real-world example of a commercial Boolean retrieval
system.
Chapter 2 provides a detailed discussion of the initial stages of the document
indexing process that include tokenization, stemming and lemmatization, stopwords
removal, and approaches to dealing with phrases at the indexing stage, namely bi-
gram indexing and the use of positional indexes. In this chapter the authors discuss
some linguistic aspects of these processes. For example, when examining tokenization,
they discuss various morphological and other aspects of languages that complicate
this process (e.g., hyphenation in English, compound nouns in German, and word
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 2
sequences in East Asian languages). A brief outline of word segmentation approaches
is provided. The authors also give a very good summary of the key relevant research
works in these areas at the end of the chapter.
In Chapters 3, 4, and 5 the authors discuss data structures for indexes, index con-
struction, and compression. These three chapters will most likely be of least interest to
the computational linguistics community. However, two topics that might be of interest
are the use of wildcard queries by users and spelling correction of queries, discussed
in Chapter 3. In their discussion of wildcard queries, the authors examine only the
use of wildcards in queries to represent different morphological variants of a word
(e.g., American vs. British), the user?s uncertainty in the correct spelling of a word, and
stemmedwords (e.g., judicia* to represent both judicial and judiciary). It would have been
interesting if the authors also discussed the use of wildcards to represent entire words,
since some commercial search engines started to provide this functionality, allowing
users to search for a phrase with a user-specified number of words in the middle (e.g.,
the use of fine * me to represent fine by me, fine with me, and fine for me).
Chapters 6 and 7 introduce the fundamentals of ranked document retrieval, term
frequency and inverse document frequency, and the vector-space model. The authors
briefly touch upon phrase queries, and how they can be handled by the vector-space
model. Phrase or proximity-based retrieval is an important problem in IR, but unfor-
tunately, the authors do not discuss in detail different approaches to proximity-based
term weighting.
Chapter 8 is devoted to evaluation in IR, and presents major evaluation frame-
works, such as the Text Retrieval Conference (TREC) and classical evaluation measures,
such as mean average precision, precision at different cutoff points, as well as the
more recently developed measure NDCG (normalized discounted cumulative gain)
for evaluation with graded (non-binary) relevance judgments. The penultimate section
in the chapter discusses various approaches to presenting retrieved documents in the
ranked list shown to the user, such as snippets, and query-independent and query-
biased document summaries.
Chapter 9 reviews relevance feedback and query expansion. Query expansion (QE)
following relevance feedback is one of the most effective techniques in IR. The authors
provide an overview of the main types of QE: local, whereby the query is modified
on the basis of retrieved documents, and global, which is query independent. Among
the local methods, they introduce here the classic Rocchio algorithm. Probabilistic
approaches to query expansion following relevance feedback are discussed in detail
in Chapter 11 after the authors introduce probabilistic models of IR. Query expansion
following relevance feedback can be either automatic (AQE), whereby the system selects
terms and adds them to the query, or interactive (IQE), whereby the selected terms are
shown to the user for further selection. The authors only discuss AQE in the context
of relevance feedback. Among the global QE methods, they mention the use of manual
and automatically generated thesauri, as well as approaches to QE on the Web, such as
suggestion of related queries.
Chapter 10 discusses XML retrieval, including such topics as a vector-space model
for XML retrieval and INEX (Initiative for the Evaluation of XML retrieval), the main
evaluation framework for XML retrieval.
Chapters 11 and 12 focus on probabilistic information retrieval and language mod-
eling, respectively. Chapter 11 introduces the theoretical underpinnings of probabilistic
IR models, and describes the Robertson and Spa?rck Jones probabilistic model and the
BM25 term weighting function. Chapter 12 starts by describing the basic approach to
language modeling in IR and then reviews some of its extensions.
308
Book Review
Chapters 13, 14, and 15 discuss approaches to text classification, starting with naive
Bayes classification, and then moving on to vector-space classification and support vec-
tor machines. All topics are presented in sufficient detail, supplemented with references
to the key papers in these areas.
In Chapters 16 and 17 the authors introduce document clustering. Flat clustering
methods (K-means and expectation maximization) and clustering evaluation methods
are discussed in Chapter 16, and Chapter 17 is devoted to hierarchical clustering. Here,
the authors present different agglomerative clustering algorithms, such as single-link,
complete-link, group-average, and centroid similarity, as well as top?down (divisive)
hierarchical clustering. An important problem in clustering is the labeling of clusters.
The authors discuss and compare two approaches to labeling: differential cluster la-
beling, where label terms are selected on the basis of their distribution in one cluster
compared to the others, and cluster-internal labeling, where a label is selected only on
the basis of the cluster being labeled.
Chapter 18 introduces latent semantic indexing. This is a rather theoretical chapter,
and readers might have benefited from a more extensive discussion of the use and
practical applications of LSI.
The remaining three chapters are devoted to Web-based IR. Among the topics
discussed are spam, types of user information needs, Web crawling and indexing, link-
based approaches to document ranking such as PageRank, Markov chains, and hubs
and authorities.
To sum up, Introduction to Information Retrieval is a comprehensive, authoritative,
and well-written overview of the main topics in IR. The book offers a good balance
of theory and practice, and is an excellent self-contained introductory text for those
new to IR. Although the book does not cover advanced NLP techniques for IR, it is
recommended for experts in computational linguistics who wish to learn about IR.
Although many computational linguists are familiar with the material covered in the
chapters on text classification, they will most certainly find chapters on different IR
models and methods very useful.
Olga Vechtomova is an Associate Professor in the Department of Management Sciences, cross-
appointed in the David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Canada.
She received her PhD in Information Science from City University, London in 2001. Her interests
are in query expansion, relevance feedback, lexical cohesion, applications of natural language
processing techniques to IR, and user interaction with IR systems. Vechtomova?s address is: De-
partment ofManagement Sciences, Faculty of Engineering, University ofWaterloo, 200 University
Avenue West, Waterloo, ON, N2L 3G1, Canada; e-mail: ovechtom@engmail.uwaterloo.ca.
309

Comparison of Two Interactive Search Refinement Techniques
Olga Vechtomova
Department of Management Sciences
University of Waterloo
200 University Avenue West, Waterloo,
Canada
ovechtom@engmail.uwaterloo.ca
Murat Karamuftuoglu
Department of Computer Engineering
Bilkent University
06800 Bilkent Ankara,
Turkey
hmk@cs.bilkent.edu.tr
Abstract
The paper presents two approaches to
interactively refining user search formulations
and their evaluation in the new High
Accuracy Retrieval from Documents (HARD)
track of TREC-12. One method consists of
asking the user to select a number of
sentences that may represent relevant
documents, and then using the documents,
whose sentences were selected for query
expansion. The second method consists of
showing to the user a list of noun phrases,
extracted from the initial document set, and
then expanding the query with the terms from
the phrases selected by the user.
1  Introduction
Query expansion following relevance feedback is a well
established technique in information retrieval, which
aims at improving user search performance. It combines
user and system effort towards selecting and adding
extra terms to the original query. The traditional model
of query expansion following relevance feedback is as
follows: the user reads a representation of a retrieved
document, typically its full-text or abstract, and
provides the system with a binary relevance judgement.
After that the system extracts query expansion terms
from the document, which are then added to the query
either manually by the searcher ? interactive query
expansion, or automatically ? automatic query
expansion. Intuitively interactive query expansion
should produce better results than automatic, however
this is not consistently so  (Beaulieu 1997, Koenemann
and Belkin 1996, Ruthven 2003).
In this paper we present two new approaches to
automatic and interactive query expansion, which we
developed and tested within the framework of the High
Accuracy Retrieval from Documents (HARD) track of
TREC (Text Retrieval Conference).
1.1 HARD track
The main goal of the new HARD track in TREC-12 is
to explore what techniques could be used to improve
search results by using two types of information:
1. Extra-linguistic contextual information about the
user and the information need, which was provided by
track organisers in the form of metadata. It specifies the
following:
 Genre ? the type of documents that the searcher is
looking for. It has the following values:
- Overview (general news related to the topic);
- Reaction (news commentary on the topic);
- I-Reaction (as above, but about non-US
commentary)
- Any.
 Purpose of the user?s search, which has one of the
following values:
- Background (the searcher is interested in the
background information for the topic);
- Details (the searcher is interested in the details of
the topic);
- Answer (the searcher wants to know the answer
to a specific question);
- Any.
 Familiarity of the user with the topic on a five-
point scale.
 Granularity ? the amount of text the user is
expecting in response to the query.  It has the
following values: Document, Passage, Sentence,
Phrase, Any.
 Related text ? sample relevant text found by the
users from any source, except the evaluation
corpus.
2. Relevance feedback given by the user in response
to topic clarification questions. This information was
elicited by each site by means of a (manually or
automatically) composed set of clarification forms per
topic. The forms are filled in by the users (annotators),
and provide additional search criteria.
In more detail the HARD track evaluation scenario
consists of the following steps:
1) The track organisers invite annotators (users), each
of whom formulates one or more topics. An example of
a typical HARD topic is given below:
Title: Red Cross activities
Description: What has been the Red Cross's
international role in the last year?
Narrative: Articles concerning the Red Cross's activities
around the globe are on topic. Has the RC's role
changed? Information restricted to international relief
efforts that do not include the RC are off-topic.
Purpose: Details
Genre: Overview
Granularity: Sentence
Familiarity: 2
2) Participants receive Title, Description and Narrative
sections of the topics, and use any information from
them to produce one or more baseline runs.
3) Participants produce zero or more clarification forms
with the purpose of obtaining feedback from the
annotators. Only two forms were guaranteed to be filled
out.
4) All clarification forms for one topic are filled out by
the annotator, who has composed that topic.
5) Participants receive the topic metadata and the
annotators? responses to clarification forms, and use any
data from them to produce one or more final runs.
6) Two runs per site (baseline and final) are judged by
the annotators. Top 75 documents, retrieved for each
topic in each of these runs, are assigned binary
relevance judgement by the annotator ? author of the
topic.
7) The annotators? relevance judgements are then used
to calculate the performance metrics (see section 4).
The evaluation corpus used in the HARD track
consists of 372,219 documents, and includes three
newswire corpora (New York Times,  Associated Press
Worldstream and Xinghua English) and two
governmental corpora (The Congressional Record and
Federal Register). The overall size of the corpus is
1.7Gb.
The primary goal of our participation in the track
was to investigate how to achieve high retrieval
accuracy through relevance feedback. The secondary
goal was to study ways of reducing the amount of time
and effort the user spends on making a relevance
judgement, and at the same time assisting the user to
make a correct judgement.
We evaluated the effectiveness of two different
approaches to eliciting information from the users. The
first approach is to represent each top-ranked retrieved
document by means of one sentence containing the
highest proportion of query terms, and ask the user to
select those sentences, which possibly represent relevant
documents. The second method extracts noun phrases
from top-ranked retrieved documents and asks the user
to select those, which might be useful in retrieving
relevant documents. Both approaches aim to minimise
the amount of text the user has to read, and to focus the
user?s attention on the key information clues from the
documents.
Traditionally in bibliographical and library IR
systems the hitlist of retrieved documents is represented
in the form of the titles and/or the first few sentences of
each document. Based on this information the user has
to make initial implicit relevance judgements: whether
to refer to the full text document or not. Explicit
relevance feedback is typically requested by IR systems
after the user has seen the full text document, an
example of such IR system is Okapi (Robertson et al
2000, Beaulieu 1997). Reference to full text documents
is obviously time-consuming, therefore it is important to
represent documents in the hitlist in such a form, that
would enable the users to reliably judge their relevance
without referring to the full text. Arguably, the title and
the first few sentences of the document are frequently
not sufficient to make correct relevance judgement.
Query-biased summaries, usually constructed through
the extraction of sentences that contain higher
proportion of query terms than the rest of the text ? may
contain more relevance clues than generic document
representations. Tombros and Sanderson (1998)
compared query-biased summaries with the titles plus
the first few sentences of the documents by how many
times the users have to request full-text documents to
verify their relevance/non-relevance. They discovered
that subjects using query-biased summaries refer to the
full text of only 1.32% documents, while subjects using
titles and first few sentences refer to 23.7% of
documents. This suggests that query-biased
representations are likely to contain more relevance
clues than generic document representations.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows:
sections 2 and 3 present the two document
representation and query expansion methods we
developed,  section 4 discusses their evaluation, and
section 5 concludes the paper and outlines future
research directions.
2  Query expansion method 1
According to the HARD track specifications, a
clarification form for each topic must fit into a screen
with 1152 x 900 pixels resolution, and the user may
spend no more than 3 minutes filling out each form.
The goal that we aim to achieve with the aid of the
clarification form is to have the users judge as many
relevant documents as possible on the basis of one
sentence representation of a document. The questions
explored here were: What is the error rate in selecting
relevant documents on the basis of one sentence
representation of its content? How does sentence-level
relevance feedback affect retrieval performance?
2.1 Sentence selection
The sentence selection algorithm consists of the
following steps:
We take N top-ranked documents, retrieved in
response to query terms from the topic title. Given the
screen space restrictions, we can only display 15 three-
line sentences, hence N=15. The full-text of each of the
documents is then split into sentences. For every
sentence that contains one or more query terms, i.e. any
term from the title field of the topic, two scores are
calculated: S1 and S2.
Sentence selection score 1 (S1) is the sum of idf of
all query terms present in the sentence.
Sentence selection score 2 (S2):
Where: Wi ? Weight of the term i, see (3);
fs ? length normalisation factor for sentence s, see (4).
The weight of each term in the sentence, except
stopwords, is calculated as follows:
Where: idfi ? inverse document frequency of term i in
the corpus; tfi ? frequency of term i in the document;
tmax ? tf of the term with the highest frequency in the
document.
To normalise the length of the sentence we
introduced the sentence length normalisation factor f:
Where: smax ? the length of the longest sentence in the
document, measured as a number of terms, excluding
stopwords; slen ? the length of the current sentence.
All sentences in the document were ranked by S1 as
the primary score and S2 as the secondary score. Thus,
we first select the sentences that contain more query
terms, and therefore are more likely to be related to the
user?s query, and secondarily, from this pool of
sentences select the one which is more content-bearing,
i.e. containing a higher proportion of terms with high
tf*idf weights.
Because we are restricted by the screen space, we
reject sentences that exceed 250 characters, i.e. three
lines. In addition, to avoid displaying very short, and
hence insufficiently informative sentences, we reject
sentences with less than 6 non-stopwords. If the top-
scoring sentence does not satisfy the length criteria, the
next sentence in the ranked list is considered to
represent the document. Also, since there are a number
of almost identical documents in the corpus, we remove
the representations of the duplicate documents from the
clarification form using pattern matching, and process
the necessary number of additional documents from the
baseline run sets.
By selecting the sentence with the query terms and
the highest proportion of high-weighted terms in the
document, we are showing query term instances in their
typical context in this document. Typically a term is
only used in one sense in the same document. Also, in
many cases it is sufficient to establish the linguistic
sense of a word by looking at its immediate neighbours
in the same sentence or a clause. Based on this, we
hypothesise that users will be able to reject those
sentences, where the query terms are used in an
unrelated linguistic sense. However, we recognise that it
is more difficult, if not impossible, for users to reliably
determine the relevance of the document on the basis of
one sentence, especially in cases where the relevance of
the document to the query is due to more subtle aspects
of the topic.
2.2 Selection of query expansion terms
The user?s feedback to the clarification form is used for
obtaining query expansion terms for the final run. For
query expansion we use collocates of query terms ?
words co-occurring within a limited span with query
terms. Vechtomova et al (2003) have demonstrated that
expansion with long-span collocates of query terms
obtained from 5 known relevant documents showed 72-
74% improvement over the use of Title-only query
terms on the Financial Times (TREC volume 4) corpus
with TREC-5 ad hoc topics.
We extract collocates from windows surrounding
query term occurrences. The span of the window is
= qidfS1 (1)
s
i
f
W
S =2 (2)
))
max
*5.0(5.0(
t
tfidfW iii += (3)
s
s
slen
sf max= (4)
measured as the number of sentences to the left and
right of the sentence containing the instance of the
query term. For example, span 0 means that only terms
from the same sentence as the query term are considered
as collocates, span 1 means that terms from 1 preceding
and 1 following sentences are also considered as
collocates.
In more detail the collocate extraction and ranking
algorithm is as follows: For each query term we extract
all sentences containing its instance, plus s sentences to
the left and right of these sentences, where s is the span
size. Each sentence is only extracted once. After all
required sentences are selected we extract stems from
them, discarding stopwords. For each unique stem we
calculate the Z score to measure the significance of its
co-occurrence with the query term as follows:
Where: fr(x,y) ? frequency of x and y occurring in the
same windows in the known relevant document set (see
(6); fc(y) ? frequency of y in the corpus; fr(x) ?
frequency of x in the relevant documents; vx(R) ?
average size of windows around x in the known relevant
document set (R); N ? the total number of non-stopword
occurrences in the corpus.
The frequency of x and y occurring in the same
windows in the relevant set ?  fr(x,y) ? is calculated as
follows:
Where: m ? number of windows in the relevant set (R);
fw(x) ? frequency of x in the window w; fw(y) ?
frequency of y in the window w.
All collocates with an insignificant degree of
association: Z<1.65 are discarded, see (Church et al
1991). The remaining collocates are sorted by their Z
score. The above Z score formula is described in more
detail in (Vechtomova et al 2003).
After we obtain sorted lists of collocates of each
query term, we select those collocates for query
expansion, which co-occur significantly with two or
more query terms. For each collocate the collocate score
(C1) is calculated:
Where: ni ? rank of the collocate in the Z-sorted
collocation list for the query term i;
Wi ? weight of the query term i.
The reason why we use the rank of the collocate in
the above formula instead of its Z score is because Z
scores of collocates of different terms are not
comparable.
Finally, collocates are ranked by two parameters:
the primary parameter is the number of query terms they
co-occur with, and the secondary ? C1 score.
We tested the algorithm on past TREC data
(Financial Times and Los Angeles Times newswire
corpora, topics 301-450) with blind feedback using
Okapi BM25 search function (Sparck Jones et al 2000).
The goal was to determine the optimal values for R - the
size of the pseudo-relevant set, s ? the span size, and k ?
the number of query expansion terms. The results
indicate that variations of these parameters have an
insignificant effect on precision. However, some
tendencies were observed, namely: (1) larger R values
tend to lead to poorer performance in both Title-only
and Title+Desc. runs; (2) larger span sizes also tend to
degrade performance in both Title and Title+Desc runs.
Title-only unexpanded run was 10% better than
Title+Description. Expansion of Title+Desc. queries
resulted in relatively poorer performance than expansion
of Title-only queries. For example, AveP of the worst
Title+Desc expansion run (R=50, s=4, k=40) is 23%
worse than the baseline, and AveP of the best run (R=5,
s=1, k=10) is 8% better than the baseline. AveP of the
worst Title-only run (R=50, s=5, k=20) is 4.5% worse
than the baseline, and AveP of the best Title-only run
(R=5, s=1, k=40) is 10.9% better than the baseline.
Based on this data we decided to use Title-only
terms for the official TREC run ?UWAThard2?, and,
given that values k=40 and s=1 contributed to a
somewhat better performance, we used these values in
all of our official expansion runs. The question of R
value is obviously irrelevant here, as we used all
documents selected by users in the clarification form.
We used Okapi BM25 document retrieval function
for topics with granularity Document, and Okapi
passage retrieval function BM250 (Sparck Jones et al
2000) for topics with other granularity values. For
topics with granularity Sentence the best sentences were
selected from the passages, returned by BM250, using
the algorithm described in section 2.1 above.
3  Query expansion method 2
The second user feedback mechanism that we evaluated
consists of automatically selecting noun phrases from
the top-ranked documents retrieved in the baseline run,
and asking the users to select all phrases that contain
possibly useful query expansion terms.
The research question explored here is whether
noun phrases provide sufficient context for the user to
select potentially useful terms for query expansion.
)()()(
)()()(),(
Rvxf
N
yf
Rvxf
N
yf
yxf
Z
xr
c
xr
c
r ?
= (5)
= ii WnC1 (7)
1
( , ) ( ) ( )
m
r w w
w
f x y f x f y
=
= (6)
We take top 25 documents from the baseline run,
and select 2 sentences per document using the algorithm
described above. We have not experimented with
alternative values for these two parameters. We then
apply Brill?s rule-based tagger (Brill 1995) and BaseNP
noun phrase chunker (Ramshaw and Marcus 1995) to
extract noun phrases from these sentences. The phrases
are then parsed in Okapi to obtain their term weights,
removing all stopwords and phrases consisting entirely
of the original query terms. The remaining phrases are
ranked by the sum of weights of their constituent terms.
Top 78 phrases are then included in the clarification
form for the user to select. This is the maximum number
of phrases that could fit into the clarification form.
All user-selected phrases were split into single
terms, which were then used to expand the original user
query. The expanded query was then searched against
the HARD track database in the same way as in the
query expansion method 1 described in the previous
section.
4   Evaluation
Every run submitted to the HARD track was evaluated
in three different ways. The first two evaluations are
done at the document level only, whereas the last one
takes into account the granularity metadata.
1. SOFT-DOC ? document-level evaluation, where
only the traditional TREC topic formulations (title,
description, narrative) are used as relevance criteria.
2. HARD-DOC ? the same as the above, plus
?purpose?, ?genre? and ?familiarity? metadata are
used as additional relevance criteria.
3. HARD-PSG ? passage-level evaluation, which in
addition to all criteria in HARD-DOC also requires
that retrieved items satisfy the granularity metadata
(Allan 2004).
Document-level evaluation was done by the
traditional IR metrics of mean average precision and
precision at various document cutoff points.  In this
paper we focus on document-level evaluation. Passage-
level evaluation is discussed elsewhere (Vechtomova  et
al. 2004).
4.1  Document-level evaluation
For all of our runs we used Okapi BSS (Basic Search
System). For the baseline run we used keywords from
the title field only, as these proved to be most effective
in our preliminary experiments described in section 2.2.
Topic titles were parsed in Okapi, weighted and
searched using BM25 function against the HARD track
corpus.
Document-level results of the three submitted runs
are given in table 1. UWAThard1 is the baseline run
using original query terms from the topic titles.
UWAThard2 is a final run using query expansion
method 1, outlined earlier, plus the granularity and
known relevant documents metadata. UWAThard3 is a
final run using query expansion method 2 plus the
Run Run description SOFT-DOC evaluation HARD-DOC evaluation
Precision
@ 10
Average
Precision
Precision
@ 10
Average
Precision
UWAThard1* Original title-only query terms;BM25 used for all topics 0.4875 0.3134 0.3875 0.2638
UWAThard2*
Query expansion method 1;
granularity and related text
metadata
0.5479 0.3150 0.4354 0.2978
UWAThard3* Query expansion method 2;granularity metadata 0.5958 0.3719 0.4854 0.3335
UWAThard4
As UWAThard1, but BM250
is used for topics requiring
passages
0.4729 0.2937 0.3667 0.2450
UWAThard5 As UWAThard2, but relatedtext metadata is not used 0.5229 0.3016 0.4062 0.2828
Table 1. Document-level evaluation results (* runs submitted to TREC)
granularity metadata.
The fact that the query expansion method 1
(UWAThard2) produced no improvement over the baseline
(UWAThard1) was a surprise, and did not correspond to our
training runs with the Financial Times and Los Angeles
Times collections, which showed 21% improvement over
the original title-only query run. We evaluated the user
selection of the sentence using average precision, calculated
as the number of relevant sentences selected by the user out
of the total number of sentences selected, and average recall
? the number of relevant sentences selected by the user out
of the total number of relevant sentences shown in the
clarification form. Average precision of TREC sentence
selections made by TREC annotators is 0.73, recall ? 0.69,
what is slightly better than our selections during training
runs (precision: 0.70, recall: 0.64). On average 7.14 relevant
sentences were included in the forms. The annotators on
average selected 4.9 relevant and 1.8 non-relevant
sentences.
Figure 1 shows the number of relevant/non-relevant
selected sentences by topic. It is not clear why query
expansion method 1 performed worse in the official
UWAThard2 run compared to the training run, given very
similar numbers of relevant sentences selected. Corpus
differences could be one reason for that ? HARD corpus
contains a large proportion of governmental documents, and
we have only evaluated our algorithm on newswire corpora.
More experiments need to be done to determine the effect
of the governmental documents on our query expansion
algorithm.
In addition to clarification forms, we used the ?related
text? metadata for UWAThard2, from which we extracted
query expansion terms using the method described in
section 2.2.  To determine the effect of this metadata on
performance, we conducted a run without it (UWAThard5),
which showed only a slight drop in performance. This
suggests that additional relevant documents from other
sources do not affect performance of this query expansion
method significantly.
We thought that one possible reason for the poor
performance of UWAThard2 compared to the baseline run
UWAThard1 was the fact that we used document retrieval
search function BM25 for all topics in the UWAThard1,
whereas for UWAThard2 we used BM25 for topics
requiring document retrieval and BM250 for the topics
requiring passage retrieval. The two functions produce
somewhat different document rankings. In UWAThard4 we
used BM250 for the topics requiring passages, and got only
a slightly lower average precision of 0.2937 (SOFT-DOC
evaluation) and 0.2450 (HARD-DOC evaluation).
Our second query expansion method on the contrary
did not perform very well in the training runs, achieving
only 10% improvement over the original title-only query
run. The official run UWAThard3, however resulted in 18%
increase in average precision (SOFT-DOC evaluation) and
26.4% increase in average precision (HARD-DOC
evaluation). Both improvements are statistically significant
(using t-test at .05 significance level).
TREC annotators selected on average 19 phrases,
whereas we selected on average 7 phrases in our tests. This
suggests that selecting more phrases leads to a notably
better performance. The reason why we selected fewer
phrases than the TREC annotators could be due to the fact
that on many occasions we were not sufficiently familiar
with the topic, and could not determine how an out-of-
context phrase is related or not related to the topic. TREC
annotators are, presumably, more familiar with the topics
they have formulated.
In total 88 runs were submitted by participants to the
HARD track. All our submitted runs are above the median
in all evaluation measures shown in table 1. The only
participating site, whose expansion runs performed better
than our UWAThard3 run, was the Queen?s college group
(Kwok et al 2004). Their best baseline system achieved
32.7% AveP (HARD-DOC) and their best result after
clarification forms was 36%, which gives 10% increase
over the baseline. We have achieved 26% improvement
over the baseline (HARD-DOC), which is the highest
increase over baseline among the top 50% highest-scoring
baseline runs.
Figure 1. Sentences selected by TREC annotators from the clarification form 1.
4.2 The effect of different numbers of relevant and
non-relevant documents on performance following
user feedback
Query expansion based on relevance feedback is typically
more effective than based on blind feedback, however as
discussed in the previous section, only 73% of the sentences
selected by users from the clarification form 1 were actually
relevant. This has prompted us to explore the following
question: How does the presence of different numbers of
relevant and non-relevant documents in the feedback affect
average precision?
With this goal, we conducted a series of runs on
Financial Times and Los Angeles Times corpora and TREC
topics 301-450. For each run we composed a set, consisting
of the required number of relevant and non-relevant
documents. To minimize the difference between relevant
and non-relevant documents we selected non-relevant
documents ranked closely to relevant documents in the
ranked document set.
The process of document selection is as follows: first
all documents in the ranked set are marked as relevant/non-
relevant using TREC relevance judgements. Then, each
time a relevant document is found, it is recorded together
with the nearest non-relevant document, until the necessary
Figure 2: Effect of relevant and non-relevant documents on query expansion from user feedback
number of relevant/non-relevant documents is reached.
The graph in figure 2 shows that as the number of
relevant documents increases, average precision (AveP)
after feedback increases considerably for each extra relevant
document used, up to the point when we have 4 relevant
documents.  The increment in AveP slows down when more
relevant documents are added.
Adding few non-relevant documents to relevant ones
causes a considerable drop in the AveP. However, the
precision does not deteriorate further when more non-
relevant documents are added (Figure 2). As long as there
are more than three relevant documents that are used, a
plateau is hit at around 4-5 non-relevant documents.
We can conclude from this experiment that as a general
rule, the more relevant documents are used for query
expansion, the better is the average precision.  Even though
use of 5 or more relevant documents does not increase the
precision considerably, it still does cause an improvement
compared to 4 and fewer relevant documents.
Another finding is that non-relevant documents do not
affect average precision considerably, as long as there are a
sufficient number of relevant documents.
5  Conclusions and future work
In this paper we presented two user-assisted search
refinement techniques:
(1) inviting the user to select from the clarification form a
number of sentences that may represent relevant documents,
and then using the documents whose sentences were
selected for query expansion.
(2) showing to the user a list of noun phrases, extracted
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
Non-relevant documents
A
v
er
ag
e 
 
pr
ec
is
io
n
1 rel. document 2 rel. documents 3 rel. documents 4 rel. documents
5 rel. documents 6 rel. documents 7 rel. documents 15 rel. documents
from the initial document set, and then expanding the query
with the terms from the user-selected phrases.
The evaluation results suggest that the second
expansion method overall is more promising than the first,
demonstrating statistically significant performance
improvement over the baseline run. More analysis needs to
be done to determine the key factors influencing the
performance of both methods.
The focus of our experiments in the HARD track of
TREC-12 was on developing effective methods of gathering
and utilising the user?s relevance feedback. Another major
goal of the HARD track, which we did not address this
time, is to promote research into how contextual and extra-
linguistic information about the user and the user?s search
task could be harnessed to achieve high accuracy retrieval.
To effectively use information such as user?s familiarity
with the topic, the purpose of the user?s search or the user?s
genre preferences we need more complex linguistic and
stylistic analysis techniques. We plan to address these issues
in the next year?s entry.
Acknowledgements
This material is based on work supported in part by Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada.
References
Allan, J. 2004. HARD Track Overview. Proceedings of the
Twelfth Text Retrieval Conference, November 18-21, 2003,
Gaithersburg, MD.
Beaulieu, M. 1997. Experiments with interfaces to support
Query Expansion. Journal of Documentation, 53(1), pp. 8-
19
Brill E. 1995. Transformation-based error-driven learning
and natural language processing: a case study in part of
speech tagging. Computational Linguistics, 21(4), pp. 543-
565.
Church K., Gale W., Hanks P., Hindle D. 1991. Using
statistics in lexical analysis. In Lexical Acquisition: Using
On-line Resources to Build a Lexicon, ed. U. Zernik,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Lawrence Elbraum Associates, pp.
115-164.
Koenemann J. and Belkin N. J.  1996. A case for
interaction: a study of interactive information retrieval
behavior and effectiveness. Proceedings of the Human
Factors in Computing Systems Conference, Zurich, pp. 205-
215.
Kwok L. et al 2004. TREC2003 Robust, HARD and QA
track experiments using PIRCS. Proceedings of the Twelfth
Text Retrieval Conference, November 18-21, 2003,
Gaithersburg, MD.
Ramshaw L. and Marcus M. 1995. Text Chunking Using
Transformation-Based Learning. Proceedings of the Third
ACL Workshop on Very Large Corpora, MIT.
Robertson S.E., Walker S. and Beaulieu M. 2000.
Experimentation as a way of life: Okapi at TREC.
Information Processing and Management, 36, pp. 95-108.
Ruthven I. 2003.  Re-examining the potential effectiveness
of interactive query expansion. Proceedings of the 26th
ACM-SIGIR conference, Toronto, Canada, pp. 213-220.
Sparck Jones K., Walker S. and Robertson S.E. 2000. A
probabilistic model of information retrieval: development
and comparative experiments. Information Processing and
Management, 36(6), pp. 779-808 (Part 1); pp. 809-840 (Part
2).
Tombros A., Sanderson M.  1998. Advantages of Query
Biased Summaries in Information Retrieval. Proceedings of
the 21st ACM SIGIR conference, Melbourne, Australia, pp.
2-10.
Vechtomova O., Karamuftuoglu M., Lam E. 2004.
Interactive Search Refinement Techniques for HARD
Tasks. Proceedings of the Twelfth Text Retrieval
Conference, November 18-21, 2003, Gaithersburg, MD.
Vechtomova O., Robertson S.E., Jones S. 2003. Query
expansion with long-span collocates. Information Retrieval,
6(2), pp. 251-273.
