NAACL HLT Demonstration Program, pages 3?4,
Rochester, New York, USA, April 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
The Automated Text Adaptation Tool 
 
Jill Burstein, Jane Shore, John Sabatini, Yong-Won Lee & Matthew Ventura 
Educational Testing Service 
Rosedale Road MS 12R 
Princeton, New Jersey 08541 
{jburstein, jshore, jsabatini , ylee, mventura}@ets.org 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Text adaptation is a teacher practice used to help 
with reading comprehension and English 
language skills development for English language 
learners (ELLs) (Carlo, August, McLaughlin, 
Snow, Dressler, Lippman, Lively, & White, 
2004; Echevarria, Vogt and Short, 2004; Yano, 
Long and Ross, 1994). The practice of text 
adaptation involves a teacher?s modification of 
texts to make them more understandable, given a 
student?s reading level.  Teacher adaptations 
include text summaries, vocabulary support (e.g., 
providing synonyms), and translation. It is a time-
consuming, but critical practice for K-12 teachers 
who teach ELLs, since reading-level appropriate 
texts are often hard to find. To this end, we have 
implemented the Automated Text Adaptation 
Tool v.1.0 (ATA v.1.0): an innovative, 
educational tool that automatically generates text 
adaptations similar to those teachers might create. 
We have also completed a teacher pilot study.  
Schwarm and Ostendorf (2005), and Heilman, 
Collins-Thompson, Callan, and Eskenazi (2006) 
describe related research addressing the 
development of NLP-based reading support tools. 
During our interactive demonstration, 
conference participants can (a) login to the 
Internet-accessible tool, (b) import text files, and 
(c) experiment with adaptation features. We are 
currently interested in feedback from the 
computational linguistics community to inform 
tool development related to (a) feature 
enhancement, and (b) ideas for new NLP-based 
features. Until now, our primary source of 
feedback has been from teachers toward tool 
development from an educational perspective. 
 
2. The Automated Text Adaptation Tool  
 
NLP-based text adaptation capabilities in the tool 
are described in this section (also see Figure 1.) 
These adaptation features were selected for 
implementation since they resemble teacher-
based adaptation methods.  
 
2.1 English and Spanish Marginal Notes 
 
Pedagogically, marginal notes are a kind of text 
summary. The Rhext automatic summarization 
tool (Marcu, 2000) is used to produce marginal 
notes in English. The amount of marginal notes 
generated can be increased or decreased based on 
students? needs. Using Language Weaver?s1 
English-to-Spanish machine translation system, 
English marginal notes can be translated into 
Spanish. 
 
2.2 Vocabulary Support 
 
Synonyms for lower frequency (more difficult) 
words are output using a statistically-generated 
word similarity matrix (Lin, 1998). ATA v.1.0 
generates antonyms for vocabulary in the text 
using WordNet?.2   Cognates are words which 
have the same spelling and meaning in two 
languages (e.g., animal in English and Spanish). 
The tool generates these using an ETS 
English/Spanish cognate lexicon. 
 
2.3 English and Spanish Text-to-Speech  
 
The tool offers English and Spanish text-to-
speech (TTS)3. English TTS may be useful for  
pronunciation support, while Spanish TTS 
provides access to the Spanish texts for Spanish-
speaking ELLs who are not literate in Spanish.   
                                                 
1 See http://www.languageweaver.com 
2 See http://wordnet.princeton.edu/
3 See http://www.cstr.ed.ac.uk/projects/festival/  & 
http://cslu.cse.ogi.edu/tts/download/.  
3
 
Figure 1.  Example Main Interface Screen showing English Marginal Notes  
in the right column and Synonyms for ?enjoyable? (entertaining, enjoyable, pleasant.)  
3. Pilot Study with Teachers 
The survey feedback indicated that the 12 teachers 
were positive about the tool?s potential. Overall, 
the vocabulary and English marginal notes were 
the most favorite features, while the text-to-speech 
was the least favorite.  Teachers commented that 
they would like to see an editing capability added 
that would allow them to make changes to the 
automatically generated outputs (i.e., vocabulary 
support, and English and Spanish marginal notes.) 
Teachers viewed the tool either as lesson planning 
support, or as a student tool for independent work.   
 
4. Future Research 
 
ATA v.1.0 is a young application that uses NLP 
methods to create text adaptations. The teacher pilot 
evaluation suggested that it produces adaptations 
with potentially effective support for ELLs. It could 
also save teachers lesson planning time. We are 
currently implementing teacher-suggested 
modifications, and planning a larger, school-based 
pilot. The pilot will evaluate the tool?s effectiveness 
in terms of measurable learning gains in reading 
comprehension and English language skills.  
 
References  
 
Carlo, M.S., August, D., McLaughlin, B., Snow, C.E., 
Dressler, C., Lippman, D., Lively, T. & White, C.  
 
 
(2004). Closing the gap: Addressing the vocabulary 
needs of English language learners in bilingual and 
mainstream classrooms. Reading Research Quarterly, 
39(2), 188-215. 
 
Echevarria, J., Vogt, M., and Short, D. (2004). Making 
Content Comprehensible for English Language 
Learners: the SIOP model.  New York: Pearson 
Education, Inc. 
 
Heilman, M., Collins-Thompson, K., Callan, J., 
Eskenazi, M. (2006) Classroom Success of an 
Intelligent Tutoring System for Lexical Practice and 
Reading Comprehension. In Proceedings of the Ninth 
International Conference on Spoken Language 
Processing.  Pittsburgh. 
 
Lin, D. (1998). Automatic Retrieval and Clustering of 
Similar Words.  In Proceedings of the 35th Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, Montreal, 898-904. 
 
Marcu, D. (2000) The Theory and Practice of Discourse 
Parsing and Summarization. The MIT Press, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
 
Schwarm, S. and Ostendorf, M. Reading Level 
Assessment Using Support Vector Machines and 
Statistical Language Models. In Proceedings of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, Ann 
Arbor, MI, 523-530. 
 
Yano, Y., Long, M. & Ross, S. (1994). The effects of 
simplified and elaborated texts on foreign language 
reading comprehension. Language Learning, 44, 189-
219.  
4
