In: Proceedings of CoNLL-2000 and LLL -2000,  pages 123-125, Lisbon, Portugal, 2000. 
A Comparison of PCFG Models* 
J ose  Lu is  Verdd-Mas  and Jo rge  Ca lera -Rub io  and Rafae l  C.  Car rasco  
Departament  de Llenguatges i Sistemes Inform?tics 
Universitat d'Alacant, E-03071 Alacant (Spain) 
(verdu, calera, carrasco)@dlsi.ua.es 
Abst rac t  
In this paper, we compare three different ap- 
proaches to build a probabilistic ontext-free 
grammar for natural language parsing from a 
tree bank corpus: 1) a model that simply ex- 
tracts the rules contained in the corpus and 
counts the number of occurrences of each rule 
2) a model that also stores information about 
the parent node's category and, 3) a model that 
estimates the probabilities according to a gen- 
eralized k-gram scheme with k -- 3. The last 
one allows for a faster parsing and decreases the 
perplexity of test samples. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Recent work (Johnson, 1998) has explored the 
performance of parsers based on a probabilistic 
context-free grammar (PCFG) extracted from a 
training corpus. The results show that the type 
of tree representation used in the corpus can 
have a substantial effect in the estimated like- 
lihood of each sentence or parse tree. Accord- 
ing to (Johnson, 1998), weaker independence as- 
sumptions --such as decreasing the number of 
nodes or increasing the number of node labels-- 
improve the efficiency of the parser. The best 
results were obtained with parent-annotated la- 
bels where each node stores contextual informa- 
tion in the form of the category of the node's 
parent. This fact is in agreement with the 
observation put forward by Charniak (Char- 
niak, 1996) that simple PCFGs, directly ob -  
tained from a corpus, largely overgeneralize. 
This property suggests that, in these models, 
a large probability mass is assigned to incorrect 
* Work partially supported by the Spanish CICYT un- 
der grant TIC97-0941. 
parses and, therefore, any procedure that con- 
centrates the probability on the correct parses 
will increase the likelihood of the samples. 
In this spirit, we introduce a generalization of
the classic k-gram models, widely used for string 
processing (Brown et al, 1992; Ney et al, 1995), 
to the case of trees. The PCFG obtained in this 
way consists of rules that include information 
about the context where the rule is applied. 
The experiments were performed using the 
Wall Street Journal (WSJ) corpus of the Uni- 
versity of Pennsylvania (Marcus et al, 1993) 
modified as described in (Charniak, 1996) 
and (Johnson, 1998). 
2 A genera l i zed  k -gram mode l  
Recall that k-gram models are stochastic mod- 
els for the generation of sequences l,s2,... 
based on conditional probabilities, that is: 
1. the probability P(s l s2 . . .  s t lM)  of a se- 
quence in the model M is computed as a 
product 
pM(  Sl )pM(  S2\[Sl ) " " " pM(  St\[Sl S2 . . . St-l), 
and 
2. the dependence of the probabilities PM 
on previous history is assumed to be re- 
stricted to the immediate preceding con- 
text, in particular, the last k - 1 words: 
PM(St \ [S l  . . . S t -1 )  ---- pM(St \ [S t -k+l  . . . S t -1 ) .  
Note that in this kind of models, the probability 
that the observation st is generated at time t is 
computed as a function of the subsequence of
length k - 1 that immediately precedes t (this 
is called a state). However, in the case of trees, 
it is not obvious what context should be taken in 
to account. Indeed, there is a natural preference 
when processing strings (the usual left-to-right 
123 
VP 
label: VP s 
V NP PP NpvP 
~ ppVP 
Det N p NP Np PP 
Det N 
Figure 1: A sample parse tree of depth 3. 
order) but there are at least two standard ways 
of processing trees: ascending (or bottom-up) 
analysis and descending (or top-down) analysis. 
Ascending tree automata recognize a wider class 
of languages (Nivat and Podelski, 1!197; G~cseg 
and Steinby, 1984) and, therefore, they allow for 
richer descriptions. 
Thus, our model will compute the expansion 
probability for a given node as a function of the 
subtree of depth k - 2 that the node generates 1, 
i.e., every state stores a subtree of depth k - 2. 
In the particular case k = 2, only the label of the 
node is taken into account (this is analogous to 
the standard bigram model for strings) and the 
model coincides with the simple rule-counting 
approach. For instance, for the tree depicted in 
Fig. 1, the following rules are obtained: 
VP ~ V NP PP 
NP ~ Det N 
PP ~ P NP 
However, in case k = 3, the expansion proba- 
bilities depend on the states that are defined by 
the node label, the number of descendents the 
node and the sequence of labels in the descen- 
dents (if any). Therefore, for the same tree the 
following rules are obtained in this case: 
VP(V NP PP) ~ V NP(Det N) PP(P NP) 
NP(Det N) --+ Det N 
PP(P NP) ~ P NP(Det N) 
where each state has the form X(Z1...Zm). 
This is equivalent to a relabeling of the parse 
tree before extracting the rules. 
Finally, in the parent annotated model (PA) 
described in (Johnson, 1998) the states depend 
1Note that in our notation a single node tree has 
depth 0. This is in contrast to strings, where a single 
symbol has length 1. 
on both the node label and the node's parent 
--+ V NP VP ppVP 
---+ Det N 
P NP PP 
---+ Det N 
It is obvious that the k = 3 and PA models 
incorporate contextual information that is not 
present in the case k = 2 and, then, a higher 
number of rules for a fixed number of categories 
is possible. In practice, due to the finite size 
of the training corpus, the number of rules is 
always moderate. However, as higher values of 
k lead to an enormous number of possible rules, 
huge data sets would be necessary in order to 
have a reliable estimate of the probabilities for 
values above k = 3. A detailed mathematical 
description of these type of models can be found 
in (Rico-Juan et al, 2000) 
3 Exper imenta l  resu l t s  
The following table shows some data obtained 
with the three different models and the WSJ 
corpus. The second column contains the num- 
ber of rules in the grammar obtained from a 
training subset of the corpus (24500 sentences, 
about the first half in the corpus) and the last 
one contains the percentage of sentences in a 
test set (2000 sentences) that cannot be parsed 
by the grammar. 
Model 
k=2 
k=3 
PA 
number of rules %unparsed sent. 
11377 0 
64892 24 
18022 0.2 
As expected, the number of rules obtained in- 
creases as more information is conveyed by the 
node label, although this increase is not ex- 
treme. On the other hand, as the generaliza- 
tion power decreases, ome sentences in the test 
set become unparsable, that is, they cannot be 
generated by the grammar. The number of un- 
parsed sentences i  very small for the parent an- 
notated model but cannot be neglected for the 
k = 3 model. 
As we will use the perplexity of a test sample 
S = {wl, ..., w\]s\] } as an indication of the quality 
of the model, 
1 k~__S\]llog2p(WklM) PP = iS--- ~ 
124 
, unparsable sentences would produce an infinite 
perplexity. Therefore, we studied the perplex- 
ity of the test set for a linear combination of 
two models Mi and Mj with p(wklMi -- Mj) = 
)~p(wklMi) + (1 - ~)p(wklMj). The mixing pa- 
rameter ~ was chosen in order to minimize the 
perplexity. Figure 2 shows that there is always 
11o 
105 
lOO 
95 
90 
? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  ..~.'?'"+'" 
i 
05  
Figure 2: Test set perplexity as a function of the 
mixture parameter A. Upper line: k -- 2 and PA. 
Lower line: k = 2 and k = 3. 
a minimum perplexity for an intermediate value 
of ),. The best results were obtained with a mix- 
ture of the k-gram models for k = 2 and k = 3 
with a heavier component (73%) of the last one. 
The minimum perplexity PPm and the corre- 
sponding value of ~ obtained are shown in the 
following table: 
Mixture model PPm Am 
k = 2 and PA 107.9 0.58 
k = 2 and k = 3 91.0 0.27 
It is also worth to remark that the model k = 3 
is the less ambiguous model and, then, parsing 
of sentences becomes much faster. 
4 Conc lus ion 
We have investigated the applicability of a 
PCFG model based on the extension of k-gram 
models described in (Rico-Juan et al, 2000). 
The perplexity of the test sample decreases 
when a combination of models with k = 2 and 
k = 3 is used to predict string probabilities. We 
are at present checking that the behavior also 
holds for other quality measures as the precision 
and recall of parses of sentences that express 
strong equivalence between the model and the 
data. 
Re ferences  
Peter F. Brown, Vincent J. Della Pietra, Peter V. 
deSouza, Jennifer C. Lai, and Robert L. Mercer. 
1992. Class-based n-gram models of natural lan- 
guage. Computational Linguistics, 18(4):467-479. 
Eugene Charniak. 1996. Tree-bank grammars. In 
Proceedings of the Thirteenth National Confer- 
ence on Artificial Intelligence and the Eighth 
Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence 
Conference, pages 1031-1036, Menlo Park. AAAI 
Press/MIT Press. 
Ferenc Gdcseg and Magnus Steinby. 1984. Tree Au- 
tomata. Akad@miai Kiad6, Budapest. 
Mark Johnson. 1998. PCFG models of linguistic 
tree representations. Computational Linguistics, 
24(4):613-632. 
Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary 
Ann Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large anno- 
tated corpus of english: the penn treebank. Com- 
putational Linguistics, 19:313-330. 
H. Ney, U. Essen, and R. Kneser. 1995. On the esti- 
mation of small probabilities by leaving-one-out. 
IEEE Trans. on Pattern Analysis and Machine 
Intelligence, 17(12):1202-1212. 
Maurice Nivat and Andreas Podelski. 1997. Min- 
imal ascending and descending tree automata. 
SIAM Journal on Computing, 26(1):39-58. 
Juan Ram6n Rico-Juan, Jorge Calera-Rubio, and 
Rafael C. Carrasco. 2000. Probabilistic k-testable 
tree language. In ICGI-2000, to appear. 
125 
