Interaction of Tools and Metadata-Descriptions1 for
Multimedia Language Resources
Daan Broeder
Max-Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics
Wundtlaan1 6525 XD
Nijmegen
The Netherlands
daan.broeder@mpi.nl
Peter Wittenburg
Max-Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics
Wundtlaan1 6525 XD
Nijmegen
The Netherlands
peter.wittenburg@mpi.nl
1We distinguish metadata from annotation data, knowing that many don?t make this difference. While metadata in this
context is meant to describe the whole language resource, the annotation is a time synchronous description of what is
happening and is spoken during a recording
Abstract
The increasing amount and complexity of
multi-media/multi-modal language
resources (MMLR) poses a problem in
many respects. This paper wants to discuss
metadata descriptions that can be used to
easy find and locate suitable MMLRs in the
Internet and how these descriptions may be
used to discover and apply suitable tools on
the data.
1 Introduction
We succeeded in reaching a consensus within a
representative part of the linguistic community
in Europe about a standard for such metadata
descriptions. A machine readable
implementation of this standard will then allow
us to build up a searchable and browsable space.
Our presentation is based on the work executed
within the framework of the international
EAGLES/ISLE [1,2] project that is named IMDI
(ISLE Metadata Initiative), on practical work
with meta descriptions at the MPI for
Psycholinguistics, on a collaborative enterprise
to create a browsable corpus demo of material 7
European institutes and on suggestions with
respect to metadata within the DOBES [3] and
the CGN [4] projects.
2 Metada for Language Resources
The idea of describing a whole document with
the help of a few characteristic metadata
elements is not new. Well-known corpora such
as Childes [5] have used header information to
describe the content, the speakers and the
language being spoken etc. The Text Encoding
Initiative [6] and the CES group [7] have
specified in detail the tag set with which a whole
text document can be described. However, all
early initiatives were not meant to be a general
standard for the description of MM LRs and
allow the formation of a searchable and
browsable space on the Internet IMDI desires.
This is what recent initiatives in other domains
such as Dublin Core (DC) [8] and MPEG7 [9]
want to achieve: XML-based machine-readable
information about certain documents that is
openly accessible in the net such that easy
retrieval is possible. New initiatives by the W3C
such as RDF [10] support these intentions.
Within IMDI we have made an overview about
header and metadata elements used so far by the
language resource community. This overview
and the concrete needs within large European
projects will be used to develop and test a first
proposal on the way to come to a hopefully
widely accepted standard. Compliance with the
standard has to guarantee that metadata
descriptions created by different people at
different locations adhere to the same syntax and
to the same semantic definitions of the metadata
elements included. The standard has to offer
possibilities of adding metadata elements
defined by sub communities, projects or even
individuals. From other initiatives we know that
these goals can only be achieved if the set of
metadata elements is not too exhaustive. This
does not mean that only limited information can
be stored. For instance the metadata description
standard certainly includes an element to enter
the name of the language spoken, but other very
elaborate information about that language can be
made available in other data types pointed to by
hyperlinks to other data perhaps conforming to
more specialised schemas.
IMDI is now entering a phase where the
metadata element categories and the metadata
elements to be included have been discussed
with interested members of the MMLR
community for about a year and become stable.
Two resource types were selected to start with:
(1) multimedia corpora and (2) lexicons, the
discussion about the lexicon resources is at the
moment less far developed than that concerning
the corpora. Within the IMDI initiative we
started the search for a suitable set of metadata
elements by trying to identify the characteristics
of such resources that people such as
researchers, developers, students, or even the
general public would choose to use to find
exactly those resources they are looking for.
Very helpful was the study of the creation
process and the construction of a structured
metadata set as a reflection of an ontology of
these resources. We know that resources
themselves are not openly available, but at least
the metadata description should inform the
community about their existence, about
intellectual property rights and modes of usage.
Two main categories of metadata can be
identified:
? Basic information on the content of the
resource: the content language of the
resource, and administrative information
about the resource.
? Resource descriptions that define the
type and structure of the resource.
A full listing of all IMDI elements is given in
Appendix A, but for definitions and
substructures we refer to [1]. The relevant
elements for the resources themselves are:
Table 1 elements
for media files
Table 2
elements for
annotation
units
C: constrained
OV: open vocabulary
CCV: closed constrained vocabulary
For annotation units multiple units may reside in
one file. The relevant elements for
characterising the resources in a way that is
important to tools (a discussion that we will
come to later) are:
o Reference to the resource itself
o Size (of media file, if the tool has a
limit)
o Format (for media files somewhat more
simple then for annotation units)
o Type (for annotation unit the type of
analysis result e.g. morphology,
phonetics ?)
o Different encodings
Resource Link (c)
Media Resource Link (c)
Annotator (string)
Date (c)
Type (ov)
Format (ov)
Content Encoding (string)
Character Encoding (c)
Resource Link (c)
Size (string)
Type (ccv)
Format (ov)
Quality (ccv)
Recording Conditions (string)
Position (c)
3 Strategies for Metadata Standards
The way IMDI has developed its metadata
vocabulary can be described as bottom up.
IMDI chose to try to first understand the
linguistic community?s needs by making an
overview of metadata used by different projects
and corpora, speak with representatives of many
institutions and try to distill a metadata set from
it that focuses on retrieval aspects. For IMDI the
needs of the creators are the start and end point
since the creators are also the major consumer
group of language resources. So the question for
IMDI posed itself was ?how to enable resource
discovery of useful language resources that can
be used for certain studies etc?. This approach
leads to a metadata set whose terminology fits
the domain and a vocabulary that is considerable
richer than the for instance the DC set.
Interesting enough another initiative named
OLAC [11] that wants to create metadata for
language resources has taken the DC set as a
starting point. The OLAC approach can be
called a top-down one and seems motivated by
the wish to join the ?very important? Open
Archives Initiative (OAI) [12] without having
too much work in mapping different metadata
sets. OLAC wants to use a slightly more
specialised version of the OAI metadata set and
because OAI uses Dublin Core as default
metadata set the choice of an extended DC set
for OLAC is understandable. Of course the
question remains if this is sufficient to
characterise language resources in a sufficient
specific manner.
The discussion showed that both approaches are
important especially when the ontology of the
domain is not very well understood. IMDI starts
with analyzing the domain and leads to a more
narrow and specialised categorization scheme.
DC on the other hand offers very broad
categories the semantics of which are often
sloppily defined. Both approaches lead to
specific inherent retrieval problems. We have to
consider two views; (1) People from inside the
domain searching for resources (2) People from
outside the domain. People from inside have
intimate knowledge of the domain ontology and
want more specific categories. People from
outside need broader categories to assure that
the resources they search fall in the larger ?hit
list?. The discussion about OLAC DC qualifiers
led partly to the same discussions that were
carried out in IMDI. This is not surprising, since
OLAC somehow has to address the needs of the
field and the participants at the meeting were
mainly linguists. The OLAC top-down approach
which starts with a smaller vocabulary than
IMDI will have less problems when addressing
the interoperability with metadata sets such as
DC. However this advantage disappears when
OLAC will add more specific elements and
qualifiers to accurately describe the domain.
4 Tools and Metadata
It was the initial idea that the metadata
descriptions could also have elements that
describe specific tools that can be used to act on
the resources themselves. However since
resources and tools form orthogonal dimensions
it is better to have the metadata description only
describe resources and not a set of tools that will
change in time anyway. A more elegant solution
is to describe the type and structure of the
resources in sufficient detail so that ?browser?
tools used to access the metadata description can
decide which ones of the available tools are
suitable to handle the data. This can be either
based on local user configurable information or
on some sort of remote tool registry. At the
moment IMDI is experimenting with a scheme
of (semi) mime-types to characterise language
resources. We foresee that users will want to
customise the mapping of tools to resource types
to their own taste just as they are able to do with
WWW-browsers.
Needed for such a scheme is that tool
repositories note the types (mime-types) and
encoding, character encoding for which the tools
are suitable (see the lists in table 1 and 2). It has
to be investigated in detail how far tool
registries and resource collections structured by
metadata descriptions can be created in a way
such that especially na?ve users can overcome
the frustrating problems of accessing the right
resources with suitable tools. This problem is
not solved and is one of the greatest obstacles
for increasing the reusability of the huge
treasure of resources. IMDI has taken limited
tests with a number of tools to study the
interaction between mime-type tagged resources
and selecting from a tool palette. We have no
doubt that this is the way to go.
A special question is the form of the
infrastructure. Where will we store the metadata
descriptions and/or resources and how are tool
registries such as from DFKI [13] made known
to the distributed resource universe? During the
IMDI project a preliminary solution is found for
creating a registry authority for metadata. This
registry authority has to build a web-portal,
check the quality of the produced meta
descriptions, create intuitively understandable
browsable hierarchies based on the meta
descriptions and link the meta descriptions to
other type of information and resources The
registry authority will also provide tools such as
a constrained editor that allows the user to create
meta descriptions and a suitable browser which
can operate on the metadata description files.
The IMDI project will also work on
requirements for the registry authority and the
metadata tools.
At the moment the time has come for IMDI to
investigate if and how the metadata description
browser can access remote software registries to
assist users in the choice of tools to use for
resources. This would be a logical extension to
the local configurable mapping of tools on
resource types that is needed anyway for non-
networked situations.
References
[1] http://www.mpi.nl/ISLE
[2] P. Wittenburg, D. Broeder & B. Sloman:
Meta-Descriptions for Language Resources
- EAGLES/ISLE - A Proposal for a Meta-
Description Standard for Language
Resources.
http://www.mpi.nl/ISLE/documents/papers/
white_paper_11.pdf.
[3] DOBES http://www.mpi.nl/DOBES
[4] Corpus Gesproken Nederlands
http://www.nwo.nl/gw/introductie/
[5] CHAT http://childes.psy.cmu.edu/
[6] TEI http://www.uic.edu/orgs/tei/
[7] CES http://www.cs.vassar.edu/CES
[8] DC http://purl.org/dc/documents/
[9] MPEG7 http://mpeg7
[10] RDF http://www.w3.org/RDF/
[11] OLAC http://www.language-archives.org/
[12] OAI http://www.openarchives.org/
[13] DFKI-softwareregistry
http://registry.dfki.de/
Appendix A: IMDI Metadata Vocabulary for Language Resources.
Session
Name (string) Resources (group)
Title (string) Media File + (group)
Date (c) Resource Link (c)
Continent (ccv) Size (string)
Country (ccv) Type (ccv)
Region (string) Format (ov)
Address (string) Quality (ccv)
Description + (sub) Recording Conditions (string)
Keys (sub) Position (c)
Project (group) Access (sub)
Name (string) Description + (sub)
Title (string) Annotation Unit + (group)
Id (string) Resource Link (c)
Contact (group) Media Resource Link (c)
Description + (group) Annotator (string)
Collector (group) Date (c)
Name (string) Type (ov)
Contact (sub) Format (ov)
Description + (sub) Content Encoding (string)
Content (group) Character Encoding (c)
Communication Context (group) Access (sub)
Interactivity (ccv) Language (sub)
Planning Type (ccv) Anonymous (ccv)
Involvement (ccv) Description + (sub)
Genre (group) Media Carrier +
Interactional (ovl) Id (string)
Discursive (ovl) Format (ov)
Performance (ovl) Quality (ccv)
Task (ocv) Position (c)
Modalities (ocv) Access (sub)
Languages (group) Description + (sub)
Description + (sub) Anonymous (group)
Language + (sub) Resource Link (c)
Description + (sub) Access (sub)
Keys (sub) References (group)
Participants (group) Description + (sub)
Description + (sub)
Participant (group)
Type (ov)
Name + (string)
Full name (string)
Role (ov)
Language + (sub)
Age (c)
Sex (ccv)
Education (string)
Anonymous (ccv)
Description + (sub)
Keys (sub)
Towards Metadata Interoperability 
Peter Wittenburg 
MPI for Psycholinguistics 
Wundtlaan 1 
6525 XD Nijmegen, Netherlands 
Peter.Wittenburg@mpi.nl 
Daan Broeder 
MPI for Psycholinguistics 
Wundtlaan 1 
6525 XD Nijmegen, Netherlands 
Daan.Broeder@mpi.nl 
Paul Buitelaar 
DFKI 
Stuhlsatzenhausweg 3 
D-66123 Saarbr?cken 
paulb@dfki.de 
 
Abstract 
Within two European projects metadata 
interoperability is one of the central top-
ics. While the INTERA project has as 
one of its goals to achieve an interopera-
bility between two widely used metadata 
sets for the domain of language re-
sources, the ECHO project created an in-
tegrated metadata domain of in total nine 
data providers from five different disci-
plines from the humanities. In both pro-
jects ad hoc techniques are used to 
achieve results. In the INTERA project, 
however, machine readable and ISO 
compliant concept definitions are created 
as a first step towards the Semantic Web. 
In the ECHO project a complex ontology 
was realized purely relying on XML. It is 
argued that concept definitions should be 
registered in open Data Category Reposi-
tories and that relations between them 
should be described as RDF assertions. 
Yet we are missing standards that would 
allow us to overcome the ad hoc solu-
tions. 
1 Introduction 
Metadata is a key source of information towards 
realization of the Semantic Web that could be 
exploited in many different ways. Several pro-
jects are starting to focus on exploiting rich 
metadata in and between projects and disciplines. 
For instance, the ECHO (European Cultural 
Heritage Online)1 project brings together meta-
data for resources from the History of Arts, His-
tory of Science, Linguistics, Ethnology and 
Philosophy. One aspect of the work in ECHO is 
to create a cross-disciplinary domain for resource 
discovery. In the INTERA (Integrated European 
Language Resource Area)2 project one of the 
                                                           
1 ECHO: http://www.mpi.nl/echo 
2 INTERA: http://www.elda.fr/rubrique22.html 
tasks is to establish a foundation for a more 
flexible definition and use of metadata for lan-
guage resources. 
 
We can distinguish two types of metadata. The 
first one concerns its use as ?data about data?. 
This definition of metadata includes for example 
text that describes images, sounds, videos and 
other texts. Such metadata can exist in different 
forms like complex annotations of media re-
cordings as discussed for example by Bird (2001) 
and Brugman (2001). A second type of metadata 
consists of keywords describing objects that form 
the catalogues of the increasingly large digital 
collections, e.g., of linguistic data. This type of 
metadata was introduced by initiatives such as 
Dublin Core3 for general type web-resources, 
OLAC4 for general type linguistic resources and 
IMDI5 for more elaborate linguistic resource de-
scriptions that are useful not only for discovery 
but also for management purposes.  
 
Although the first type of metadata is very im-
portant for the above mentioned use in content 
descriptions, in this paper we will focus on as-
pects that are related to the second, keyword type 
of metadata. It is obvious that this type of meta-
data  
? contains amongst others important informa-
tion about a resource that cannot be retrieved 
from its content; 
? are especially relevant for the discovery and 
management of multimedia resources since 
speech and image recognition are still far 
away from being applicable in most cases; 
? includes a reduced set of descriptive ele-
ments and requires classification such that 
content information in many cases is richer; 
? offers a limited set of semantically well-
defined data categories (ISO 12620) that can 
be related with other concepts. 
 
                                                           
3 Dublin Core: http://dublincore.org 
4 OLAC: http://www.language-archives.org 
5 IMDI: http://www.mpi.nl/IMDI 
In this paper we will describe the problems that 
we encountered in the INTERA and the ECHO 
projects to come to interoperable metadata do-
mains, the structural and semantic solutions that 
were chosen to solve the tasks and the solutions 
we are aiming at in the long run. In this context 
we will also refer to the intentions within ISO 
TC37/SC46. 
2 Current tasks 
The INTERA task 
One focus of the work in the INTERA project is 
on the integration of metadata elements that are 
used in describing language resources for open 
data category repositories. Two metadata sets are 
being used currently for the discovery and man-
agement of language resources. The OLAC set is 
used for discovery purposes and aims to be used 
for all kinds of language resources. The set was 
derived from the Dublin Core set, i.e., on pur-
pose it only includes a limited set of elements.  
 
The IMDI set was designed bottom-up and is 
used for discovery and management purposes. It 
is a rich and structured set especially derived for 
annotated resources and lexica. The distributed 
IMDI domain was extended in the INTERA and 
ECHO projects to more than 27 participating 
European institutions sees itself as an OLAC data 
provider, i.e., the OLAC harvester can read all 
IMDI records that are offered via the Open Ar-
chives Initiative metadata harvesting protocol7 
(OAI MHP). A wrapper is used to map the IMDI 
elements to the OLAC elements, i.e., the map-
                                                           
6 ISO TC37/SC4: http://www.tc37sc4.org 
7 OAI MHP: http:// www.ukoln.ac.uk/cd-
focus/presentations/ cldprac/sld020.htm 
ping relations are hardwired into a server-based 
program.  
 
Recently, a new version of the IMDI metadata 
set (version 3.0.3) was provided. In parallel, also 
the new version of the OLAC metadata set (Au-
gust 2003) was worked out. Both metadata sets 
are described by human readable definition docu-
ments available in the web. New mapping rules 
have to be constructed which for short-term 
needs will again be hard-wired into a server-
based program.  
 
But this is not seen as being sufficient to serve 
future needs. New ways have to be developed for 
making the mapping more transparent and to pre-
pare the metadata domain for Semantic Web ap-
plications. Therefore, as a first step, the IMDI 
metadata concepts are entered into the open data 
category registry that is currently emerging 
within ISO TC37/SC4.  
The ECHO task 
In the ECHO project one of the tasks is to create 
a metadata domain that covers five disciplines 
and several institutions within each discipline. In 
total we were confronted with nine different 
metadata sets.  
 
The table below gives an overview of the meta-
data types that we were confronted with. One of 
the sets is DC compliant, two produce descrip-
tions that are close to DC, two provide true OAI 
compliance including the delivery of DC records. 
Most of the data is extracted from relational da-
tabases, encoding other types of data as well. In 
many cases the elements used were not well de-
fined, possibly leading to differences in usage by 
the metadata creators. 
 
Domain ? Sub-domain size Type MD 
Formal 
State 
Harvesting 
Type Comment 
HoA - Fotothek very large MIDAS Iconclass 
non 
validated XML export from a database 
HoA - Lineamenta small close to DC non val XML export from a database 
HoA ? Maps of Rome small self-defined non val XML export from a database 
HoS ? Berlin Collection large close to DC validated XML export from a database 
HoS ? IMSS pot large DC non val XML export from a database 
E ? Ethnology Museum 
Leiden RMV very large 
OMV 
OMV Thesaurus validated OAI export from a database 
E ? NECEP database small self defined validated XML export from a database 
L ? IMDI Domain large IMDI set validated XML/OAI true XML domain 
P ? Collection of Texts small self defined non val XML XML texts 
History of arts (HoA), History of Science (HoS), Linguistics (L), Ethnology (E), Phylosophy (P) 
Also the way in which the content of resources is 
described differs substantially. In Fotothek the 
IconClass thesaurus is used to categorize the con-
tent of photos and images. In the RMV catalogue 
the OVM thesaurus is used which is similar to 
the AAT thesaurus. Some use the subject field 
from the DC element set with all its weaknesses, 
others have an unconstrained keyword field and 
the elaborate IMDI set has a couple of elements 
that describe the content such as ?task?, ?genre?, 
?subgenre?, ?language? and ?modalities?.  
 
A variety of description options is used for the 
indication of geographic regions. In the RMV 
case a geographic thesaurus is used. Others use 
descriptors such as ?country? and ?region?. In 
some instances language names have to be used 
to indicate a geographical overlap. 
 
When creating an interoperable metadata domain 
one has to cope with problems at each layer: 
character encoding, data harvesting, syntactical 
aspects and semantic integration. Only the last 
point is of relevance in the context of this paper.  
 
To enable semantic integration an ontology was 
built that covers  
 
? nine metadata repositories; 
? a file where all metadata concepts rele-
vant for the integrated domain ECHO 
domain are listed including their descrip-
tion in a number of major languages (the 
setup is similar to the one used within 
ISO TC37/SC4); 
? a file that includes all mappings between 
these concepts where each individual set 
presents a view that is mapped to all oth-
ers; 
? two geographic thesauri containing dif-
ferent types of geographic information 
with cross-links between them; 
? two category thesauri describing the con-
tent of the resources; 
? two mapping files containing one-
directional cross-links between the two 
thesauri; 
? a file that contains all content type of de-
scriptions that occur in the metadata re-
cords and which do not use one of the 
big thesauri with mappings to these two. 
 
As we are currently using the existing files sim-
ply as exchange formats they have been repre-
sented in XML (rather than RDF for instance). 
To implement fast search, specially optimized 
internal representations are chosen and combined 
with fast indexes. The representations are such 
that all occurring references are expanded in 
preparation time and not during execution time. 
A special engine was programmed that can oper-
ate on these extended representations. 
 
To illustrate this we use an example with geo-
graphic thesaurus information. A search for 
?Country=Italy? should result in hits for all ob-
jects that have to do with ?Italy? either as the 
creation site or as the site where the scene takes 
place. The metadata records are now extended 
such that for all locations that are within ?Italy? 
the nodes appearing higher up in the thesaurus 
hierarchy are added. This assures that a record 
containing for example ?Rome? will also be in-
dicated as a hit when ?Italy? was entered in the 
query. 
 
Exploiting all repositories during run-time by 
intelligent crawlers would require fast parallel 
algorithms. Only parallelism would yield the 
execution speed needed to satisfy the users.  
Relation types 
We have discovered different types of relations 
between the concepts used in the INTERA and 
ECHO projects.  
 
In the INTERA project we can indicate internal 
relations within the structured IMDI metadata 
set, i.e., structure conveys semantic relations. An 
example can be given by the many attributes of a 
participant. A certain participant has a ?name? as 
an identifier and various attributes such as ?age?, 
?role? and ?education?. Between the IMDI and 
OLAC concepts there are three types of relations: 
(1) For some concepts one can speak of equality 
and it was agreed that the controlled vocabularies 
will be unified where possible. (2) There are also 
hierarchical relations such as ?subClass? and 
?superClass? between some of the concepts. (3) 
There is a type of relation where we can speak 
about a semantic overlap that we cannot specify 
in more detail. Finally, there are concepts such as 
?age? or ?education? of a participant that do not 
map at all.  
 
For the mappings in ECHO we have identified 
four useful types of relations: (1) ?isEqualTo? 
defines semantic equivalence, (2) ?isSubclassOf? 
defines a hyponymy relation, (3) ?isSuperclas-
sOf? defines the inverse and (4) ?mapsTo? is 
used to express a semantic overlap. In most 
cases, the ?mapsTo? relation type was used ? a 
one-directional relation indicating semantic over-
lap that should be exploitable. It is not clear yet 
in how far it makes sense to define the fuzzy 
?mapsTo? relation in terms of the standard types 
provided by RDF(S)8 and/or OWL9. All concepts 
that do not map to others or that are too special 
(for example ?size of an image?) were excluded 
in the ontology definition process. 
Examples from ECHO 
Using the described ECHO interoperability 
framework a number of experiments were carried 
out for evaluation purposes. A few examples will 
be discussed here. 
 
Example 1 
Simple Search ?dogon? 
 1 match was found: NECEP: 1 
Complex Search ?dogon? 
 View NECEP - society name: 1 in NECEP 
 View IMSS - Ianguage: 1 in NECEP 
 View DC - language: 1 in NECEP 
 View Language - language: 1 in NECEP 
Complex Search ?mali? 
 View Language - country: 1 in NECEP 
 
This example demonstrates the effect of the 
mapping between the metadata sets and of the 
geographical thesaurus. The language element is 
mapped to the society name element in NECEP 
although this is semantically not correct. Enter-
ing ?mali? in the country specification yields a 
hit since ?mali? is seen as a superclass to 
?dogon?. Here a relation type such as 
?has_language? would be semantically more ap-
propriate.  
 
Example 2 
Simple Search ?inuit? 
 2 matches are found: Language: 1, NECEP: 1 
Complex Search ?inuit? 
 View Language - *: 0 in Language (could not be  
found in the Language domain) 
 View Language ? language: 1 in NECEP 
Complex Search ?greenland? 
 View Language ? language: 1 in NECEP 
 
The results are similar compared to example 1. It 
indicates that the element including ?inuit? in the 
language domain is not an element that is used 
for mapping. It was used as avalue of an optional 
                                                           
8 RDF: http://www.w3.org/RDF 
9 OWL: http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/WebOnt 
element by one specific researcher. This example 
shows that simple search covering all metadata 
elements can lead to improved results. 
 
Example 3 
Simple Search ?agriculture? 
 75 matches are found: Language: 73, Fotothek: 2 
Complex Search ?agriculture? 
 View Fotothek - iconography: 2 in Fotothek  
 View RMV ? content: 2 in Fotothek 
 View IMDI ? content: 2 in Fotothek 
 
These results are misleading and demonstrate the 
weakness of simple search. The 73 hits for lan-
guage result from matching with the recording 
place (?southern agriculture kindergarten?) and 
the affiliation of an actor (?ministry of agricul-
ture?). These results obviously do not refer to 
documents the user was serching for. In the case 
of Fotothek the hits make sense since it is about 
?harvesting?. The mapping in complex leads to 
the expected results, the misleading hits from the 
language domain are not found.  
 
Example 4 
Simple Search ?clothing?  
 22 matches: Language: 8, RMV: 8, Fotothek: 6 
Complex Search ?clothing? 
 View RMV ? content: 8 in RMV, 6 in Fotothek 
 View Fotothek ? iconography: 8 in RMV, 6 in  
Fotothek 
 View Language ? content: 8 in RMV, 6 in  
Fotothek 
 
Again the rich annotations that are used in vari-
ous free-text fields in the language domain lead 
to wrong hits. They are about chats at the bakery 
shop and the clothes people are wearing ? so it?s 
not about clothing as an object which may be 
intended by the person specifying the search. The 
results for complex search from different do-
mains shows the correctness of the mappings.  
 
Example 5 
Simple Search ?horses? 
 7 matches: Fotothek: 2, Language: 2, IMSS: 3 
Complex Search ?horses? 
 View Fotothek ? object title: 3 in IMSS 
 View Fotothek ? iconography: 2 in Fotothek 
 View Lineamenta ? title: 3 in IMSS 
 View Lineamenta ? keywords: 2 in Fotothek 
 View IMSS ? title: 3 in IMSS 
 View IMSS ?subject: 2 in Fotothek 
 View Language ? title: 3 in IMSS 
 View Language ? content: 2 in Fotothek 
 
This example clearly indicates the strength of 
simple search and the weakness of complex 
search. The pattern used by complex search can 
be compared with a narrow path in the complex 
semantic space. If selecting the title element the 
hits of IMSS are found, if the content element is 
chosen the Fotothek hits are found. Both, how-
ever, are leading to useful hits where ?horses? 
are central concepts in the resources. The reason 
for the indicated results are partly caused by very 
sparsely encoded metadata. In the case of IMSS 
the term ?horses? is only mentioned in the title, 
the content element is yet not used. In the lan-
guage case thesaurus information is used to infer 
from the string found in the title element (?spa-
tial layout task, farm scenarios?) to ?horses?.  
Summary 
Only the first three relations (equality, hypo-
nomy, hyperonomy) can be used in a strictly 
logical way. The fourth relation type is of a fuzzy 
nature but occurs most frequently. To prevent a 
semantic cycle during searching, the specially 
tailored inference engine is restricted to one in-
ference step over this fuzzy relation and exploits 
all relations only in one direction10. It is evident 
that the existing ontology does not describe a 
complete logical system. 
 
In case of the INTERA project we will continue 
to rely on a wrapper that will map IMDI to 
OLAC records to allow OAI style of harvesting. 
In the ECHO project we created optimized in-
dexes such that searching can be executed fast, 
i.e., the knowledge components in XML are sim-
ply used as interchange formats allowing for the 
easy identification of all structural components 
and for their validation. 
3 Foundation for Metadata-
Interoperability 
In the previous sections we described the current 
state of the practical work in two projects to 
achieve semantic interoperability. The way cho-
sen has a number of disadvantages in the long-
run: 
 
? In the ECHO project there are no con-
cept definitions that adhere to open and 
emerging standards such as ISO 11179 
and ISO 12620, and which are available 
in validated machine-readable registries. 
                                                           
10 It should be noted, however, that advanced infer-
ence systems can handle semantic cycles of this na-
ture. 
? The current definitions do not contain 
hierarchical relations, which could be 
part of the concept definitions if agreed 
upon by the community.  
? A contribution from other experts, for 
example to improve the definitions and 
to add other language specific aspects, is 
largely excluded. 
? The representation of the semantic rela-
tions between concepts is partly encapsu-
lated in a program preventing any 
flexibility. In the ECHO case they are 
structurally described with the help of 
XML tags, however, it would be much 
better to provide them in a way that in-
ference engines relying on RDF(S) and 
OWL could operate on them.  
 
From the practical work we learned that often the 
semantic scope of the metadata elements is not 
specified as precisely as seems possible and also 
necessary. This will allow for a spectrum of us-
age that will have effects not only on human in-
terpretation, but especially on the way of 
mapping relations to chose. It is obvious from 
this experience that users will not always agree 
on the interpretation of the definitions and on the 
types of mappings applied. At this moment we 
cannot make final statements in how far hierar-
chical relations will be effected by this that 
would constitute an implicit thesaurus as is ex-
pected within ISO TC37/SC4. 
Open Data Category Repositories 
Based on the experience so far it can be recom-
mended to include into open repositories only 
concepts that have been used for a while and 
therefore have shown their semantic stability 
within a certain community. For the area of lan-
guage resources ISO TC37/SC4 is on the way to 
create such a repository, which is compliant with 
widely recognized standards such as ISO 11179 
and ISO 12620. Therefore, it makes sense to reg-
ister all elements used within IMDI and OLAC 
as data categories in this repository.  
 
This will open up several new possibilities for 
projects and initiatives: (1) IMDI and OLAC can 
create schemas that define their sets by referring 
to machine-readable definitions. For instance, an 
equality relationship can be directly indicated by 
referring to the same data category registry 
(DCR) entry. Search engines could make use of 
this information. (2) It is our experience that pro-
jects often like to tailor their own metadata sets 
due to their specific needs. In this case an open 
registry would simply allow to create a new 
schema and to re-use existing definitions as 
much as possible11. By referring to DCR entries 
again a direct form of interoperability is 
achieved.  
 
We assume that we will have widely recognized 
DCRs as currently defined within ISO 
TC37/SC4. They should contain the concepts 
that are based on a wide agreement within com-
munities. However, due to the slow acceptance 
processes within standardization bodies and the 
different needs that result for example from dif-
ferent languages there could be a need for re-
searchers to set up their own temporary DCRs. 
We therefore foresee a large number of data 
category repositories.  
 
 
For the ECHO project the usage of an open DCR 
is not yet an option. To be of use for the commu-
nity there has to be a wide acceptance. The do-
main of ?cultural heritage? addressed within 
ECHO covers too many different disciplines and 
the concepts are semantically mostly too differ-
ent. Disciplines such as history of arts, history of 
science and ethnology have to start their disci-
pline oriented discussion process to define useful 
concepts and to start building widely recognized 
registries. What seems necessary is to start creat-
ing files with concept definitions that can be eas-
ily integrated later into open registries and that 
are compliant to emerging standards.  
Open Relation repositories 
Concept definitions in DCRs are one important 
aspect in defining metadata ontologies. Another 
aspect are repositories that store relations be-
tween these concepts. From our experience in the 
two projects mentioned, it seems required to 
separate these two types of information in order 
to achieve a high degree of independence and 
flexibility. However, other experiences as that of 
the GOLD initiative (Farrar, 2005) indicate that 
opinions on this vary largely. 
 
Theoretically, it is possible to include all infor-
mation that defines a concept into the DCR. The 
concept ?country? that is used within IMDI is 
                                                           
11 IMDI already provides a step towards this kind of 
flexibility by allowing projects to define profiles or 
individuals to define new key-value pairs. 
typically a sub-part of a ?continent?. However, 
the proper definition of the concept ?country? in 
the context of language resources is not depend-
ent on the availability of this hierarchical rela-
tion. But this again may be completely different 
for abstract linguistic concepts such as ?transitive 
verb? where we know that the class relation 
?transitive-verb isSubClassOf verb? is part of the 
definition.  
 
In general, we argue that whenever it is not 
strictly necessary for the proper definition of a 
concept, relation aspects should be kept outside 
of DCRs as much as possible, since they often 
form a constraint with only little agreement.  
 
For the represention of relations in a machine-
readable format, RDF(S) seems to be the most 
suitable choice. In RDF, all relations are repre-
sented as tertiary assertions as indicated in Figure 
1. Actually, each of these RDF assertions defines 
a relation between two resources, since the value 
can be an arbitrary web-resource as well. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 shows a basic RDF assertion specifying that 
a (web) resource identified by a URI has properties 
that may have values.  
 
Obviously, this simple mechanism allows us to 
create complex repositories of semantic relations. 
Since all objects of such an assertion can be web-
resources we can for example point to concepts 
defined in a DCR and relate them with each 
other.  
 
From the two mentioned projects we can give 
two typical examples. From the INTERA project 
we notice that according to our interpretation the 
concept ?IMDI:Participant.Role=Collector? is a 
sub-class of ?OLAC:Creator? (Figure 2).  
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 shows a typical relation that can be found in 
the INTERA project. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 shows a typical relation that can be found in 
the ECHO project. 
 
resource value 
property 
I:Participant O:Creator 
isSubClassOf 
I:Genre F:Iconography 
mapsTo 
In the ECHO project we can identify a semantic 
overlap between ?IMDI:Genre? and ?Foto-
thek:Iconography? (Figure 3).  
 
We can imagine that RDF will be used by some 
projects, initiatives and institutions to establish 
widely recognized and used repositories with 
mapping relations.  
 
We also assume that many persons, projects and 
institutions will create their own mappings to 
tune their operations like searching according to 
their specific needs, i.e., a large variety of ?prac-
tical ontologies? will emerge. These practical 
ontologies may re-use most of the semantics 
found in a repository, or they overwrite a certain 
number of relations or they introduce new rela-
tions that are not yet defined elsewhere. 
 
In contrast to the ISO data category repository 
that is based on the experiences of the work 
about ISO 11179 and ISO 12620, there is no 
work yet of how to represent relations for the 
domain of language resources. For INTERA this 
creates the need of using ad hoc solutions. ISO 
TC37/SC4 should urgently take up this issue. 
4 Registries and Engines 
Given the discussion above, we can expect the 
Semantic Web era to produce a large number of 
data category definitions stored in different 
DCRs and mapping relations between these 
stored in other repositories. Amongst these com-
ponents there will be some that deserve a larger 
interest by the language resource community, 
since they are maintained by recognized experts, 
but there will also be many others created within 
projects and institutions or even by individuals to 
satisfy only ad-hoc purposes. Therefore, we need 
an infrastructure for registering these compo-
nents for making them visible and searchable. 
 
Current inference engines such as provided by 
Jena12 assume that there is one database of mean-
ingful RDF triples. This would allow us to inte-
grate all our mapping relations from the INTERA 
or ECHO ontologies (such as ?Country isSub-
ClassOf Continent? and ?Place isSubClassOf 
Country?), that is currently part of an XML-
based thesaurus. To arrive at an RDF-based da-
tabase instead, we would need to harvest meta-
data from the XML-based thesaurus, i.e., we 
                                                           
12 Jena: http://jena.sourceforge.net 
would first have to write a wrapper that converts 
XML structure information into RDF assertions. 
 
Further, we would like to harvest RDF triples 
from different sites, since we need to integrate 
already existing knowledge. Two problems can 
be foreseen here: (1) How do we know where to 
find useful RDF triple instances? We need 
mechanisms to register the existence of sites with 
that type of information and to semi-formally 
describe the content. (2) When we harvest triples 
from such a site we may include knowledge ? 
metadata ontologies defined in RDF(S) - that is 
conflicting with what is already available. How 
can we deal with this and how can we be selec-
tive? 
 
Currently, there are no answers to these ques-
tions. But they have to be addressed soon. Also 
here ISO TC37/SC4 could play an important 
role, since it is about infrastructure aspects that 
have to be worked out for the language resource 
community. 
5 XML vs RDF 
We explained why XML was chosen in repre-
senting the knowledge involved in the projects 
mentioned. Mainly short-term arguments guided 
us to take this decision. This may not be the cor-
rect decision in the long-term. Nevertheless, also 
ISO TC37/SC4 has chosen to represent data 
category definitions as XML structures including 
hierarchical references needed to properly define 
a concept. 
 
The underlying data models of XML and RDF 
are very different. XML is based on a tree model, 
i.e., it has a strong bias towards hierarchies. All 
expressive power is gained from structural rela-
tions, which to a certain extent allow for the rep-
resentation of semantic relations. 
 
In contrast to this, RDF is based on a loose col-
lection of relations. It is therefore very simple to 
combine relations from different RDF reposito-
ries into larger collections. Although implicit 
hierarchies will be difficult to recover. 
 
Semantically, RDF Schema offers the user the 
option to define the value range of any user-
defined relation (property) used in an RDF file 
with user-defined classes, while XML only offers 
basic data types. OWL has even more expressive 
power. A good overview is given by Gil and 
Ratnaker, 2001.  
 
Summarizing, we would like to emphasize the 
following two points that need to be taken into 
account by any follow-up projects of INTERA 
and ECHO. Such a project should:  
 
? represent all concept definitions of a resource 
metadata set in an ISO DCR compliant way 
and turn them over to RDF-based reposito-
ries that may emerge within the disciplines in 
the coming years; 
? represent relations as much as possible in 
external RDF(S)-based metadata ontologies 
using all needed expressional power of 
RDF(S) and OWL so that users can easily 
add their own relations or reformulate exist-
ing ones. 
6 Conclusion 
The work on metadata interoperability in the two 
projects mentioned clearly indicate that this type 
of work is in its beginning phase. Ad hoc meth-
ods are used to achieve high speed and to guaran-
tee efficient exchange of knowledge components, 
but they form obstacles on the way towards a 
flexible and open Semantic Web type of infra-
structures. The examples indicate that the chosen 
mapping strategies lead to the expected results in 
many cases. They also indicate some of the prob-
lems that are associated with using specific ele-
ments for searching. Amongst others these are 
caused by sparsely filled in metadata descrip-
tions, unawareness about the underlying element 
semantics, insufficient mappings between meta-
data elements and thesaurus concepts. 
 
The usage of ISO 11179 and ISO 12620 compli-
ant open Data Category Registries for machine 
readable definitions of metadata concepts within 
INTERA is a first step in the right direction. 
However, other disciplines than linguistics lack 
such a widely agreed registry type. For building 
up and combining repositories of RDF-based 
relations between registered concepts there is yet 
no infrastructure. Even in the linguistics domain 
yet there is no suggestion for standards. ISO 
TC37/SC4 should take up this issue, since Data 
Category repositories with concept definitions 
and relation repositories are mutually dependent 
on each other to form exploitable knowledge 
bases. Due to the many contributions from pro-
jects, institutions and even individuals that will 
disagree with proposed definitions and relations 
we will need an efficient infrastructure for dis-
covering and combining useful knowledge com-
ponents. 
References 
S. Bird and M. Liberman. 2001. A formal framework 
for linguistic annotation. 
http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Papers/CIS9901_1999/r
evised_13Aug99.pdf 
H. Brugman and P. Wittenburg. 2001. The application 
of annotation models for the construction of data-
bases and tools. 
http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/annotation/database/pap
ers/Brugman_Wittenburg/20.2.brugman.pdf 
S. Farrar and D.T. Langendoen. 2003. Markup and the 
GOLD Ontology. 
http://saussure.linguistlist.org/cfdocs/emeld/worksh
op/2003/paper-terry.html 
Y. Gil and V. Ratnaker. A Comparison of (Semantic) 
Markup Languages. In Proceedings of AAAI 2001. 
http://trellis.semanticweb.org.expect/web/semantic
web.comparison.html 
 
