Learning Word Meaning and Grammatical Constructions
from Narrated Video Events
Peter Ford Dominey
Institut des Sciences Cognitives,
CNRS
67 Blvd. Pinel,
69675 Bron Cedex, France
dominey@ isc.cnrs.fr
Thomas Voegtlin
Institute for Theoretical Biology
Humboldt-Universit?t
Invalidenstra?e 43
D-10115 Berlin, Germany
Voegtlin@isc.cnrs.fr
Abstract
The objective of this research is to develop a system for
miniature language learning based on a minimum of pre-
wired language-specific functionality, that is compatible
with observations of perceptual and language capabilities in
human development.  In the proposed system, meaning is
extracted from video images based on detection of physical
contact and its parameters.  Mapping of sentence form to
meaning is performed by learning grammatical
constructions that are retrieved from a construction
inventory based on the constellation of closed class items
uniquely identifying the target sentence structure.  The
resulting system displays robust acquisition behavior that
reproduces certain observations from developmental
studies, with very modest ?innate? language specificity.
1. Introduction
Feldman et al (1990) posed the problem of
"miniature" language acquisition based on <sentence,
image> pairs as a "touchstone" for cognitive science.  In
this task, an artificial system is confronted with a reduced
version of the problem of language acquisition faced by
the child, that involves both the extraction of meaning
from the image, and the mapping of the paired sentence
onto this meaning.
Extraction of Meaning
In this developmental context, Mandler (1999)
suggested that the infant begins to construct meaning from
the scene based on the extraction  of perceptual
primitives.  From simple representations such as contact,
support, attachment (Talmy 1988) the infant could
construct progressively more elaborate representations of
visuospatial meaning.  Thus, the physical event "collision"
is a form of the perceptual primitive ?contact?. Kotovsky
& Baillargeon (1998) observed that at 6 months, infants
demonstrate sensitivity to the parameters of objects
involved in a collision, and the resulting effect on the
collision, suggesting indeed that infants can represent
contact as an event predicate with agent and patient
arguments.
Siskind (2001) has demonstrated that force dynamic
primitives of  contact, support, attachment can be
extracted from video event sequences and used to
recognize events including pick-up, put-down, and stack
based on their characterization in an event logic.  The use
of these intermediate representations renders the system
robust to variability in motion and view parameters.  Most
importantly, Siskind demonstrated that the lexical
semantics for a number of verbs could be established by
au omatic image processing.
Sentence to meaning mapping:
Once meaning is extracted from the scene, the
significant problem of mapping sentences to meanings
remains.  The nativist  perspective on this problem holds
that the <sentence, meaning> data to which the child is
expos  is highly indeterminate, and underspecifies the
mapping to be learned.  This ?poverty of the stimulus? is a
c ntral argument for the existence of a genetically
pecified universal grammar, such that language
acquisition consists of configuring the UG for the
appropriate target language (Chomsky 1995).  In this
framework, once a given parameter is set, its use should
apply to new constructions in a generalized, generative
manner.
An alternative functionalist perspective holds that
learning plays a much more central role in language
acq isition. The infant develops an inventory of
grammatical constructions as mappings from form to
meaning (Goldberg 1995).  These constructions are
initially rather fixed and specific, and later become
ge eralized into a more abstract compositional form
employed by the adult (Tomasello 1999).  In this context,
construction of the relation between perceptual and
cognitive representations and grammatical form plays a
central role in learning language (e.g. Feldman et al 1990,
1996; Langacker 1991; Mandler 1999; Talmy 1998).
These issues of learnability and innateness have
provided a rich motivation for simulation studies that have
taken a number of different forms.  Elman (1990)
demonstrated that recurrent networks are sensitive to
predictable structure in grammatical sequences.
Subsequent studies of grammar induction demonstrate
how syntactic structure can be recovered from sentences
(e.g. Stolcke & Omohundro 1994).  From the ?grounding
of language in meaning? perspective (e.g. Feldman et al
1990, 1996; Langacker 1991; Goldberg 1995)  Chang &
Maia (2001) exploited the relations between action
representation and simple verb frames in a construction
grammar approach.  In effort to consider more complex
grammatical forms, Miikkulainen (1996) demonstrated a
system that learned the mapping between relative phrase
constructions and multiple event representations, based on
the use of a stack for maintaining state information during
the processing of the next embedded clause in a recursive
manner.
In a more generalized approach, Dominey (2000)
exploited the regularity that sentence to meaning mapping
is encoded in all languages by word order and
grammatical marking (bound or free) (Bates et al 1982).
That model was based on the functional neurophysiology
of cognitive sequence and language processing and an
associated neural network model that has been
demonstrated to simulate interesting aspects of infant
(Dominey & Ramus 2000) and adult language processing
(Dominey et al 2003).
Objectives
The goals of the current study are fourfold: First to test
the hypothesis that meaning can be extracted from visual
scenes based on the detection of contact and its
parameters in an approach similar to but significantly
simplified from Siskind (2001); Second to determine
whether the model of Dominey (2000) can be extended to
handle embedded relative clauses; Third to demonstrate
that these two systems can be combined to perform
miniature language acquisition; and finally to demonstrate
that the combined system can provide insight into the
developmental progression in human language acquisition
without the necessity of a pre-wired parameterized
grammar system (Chomsky 1995).
The Training Data
The human experimenter enacts and simultaneously
narrates visual scenes made up of events that occur
between a red cylinder, a green block and a blue
semicircle or ?moon? on a black matte table surface. A
video camera above the surface provides a video image
that is processed by a color-based recognition and
tracking system (Smart ? Panlab, Barcelona Spain) that
generates a time ordered sequence of the contacts that
occur between objects that is subsequently processed for
event analysis (below). The simultaneous narration of the
ongoing events is processed by a commercial speech-to-
text system (IBM ViaVoiceTM). Speech and vision data
were acquired and then processed off-line yielding a data
set of matched sentence ? scene pairs that were provided
as input to the structure mapping model.  A total of  ~300
<sentence, scene> pairs were tested in the following
experiments.
2. Visual Scenes and analysis
For a given video sequence the visual scene analysis
generates the corresponding event description in the
format event(agent, object, recipient).
Single Event Labeling
Events are defined in terms of contacts between
elements.  A contact is defined in terms of the time at
which it occurred, the agent, object, and duration of the
contact.  The agent is determined as the element that had a
larger relative velocity towards the other element involved
in the contact. Based on these parameters of contact, scene
events are recognized as follows:
Touch(agent, object): A single contact, in which (a)
the duration of the contact is inferior to touch_duration
(1.5 seconds), and (b) the objectis not displaced during
the duration of the contact.
Push(agent, object): A single contact in which (a) the
duration of the contact is superior or equal to
touch_duration and inferior toake_duration (5 sec), (b)
the object is displaced during the duration of the contact,
and (c) the agent and object are not in contact at the end of
the event.
Take(agent, object): A single contact in which (a) the
duration of contact is superior or equal to take_duration,
(b) the bject is displaced during the contact, and (c) the
agent and object remain in contact.
Take(agent, object, source): Multiple contacts, as the
agent takes the object from the source. For the first
contact between the agent and the object (a) the duration
of contact is superior or equal to t ke_duration, (b) the
object is displaced during the contact, and (c) the agent
and object remain in contact.  For the  optional second
contact between the agent and the source (a) the duration
of the contact is inferior to take_duration, and (b) the
agent and source do not remain in contact.  Finally,
contact between the object and source is broken during the
event.
Give(agent, object, recipient):  In this multiple
contact event, the agent first takes the object, and then
gives the object to the recipient. For the first contact
between the agent and the object (a) the duration of
contact is inferior to take_duration, (b) the object is
displaced during the contact, and (c) the agent and object
do not remain in contact.  For the second contact between
the object and the recipient (a) the duration of the contact
is superior to take_duration, and (b) the object and
recipient remain in contact. For the third (optional)
contact between the agent and the recipient (a) the
duration of the contact is inferior to take_duration and
thus the elements do not remain in contact.
These event labeling templates form the basis for a
template matching algorithm that labels events based on
the contact list, similar to the spanning interval and event
logic of Siskind (2001).
Complex ?Hierarchical? Events
The events described above are simple in the sense
that there have no hierarchical structure.  This imposes
serious limitations on the syntactic complexity of the
corresponding sentences (Feldman et al 1996,
Miikkulainen 1996).  The sentence ?The block that
pushed the moon was touched by the triangle? illustrates a
complex event that exemplifies this issue.  The
corresponding compound event will be recognized and
represented as a pair of temporally successive simple
event descriptions, in this case: push(block, moon), and
touch(triangle, block).   The ?block? serves as the link
that connects these two simple events in order to form a
complex hierarchical event.
3. Structure mapping for language learning
The mapping of sentence form onto meaning
(Goldberg 1995) takes place at two distinct levels:  Words
are associated with individual components of event
descriptions, and grammatical structure is associated with
functional roles within scene events.  The first level has
been addressed  by Siskind (1996), Roy & Pentland
(2000) and Steels (2001) and we treat it here in a
relatively simple but effective manner.  Our principle
interest lies more in the second level of mapping between
scene and sentence structure.
Word Meaning
In the initial learning phases there is no influence of
syntactic knowledge and the word-referent associations
are stored in the WordToReferent matrix (Eqn 1) by
associating every word with every referent in the current
scene (a = 0), exploiting the cross-situational regularity
(Siskind 1996) that a given word will have a higher
coincidence with referent to which it refers than with
other r ferents. This initial word learning contributes to
learning the mapping between sentence and scene
s ructure (Eqn. 4, 5 & 6 below).  Then, knowledge of the
syntactic structure, encoded in FormToMeaning can be
used to identify the appropriate referent (in the SEA) for a
given word (in the OCA), corresponding to a non-zero
value of a in Eqn. 1.  In this ?syntactic bootstrapping? for
the new word ?gugle,? for example, syntactic knowledge
of Agent-Event-Object structure of the sentence ?John
pushed the gugle? can be used to assign ?gugle? to the
object of push.
WordToReferent(i,j) = WordToReferent(i,j) +
OCA(k,i) * SEA(m,j) *
aFormToMeaning(m,k) (1)
Figure 1.  Structure-Mapping Architecture.  Open class
words in OCA are translated to Predicted Referents in the
PRA via the WorldToReferent   mapping. PRA elements
are mapped onto their roles in the SEA by the
FormToMeaning mapping, specific to each sentence type.
This mapping is retrieved from Construction Inventory,
via the ConstructionIndex that encodes the closed class
words that characterize each sentence type.
Open vs Closed Class Word Categories
Our approach is based on the cross-linguistic
observation that open class words (e.g. nouns, verbs,
adjectives and adverbs) are assigned to their thematic
rol s based on word order and/or grammatical function
words or morphemes (Bates et al 1982).  Newborn infants
are sensitive to the perceptual properties that distinguish
these two categories (Shi et al 1999), and in adults, these
categories are processed by dissociable
neurophysiological systems (Brown et al 1999).
Visual Scene
Analysis
Action
Agent
Object
Recipient
Construction I ventory
Closed
class
words
Construction
Index
WordToReferent
Open Class
Array (OCA)
FormToMeaning
Predicted
Referents
Array (PRA)
Speech Input
 Processing
Scene  Event Array
(SEA)
Similarly, artificial neural networks can also learn to make
this function/content distinction (Morgan et al 1996).
Thus, for the speech input that is provided to the learning
model open and closed class words are directed to
separate processing streams that preserve their order and
identity, as indicated in Figure 1.
Note that by making this dissociation between open
and closed class elements, the grammar learning problem
is substantially simplified.  Again, it is thus of interest that
newborn infants can perform this lexical categorization
(Shi et al 1999), and we have recently demonstrated that
a recurrent network of leaky integrator neurons can
categorize open and closed class words based on the
structure of the F0 component of the speech signal in
French and English (Blanc, Dodane & Dominey 2003).
Mapping Sentence to Meaning
In terms of the architecture in Figure 2, this mapping
can be characterized in the following successive steps.
First, words in the Open Class Array are decoded into
their corresponding scene referents (via the
WordToReferent mapping) to yield the Predicted
Referents Array that contains the translated words while
preserving their original order from the OCA (Eqn 2).
n
i 1
PRA(k,j) = OCA(k,i) * WordToReferent(i,j)
=
?       (2)
Next, each sentence type will correspond to a specific
form to meaning mapping between the PRA and the SEA.
encoded in the FormToMeaning array. The problem will
be to retrieve for each sentence type, the appropriate
corresponding FormToMeaning mapping.  To solve this
problem, we recall that each sentence type will have a
unique constellation of closed class words and/or bound
morphemes (Bates et al 1982) that can be coded in a
ConstructionIndex (Eqn.3) that forms a unique identifier
for each sentence type.  Thus, the appropriate
FormToMeaning mapping for each sentence type can be
indexed in ConstructionInventory by its corresponding
ConstructionIndex.
ConstructionIndex = fcircularShift(ConstructionIndex,
 FunctionWord) (3)
The link between the ConstructionIndex and the
corresponding FormToMeaning mapping is established as
follows. As each new sentence is processed, we first
reconstruct the specific FormToMeaning mapping for that
sentence (Eqn 4), by mapping words to referents (in PRA)
and referents to scene elements (in SEA). The resulting,
FormToMeaningCurrent encodes the correspondence
between word order (that is preserved in the PRA Eqn 2)
and thematic roles in the SEA.  Note that the quality of
FormToMeaningCurrent will depend on the quality of
acquir d word meanings in WordToReferent.   Thus,
syntactic learning requires a minimum baseline of
s mantic knowledge.
n
i=1
FormToMeaningCurrent(m,k) =
     PRA(k,i)*SEA(m,i)? (4)
G ven the FormToMeaningCurrent mapping for the
current sentence, we can now associate it in the
ConstructionInventory with the corresponding function
word configuration or ConstructionIndex for that
sentence, expressed in (Eqn 5).
ConstructionInventory(i,j) = ConstructionInventory(i,j)
+ ConstructionIndex(i)
* FormToMeaning-Current(j) (5)
Finally, once this learning has occurred, for new
sentences we can now extract the FormToMeaning
mapping from the learned ConstructionInventory by using
the ConstructionIndex as an index into this associative
memory, illustrated in Eqn. 6.
n
i=1
FormToMeaning(i) = 
  ConstructionInventory(i,j) * ConstructinIndex(j)? (6)
To accommodate the dual scenes for complex events
Eqns. 4-7 are instantiated twice each, to represent the two
components of the dual scene.  In the case of simple
scenes, the second component of the dual scene
representation is null.
We evaluate performance by using the
WordToReferent and FormToMeaning knowledge to
construct for a given input sentence the ?predicted scene?.
That is, the model will construct an internal representation
of the scene that should correspond to the input sentence.
This is achieved by first converting the Open-Class-Array
into its corresponding scene items in the Predicted-
Referents-Array as specified in Eqn.  2.  The referents are
then re-ordered into the proper scene representation via
application of the FormToMeaning transformation as
described in Eqn.  7.
PSA(m,i) = PRA(k,i) * FormToMeaning(m,k) (7)
When learning has proceeded correctly, the predicted
scene array (PSA) contents should match those of the
scene event array (SEA) that is directly derived from input
to the model.   We then quantify performance error in
terms of the number of mismatches between PSA and
SEA.
4.  Experimental results
Hirsh-Pasek & Golinkof (1996) indicate that children
can use knowledge of word meaning to acquire a fixed
SVO template around 18 months, and then expand this to
non-canonical sentence forms around 24+ months.
Tomasello (1999) similarly indicates that fixed
grammatical constructions will be used initially, and that
these will then provide the basis for the development of
more generalized constructions (Goldberg 1995).  The
following experiments attempt to follow this type of
developmental progression.
A. Learning of Active Forms for Simple Events
1. Active:  The block pushed the triangle.
2. Dative:  The block gave the triangle to the moon.
For this experiment, 17 scene/sentence pairs were
generated that employed the 5 different events, and
narrations in the active voice, corresponding to the
grammatical forms 1 and 2.  The model was trained for 32
passes through the 17 scene/sentence pairs for a total of
544 scene/sentence pairs.  During the first 200
scene/sentence pair trials, a in Eqn. 1 was 0 (i.e. no
syntactic bootstrapping before syntax is adquired), and
thereafter it was 1. This was necessary in order to avoid
the random effect of syntactic knowledge on semantic
learning in the initial learning stages. The trained system
displayed error free performance for all 17 sentences, and
generalization to new sentences that had not previously
been tested.
B. Passive forms
This experiment examined learning active and passive
grammatical forms, employing grammatical forms 1-4.
Word meanings were used from Experiment A, so only
the structural FormToMeaning mappings were learned.
3. Passive:  The triangle was pushed by the block.
4. Dative Passive:  The moon was given to the triangle
by the block.
Seventeen new scene/sentence pairs were generated
with active and passive grammatical forms for the
narration. Within 3 training passes through the 17
sentences (51 scene/sentence pairs), error free
performance was achieved, with confirmation of error free
generalization to new untrained sentences of these types.
The rapid learning indicates the importance of lexicon in
establishing the form to meaning mapping for the
grammatical constructions.
C. Relative forms for Complex Events
Here we consider complex scenes narrated by sentences
with relative clauses.  Eleven complex scene/sentence
pairs were generated with narration corresponding to the
grammatical forms indicated in 5 ? 10:
5. T e block that pushed the triangle touched the moon.
6. The block pushed the triangle that touched the moon.
7. T e block that pushed the triangle was touched by the
moon.
8.  block pushed the triangle that was touched the
moon.
9. The block that was pushed by the triangle touched the
moon.
10. The block was pushed by the triangle that touched the
moon.
After presentation of 88 scene/sentence pairs, the model
performed without error for these 6 grammatical forms,
and displayed error-free generalization to new sentences
that had not been used during the training for all six
grammatical forms.
D. Combined Test with and Without Lexicon
A total of 27 scene/sentence pairs, used in Experiments
B and C, were employed that exercised the ensemble of
grammatical forms 1 ? 10 using the learned
WordToReferent mappings.  After exposure to 162
scene/sentence pairs the model performed and generalized
without error. When this combined test was performed
without the pre-learned lexical mappings in
WordToReferent, the system failed to converge,
illustrating the advantage of following the developmental
progression from lexicon to simple to complex
grammatical structure.  This also illustrates the
importance of interaction between syntactic and semantic
knowledge that is treated in more detail in Dominey
(2000).
E. Some Scaling Issues
A small lexicon and construction inventory are used to
illustrate the system behavior. Based on the independant
representation formats, the architecture should scale well.
The has now been tested with a larger lexicon, and has
learned over 35 grammatical constructions.  The system
should extend to all languages in which sentence to
meaning mapping is encoded by word order and/or
grammatical marking (Bates et al 1982).  In the current
study, deliberate human event production yielded
essentially perfect recognition, though the learning model
is relatively robust  (Dominey 2000) to elevated scene
e ror rates.
F. Representing Hierarchical Structure
The knowledge of the system is expressed in the
WorldToReferent and FormToMeaning matrices. In order
to deal with complex sentences with embedded clauses, it
is necessary to use this same knowledge at different levels
of the hierarchy. For this, a "branching mechanism" is
necessary, that ordinates the input and output vectors
corresponding to meaning and word events. An effective
solution to that problem is to learn the branching for each
construction as we have done. However, a real account of
the human faculty of recursion should be both general (i.e.
it should apply to any reasonably complex structure) and
plausible (i.e. the branching mechanism should be
connectionist). In order to provide this level of generality,
neural models need to include a logical "stack" (cf
Miikkulainen 1996), in order to process the context of
embedded sentences. Complex structures themselves may
be represented in a connectionist way, using the Recursive
Auto-Associative Memory (Pollack, 1990). In (Voegtlin
and Dominey 2003), we proposed a representation system
for complex events, that is both generative (it can handle
any structure) and systematic (it can generalize, and it
does so in a compositional way). This system could be
used here, as its representation readily provides a case-
role system. The advantages are twofold. First, the
branching mechanism is implemented in a neurally
realistic way. Second, the recursion capability of the
system will allow it to apply its knowledge to any
sentence form, whether known or new.  Future research
will address this issue.
Conclusion
The current study demonstrates (1) that the perceptual
primitive of contact (available to infants at 5 months), can
be used to perform event description in a manner that is
similar to but significantly simpler than Siskind (2001),
(2) that a novel implementation of principles from
construction grammar can be used to map sentence form
to these meanings together in an integrated system, (3)
that relative clauses can be processed in a manner that is
similar to, but requires less specific machinery (e.g. no
stack) than that in Miikkalanian (1996), and finally (4)
that the resulting system displays robust acquisition
behavior that reproduces certain observations from
developmental studies with very modest ?innate?
language specificity.
Note that one could have taken the same approach by
integrating Siskind?s (2001) full event system, and
Miikkulainen?s (1996) embedded case-role system.  Each
of these however required significant architectural
complexity to accomplish the full job.  The current goal
was to identify minimal event recognition and form-to-
meaning mapping capabilities that could be integrated into
a coherent system that performs at the level of a human
infant in the first years of  development when the
construction inventory is being built up.  This forms the
basis for the infant?s subsequent ability to de- and re-
compose these constructions in a truly compositional
manner, a topic of future research.
Acknowledgments
Supported by the EuroCores OMLL project, the
French ACI Integrative and Computational Neuroscience
Project, and the HFSP MCILA Project.
Appendix: Sentence and scene descriptions
The <sentence, meaning> pairs for training and testing are
constructed from the following templates.  The lexicon
consists of 5 nouns (cylinder, moon, block, cat, dog), 5
verbs (touch, push, take, give, say), and 8 function words
(to, by, from, was, that, it, itself, and)1.
A.1 Single event scenes
1. Agent verb object.  (Active)
Verb(agent, object)
2. Object was verbed by agent.  (Passive)
Verb(agent, object).
3. Agent verbed object to recipient. (Dative)
Verb(agent, object, recipient)
4. Object was verbed to recipient by agent. (Dative
passive)
Action1(agent1, object2, recipient3).
5.  Agent1 action1 recipient3 object2.
Verb(agent, object, recipient).
A.2 Double event relatives
6. Agent1 that verb1ed object2 verb2ed object3. (Relative
agent).
Action1(agent1,object2), Action2(agent1,object3)
7. Object3 was action2ed by  agent1 that action1ed
object2. (Relative object).
Action1(agent1,object2), Action2(agent1,object3)
8. Agent1 that action21ed object2 was action22ed by
agent3
Action1(agent1,object2), Action2(agent3,object1)
9.  Agent3 action2ed object1 that action1ed object2
Action1(agent1,object2), Action2(agent3,object1)
10.   Obj2 that was action1ed by agent1 action2ed obj3
Action1(agent1,object2), Action2(agent2,object3)
11. Obj3 was act2d by agent2 that was act1d by agent1
Action1(agent1,object2), Action2(agent2,object3)
12. Obj2 that was action1ed by agent1 was action2ed by
g3
Action1(agent1,object2), Action2(agent3,object2)
13.  ag3 act22ed obj2 that was act21ed by ag1
Action21(agent1,object2), Action22(agent3,object2)
                                                          
1 Possible scaling issues for WordToWorld mappings are not of concern
here.  If WordToWorld is well specified, then lexicon size has no
influence on SentenceToWorld mapping.
14. Ag1 that act1ed obj2 act2ed obj3 to recip4
Action1(agent1,object2),
Action2(agent1,object3,recipient4)
 15. Obj3 was act32ed to recip4 by ag1 that act21ed obj2
Action1(agent1,object2),
Action2(agent1,object3,recipient4)
16. Agent1 that action1ed object2 was action2ed to recip4
by ag3
Action1(agent1,object2),
Action2(agent3,object1,recipient4)
17. Ag3 act2ed obj4 to recip1 that act1ed obj2
Action1(agent1,object2),
Action2(agent3,object4,recipient1)
18.  Obj4 was act2ed from ag3 to recip1 that act1ed obj2
Action1(agent1,object2),
Action2(agent3,object4,recipient1)
19.   Obj2 that was act1ed by ag1 act2ed obj3 to recip4
Action1(agent1,object2),
Action2(agent2,object3,recipient4) 
20.  Ag3 act2ed ob4 to rec2 that was act1ed by ag1
Action1(agent1,object2),
Action2(agent3,object4,recipient2)
21.   Ag1 that act1ed obj2 to rec3 act2ed obj4
Action1(agent1,object2,recipient3),
Action2(agent1,object4)
22.  Obj4 was act2ed by ag1 that act1ed ob2 to rec3
Action1(agent1,object2,recipient3),
Action2(agent1,object4)
23.  Ag4 act2ed ob1 that act1ed ob2 to rec3
Action1(agent1,object2,recipient3),
Action2(agent4,object1)
24. Ob1 that act1ed ob2 to rec3 was act2ed by ag4
Action1(agent1,object2,recipient3),
Action2(agent4,object1)
25. Ag2 that was act1ed by ag1 to rec3 act2ed ob4
Action1(agent1,object2,recipient3),
Action2(agent2,object4)
26.  Ag4 act2ed obj2 that was act1ed by ag1 to rec3
Action1(agent1,object2,recipient3),
Action2(agent4,object2)
A.3  Dual event Conjoined
27. Agent1 action1 object1 and object2. (Active
conjoined object)
Action1(agent1, object1),
Action1(agent1, object2)
28. Agent1 and agent3 action1ed object2.(Active
conjoined agent)
Action1(agent1, object2),
Action1(agent3, object2)
29. Agent1 action1ed object2 and action2 object3.
(Conjoined)
Action1(agent1, object2),
Action2(agent1, object3)
A.4 Dual Event Reflexive
30. Agent1 action1r that agent2 action2ed object3.
(Simple reflexive)
Action1r2(agent1),
Action2(agent2, object3).
31. Agent1 action1ed itself.  (Simple active reflexive)
Action1(agent1, agent1).
32. Agent1 action1r that agent2 action2ed itself.
(Reflexive simple noun phrase).
Action1r(agent1),
Action2(agent2, agent2).
33.  Agent1 action1r that agent2 action2ed it. 
(Pronoun simple noun phrase).
Action1r(agent1),
Action2(agent2, agent1).
34.  Agent1 action1r that it action1ed object2.
Action1r(agent1),
Action2(agent1, object2).
35. Agent1 action1r that object3 was action2ed by agent2.
Action1r(agent1),
Action2(agent2, object3).
36. Agent1 action1r that agent2 action2ed object3 to
recipient4.
Action1r(agent1),
Action2(agent2, object3, recipient4).
37. Agent1 action1r agent2 action2ed object3 to
recipient4.
Action1r(agent1),
Action2(agent2, object3, recipient4).
38. Object2 object3 were action1ed to recipient4 by
agent1.
Action1(agent1, object2, recipient4), Action1(agent1,
object3, recipient4)
References
Bates E, McNew S, MacWhinney B, Devescovi A, Smith
S (1982) Functional constraints on sentence processing:
A cross linguistic study, Cognition (11) 245-299.
Blanc J-M, Dodane C, Dominey PF (2003)  Temporal
Processing for Syntax Acquisition: A simulation study.
Ms submitted to C gSci 2003.
Brown CM, Hagoort P, ter Keurs M (1999)
Electrophysiological signatures of visual lexical
processing :  Open- and closed-class words.  Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience. 11 :3, 261-281
Chomsky N. (1995) The Minimalist Program.  MIT
Chang NC, Maia TV (2001) Grounded learning of
grammatical constructions, AAAI Spring Symp. On
Learning Grounded Representations, Sta ford CA.
Dominey PF, Ramus F (2000) Neural network processing
of natural lanugage: I. Sensitivity to serial, temporal and
abstract structure of language in the infant.  Lang.  and
Cognitive Processes,  15(1) 87-127
                                                          
2 Corresponds to reflexive verbs such as ?said,? or ?believed.?
Dominey PF (2000) Conceptual Grounding in Simulation
Studies of Language Acquisition, Evolution of
Communication, 4(1), 57-85.
Dominey PF, Hoen M, Lelekov T, Blanc JM  (2003)
Neurological basis of language in sequential cognition:
Evidence from simulation, aphasia and ERP studies, (in
press) Brain and Language
Elman J (1990) Finding structure in time. Cognitive
Science, 14:179-211.
Feldman JA, Lakoff G, Stolcke A, Weber SH (1990)
Miniature language acquisition: A touchstone for
cognitive science. In Proceedings of the 12th Ann Conf.
Cog. Sci. Soc. 686-693, MIT, Cambridge MA
Feldman J., G. Lakoff, D. Bailey, S. Narayanan, T.
Regier, A. Stolcke (1996). L0: The First Five Years.
Artificial Intelligence Review, v10 103-129.
Goldberg A (1995) Constructions. U Chicago Press,
Chicago and London.
Hirsh-Pasek K, Golinkof RM (1996) The origins of
grammar: evidence from early language
comprehension. MIT Press, Boston.
Kotovsky L, Baillargeon R,  The development of
calibration-based reasoning about collision events in
young infants.  1998, Cognition, 67, 311-351
Langacker, R. (1991). Foundations of Cognitive
Grammar. Practical Applications, Volume 2. Stanford
University Press, Stanford.
Mandler J (1999) Preverbal representations and language,
in P. Bloom, MA Peterson, L Nadel and MF Garrett
(Eds) Language and Space, MIT Press,  365-384
Miikkulainen R (1996) Subsymbolic case-role analysis of
sentences with embedded clauses. Cognitive Science,
20:47-73.
Morgan JL, Shi R, Allopenna P (1996) Perceptual bases
of rudimentary grammatical categories: Toward a
broader conceptualization of bootstrapping, pp 263-286,
in Morgan JL, Demuth K (Eds) Signal to syntax,
Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah NJ, USA.
Pollack JB (1990) Recursive distributed representations.
Artificial Intelligence, 46:77-105.
Roy D, Pentland A (2002). Learning Words from Sights
and Sounds: A Computational Model. Cognitive
Science, 26(1), 113-146.
Shi R., Werker J.F., Morgan J.L. (1999) Newborn infants'
sensitivity to perceptual cues to lexical and grammatical
words, Cognition, Volume 72, Issue 2, B11-B21.
Siskind JM (1996) A computational study of cross-
situational techniques for learning word-to-meaning
mappings, Cognition (61) 39-91.
Siskind JM (2001) Grounding the lexical semantics of
verbs in visual perception using force dynamics and
event logic. Journal of AI Research (15) 31-90
Steels, L. (2001) Language Games for Autonomous
Robots. IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 16, nr. 5, pp. 16-
22, New York: IEEE Press.
Stolcke A, Omohundro SM (1994) Inducing probablistic
grammars by Bayseian model merging/ In Grammatical
Inference and Applications: Proc. 2nd Intl. Colloq. On
Grammatical Inference, Springer Verlag.
Talmy L (1988) Force dynamics in language and
cognition. Cognitive Science, 10(2) 117-149.
Tomasello M (1999) The item-based nature of children's
early syntactic development, Trends in Cognitive
Science, 4(4):156-163
Voegtlin T, Dominey PF (2003) Linear recursive
distributed representations (submitted).
