Incremental Generation of Multimodal Deixis Referring to Objects
Alfred Kranstedt, Ipke Wachsmuth
University of Bielefeld
Artificial Intelligence Group, Faculty of Technology
D-33594 Bielefeld
{akranste, ipke}@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de
Abstract
This paper describes an approach for the generation
of multimodal deixis to be uttered by an anthro-
pomorphic agent in virtual reality. The proposed
algorithm integrates pointing and definite descrip-
tion. Doing so, the context-dependent discrimina-
tory power of the gesture determines the content-
selection for the verbal constituent. The concept
of a pointing cone is used to model the region sin-
gled out by a pointing gesture and to distinguish
two referential functions called object-pointing and
region-pointing.
1 Introduction
Deixis anchors utterances in their spatio-temporal context and
can therefore be seen as a central part of the aboutness of
language. In face-to-face interaction deixis is typically ex-
pressed using several modalities. In this paper we describe
an approach for the generation of multimodal deixis referring
to objects. These expressions integrate two different kinds
of referring to objects, indicating the location of an object
by pointing or describing its properties by a definite descrip-
tion. Following McNeill [McNeill, 1992], we distinguish
between abstract pointings and pointings into concrete do-
mains. Here, we focus on pointings into concrete domains
co-occurring with verbal expressions, typically definite noun
phrases. As we will see further on, the interrelation between
gesture and verbal expression is of a complex nature. Both
are often under-specified; only together they identify the ref-
erent unambiguously.
In the growing number of applications which are char-
acterised by an anthropomorphic human-computer interface
there is an increasing need for robust mechanisms when re-
ferring to objects by speech and gesture. Emphasising the
importance of deixis in the interaction with humanoid agents,
[Lester et al, 1999] introduced the expression deictic believ-
ability. In contrast, the generation of multimodal reference
is an open issue until now, while the generation of referring
expressions, which identify objects by description, is well in-
vestigated (several computational models have been proposed
over the last years).
The approach proposed for the generation of multimodal
deictic expressions is based on the incremental algorithm by
[Dale and Reiter, 1995]. This algorithm for the generation
of verbal referring expressions was adapted in that the spatial
property location, which can be expressed either absolutely
by pointing or relationally by verbal expressions (e.g. ?the
left object?), is evaluated besides other object properties in
content-selection. Taking account of the inherent imprecise-
ness of pointing gestures, two referential functions of point-
ing are distinguished, object-pointing and region-pointing.
While object-pointing refers on its own, region-pointing is
used to narrow down the set of objects from which the refer-
ent has to be distinguished by a definite description.
Figure 1: The interaction scenario
The described research is undertaken in the course of the
development of human computer interfaces for natural inter-
action in Virtual Reality (VR). Conducting empirical inves-
tigations and developing computational models we focus on
dialogues in a construction task domain, where a kit consist-
ing of generic parts is used to construct models of mechanical
objects such as a toy airplane. A typical setting consists of a
human instructor and an anthropomorphic virtual agent inter-
acting in face-to-face manner in VR realised in a three-side
Cave-like installation. Our human-sized virtual agent called
Max is able to interpret simple multimodal (speech and ges-
ture) input from the human instructor on the one hand and to
produce synchronised output involving synthetic speech, fa-
cial display and gesture [Kopp and Wachsmuth, 2004] on the
other hand. As illustrated in Fig. 1, Max and the human dia-
logue partner are located at a virtual table with toy parts and
communicate about how to assemble them. Speech and ges-
ture are used by both interlocutors to specify tasks and select
relevant objects.
On the way towards dialogue generation a setting we call
demonstration games has been established to get at the un-
derstanding and generation of complex deictic expressions.
These demonstration games which reduce interaction to two
turns are based on the minimal dialogue games proposed by
[Mann, 1988]. The setting consists of two interlocutors lo-
cated at a table with some objects lying on it. One inter-
locutor has to indicate an object by speech and gesture, and
the other interlocutor has to give feedback on which object
was referred to. In a human-human realisation this setting
is used to conduct empirical studies to investigate the refer-
ring behaviour of subjects [Ku?hnlein and Stegmann, 2003;
Lu?cking et al, 2004]. An annotated corpus was acquired
which comprises 65 multimodal demonstrations uttered by
several subjects. In a human-machine realisation the setting
is used as a testbed for the developed communicative abili-
ties of our agent concerning deictic reference. This enables
us to directly link and compare the results of speech-gesture
processing with empirically recorded data in a comparable
setting [Kranstedt et al, 2004].
In the section to follow, the role of pointing in multimodal
referring expressions is analysed in more detail. The concept
of a pointing cone and two referential functions of pointing,
object-pointing and region-pointing, are introduced. In Sec. 3
a short overview on related work concerning the generation of
referring expression is given. The incremental algorithm pro-
posed by [Dale and Reiter, 1995] underlying our approach is
outlined in Sec. 3.1. In Sec. 4 the content-selection algorithm
proposed for multimodal deictic expressions is described in
detail. Sec. 5 illustrates its functionality giving an example.
Sec. 6 describes the embedding of the algorithm in a gener-
ation framework and the current potentials and limitations of
the approach. The paper concludes with a short discussion of
the proposed approach.
2 Pointing in Multimodal Deictic Expressions
There is little doubt in the literature that pointing is tied up
with reference as the following quotation from [Lyons, 1977,
p. 654] shows:
When we identify an object by pointing to it (and this no-
tion, as we have seen, underlies the term ?deixis? and Peirce?s
term ?index?: cf. 15.1), we do so by drawing the attention
of the addressee to some spatio-temporal region in which the
object is located.
Pointing, then, is related to objects indicated and regions
occupied. Lyons also emphasises that certain kinds of ex-
pressions, especially definite descriptions, are closely linked
to pointing or demonstration (op. cit., p. 657):
[. . . ] definite referring noun-phrases, as they have been
analysed in this section, always contain a deictic element. It
follows that reference by means of definite descriptions de-
pends ultimately upon deixis, just as much as does reference
by means of demonstratives and (as we saw in the previous
section) personal pronouns.
Pointing and definite descriptions therefore represent on
the one hand different kinds of referring to objects (indicat-
ing their location or describing their properties). On the other
hand they appear to be intimately connected. Lyons does not
discuss how exactly pointing and verbal expression are re-
lated. Following [Rieser, 2004], we pursue a line of thought
associated with Peirce, who maintains the idea of gestures be-
ing part of more complex signs [Peirce, 1965]. Transferring
that to deixis we call such complex signs, which are com-
posed of a pointing gesture and a definite description, com-
plex demonstrations. In other words, complex demonstra-
tions are definite descriptions to which pointings add content,
either by specifying an object independently of the definite
description (Lyons? attention being drawn to some object) or
by narrowing down the description?s restrictor (Lyons? spatio-
temporal region). Below, we refer to these two possibilities as
the respective functions of demonstration, see [Rieser, 2004]
for discussion. If a pointing gesture uniquely singles out an
object, it is said to have object-pointing function. If the ges-
ture draws the attention of the addressee to a region making
the objects inside it salient it is ascribed a region-pointing
function.
The distinction between object-pointing and region-
pointing is closely connected with the observation that point-
ing gestures are inherently ambiguous, varying with the dis-
tance between pointing agent and referent. In the empirical
data collected in our demonstration games we found object-
pointing only in demonstrations to objects near to the demon-
strating subject, while pointings to objects farther are accom-
panied by definite descriptions [Lu?cking et al, 2004]. Two
phenomena can be recognised (even though they are blurred
by over-specification which we observe very often in com-
plex demonstrations). First, pointing saves words; definite
descriptions accompanied by a pointing gesture are shorter
and less complex than definite descriptions without gesture.
Secondly, length and complexity of the definite description
in complex demonstrations depend on the distance between
demonstrating subject and referent pointed to. Similar results
can be found in literature, e.g. [Beun and Cremers, 2001;
van der Sluis and Krahmer, 2004].
These results indicate that the discriminative power of
pointing gestures influences the construction of definite de-
scriptions and that in order to determine the set of entities
delimited by a pointing gesture the distance to the referent
has to be accounted for. As a first approximation we model
the topology of the region singled out by a pointing gesture
as a cone anchored at the index finger tip and directed along
the vector defined by the stretched index finger.
It has to be stressed, however, that a cone is an idealisation
of the pointing region. There are a lot of influencing param-
eters, which we can divide in perceivable parameters on the
one hand (like spatial configuration of demonstrating agent,
addressee, and referents as well as the clustering of the en-
tities under demonstration) and dialogue parameters on the
other hand. Determining the pointing cone in more detail is
the issue of further empirical investigations currently under-
taken. The concept of pointing cone we use is based on a set
of parameters which guarantees that the cone?s form and size
can be adjusted as further findings become available.
Observations we made in our corpus suggest that we have
to acknowledge that each of the two referential functions
of pointing, i.e. object-pointing and region-pointing, comes
with a cone on its own. Therefore, the concept of pointing
cone can be divided into two topologically different types for
object- and for region-pointing respectively, with the former
having a narrower angle than the latter. The cone of object-
pointing represents the resolution of a pointing gesture visu-
ally perceivable to the dialogue participants, and therefore,
defines the borderline up to which object-pointing can be
conducted successfully. Preliminary findings [Ku?hnlein and
Stegmann, 2003] indicate an apex angle of this cone of about
12 to 24 degrees. In contrast, region-pointing draws the at-
tention of the addressee to a wider region making the objects
inside this region salient. The cone representing this region
has to be modelled with a wider apex angle than the cone for
object-pointing to ensure robust reference and to fit empirical
findings concerning over-specification.
3 Related Work
While much work concerning the generation of referring ex-
pressions has been published over the last 15 years, work on
the generation of multi-modal referring expressions is rare.
Most of the approaches which can be found in this field use
idealised pointing in addition or instead of referring expres-
sions. [Claassen, 1992] and [Reithinger, 1992] highlight the
referent in two-dimensional settings by an idealised pointing
gesture represented by an arrow or a schematic hand. [Noma
and Badler, 1997] and [Andre? et al, 1999] introduce virtual
agents in presentation tasks able to produce simple point-
ing gestures. [Lester et al, 1999] and [Rickel and Johnson,
1999] generate pointing gestures expressed by an agent which
moves to the referent, and therefore, achieve unambiguous
pointing. Only [Krahmer and van der Sluis, 2003] integrate
pointing and definite descriptions in a more natural way and
account for vague pointing. They distinguish three types of
preciseness, i.e. precise, imprecise, or very imprecise point-
ing, and integrate pointing into the graph-based algorithm
proposed by [Krahmer et al, 2003].
Examining the generation of referring expressions realised
as definite descriptions one has to mention, first of all, that the
problem of selecting the minimal set (in the sense of Grice?s
quantity maxim) of object properties needed for an unam-
biguous description of the referent has exponential computa-
tional complexity [Reiter, 1990]. Each combination of prop-
erties has to be tested whether it is true only for the referent,
and the shortest one of these combinations has to be chosen.
Especially for real-time applications in domains with high ob-
ject density and objects with a high number of properties this
computation is intractable with brute-force methods. Several
approaches have been proposed to deal with this problem,
namely [Dale, 1992; Krahmer et al, 2003; Horacek, 1997;
Gardent, 2002]. [Dale and Reiter, 1995] proposed an incre-
mental algorithm which violates the quantity maxim in the
strict sense, but achieves linear compute time and fits well
with empirical findings.
3.1 The Incremental Algorithm by Dale and Reiter
To achieve linear compute time, [Dale and Reiter, 1995] pro-
pose a fixed sequence of property evaluation and avoid back-
tracking. This approach leads to over-specification, but they
can show that the generation results fit well with empirical
findings if the sequence of properties is chosen accurately
w.r.t. the specific domain. Therefore, the content-selection
algorithm (see Alg. 3.1) gets, in addition to the referent r and
the context set C, also a sorted list of properties P as an input.
The functionality of this algorithm can be described in
short as follows. In the ordering of P each property Ai in P
is evaluated concerning its discriminatory power, that means
it is checked if there is at least one object in C which has an-
other value for A than the referent r has. These objects are
ruled out. If the contrast set C is empty the algorithm termi-
nates and returns a list with the discriminating properties L.
W.r.t. observations in their corpora Dale and Reiter add the
property type everytime. The task of FINDBESTVALUE is the
search for the most specific value of an attribute that (1), dis-
criminates the referent r from more elements in D than the
next general one does, and (2), is known by the addressee.
We chose this algorithm as a starting point for our work
and adapted it for multimodal expressions because of its ap-
propriateness w.r.t. empirical data and its efficient compute
time .
Algorithm 3.1: MAKEREFERRINGEXPRESSION(r, C, P )
L? {}
for each member Ai of list P do
V = FINDBESTVALUE(r, Ai, BASICLEVELVALUE(r, Ai))
if RULESOUT((Ai, V )) 6= nil
then L? L ? {(Ai, V )}
C ? C \ RULESOUT((Ai, V ))
if C = {} then
if (type,X) ? L for some X
then return (L)
else return (L ? {(type, BASICLEVELVALUE(r, type))})
return (failure)
procedure FINDBESTVALUE(r, A, initial-value)
if USERKNOWS(r, (A, initial-value)) = true
then value? initial-value
else value? no-value
if (more-specific-value? MORESPECIFICVALUE(r, A, value)) 6= nil ?
(new-value? FINDBESTVALUE(A,more-specific-value)) 6= nil ?
(|RULESOUT((A,new-value))| > |RULESOUT((A, value))|)
then value? new-value
return (value)
procedure RULESOUT((A, V ))
if V = no-value
then return (nil)
else return (x : x ? C ? USERKNOWS(x, (A, V )) = false)
4 Incremental Multimodal Content Selection
We integrate in the incremental algorithm by Dale and Re-
iter an evaluation of the spatial property location, either to
be uttered absolutely by a pointing gesture or to be expressed
verbally in relation to other objects in speaker-intrinsic coor-
dinates.
Before presenting the algorithm we first have to clarify the
terminology used. Analogous to [Dale and Reiter, 1995], we
define the context set C to be the set of entities (physical ob-
jects in our scenario) that the hearer is currently assumed to
be attending to. We also define the set of distractors D to be
the set of entities from which the referent r has to be distin-
guished further on. At the beginning of the content selection
process the distractor set D will be the context set C except
the referent r; at the end D will be empty if content selection
was successful. R represents the set of restricting properties
found, each composed of an attribute-value pair.
P represents the ordered list of properties which the algo-
rithm gets as additional input. Based on observations in our
data we assume that referring to objects by pointing is the
first choice in face-to-face dialogues, while expressing rela-
tive location is only used after basic properties like type or
colour. Therefore, we get absolut location, type, colour, size,
and relative location to be the list of properties which have to
be evaluated concerning their discriminatory power.
Algorithm 4.1: CONTENTSELECTRE(r, P, C)
R? {}
D ? C
?? objectPointingConeApexAngle
? ? regionPointingConeApexAngle
if REACHABLE?(r) (i)
then
?
??
??
R? {(location,?)}
(~h, ~r)? GENERATEPOINTINGRAY(r)
if GETPOINTINGMAP((~h, ~r), C, ?) = {r}
then return (R ? {type, GETVALUE(r, type)})
else D ? GETPOINTINGMAP((~h, ~r), C, ?)
for each p ? P (ii)
do
?
????????
????????
if RELATIONALPROPERTY?(p)
then v ? GETRELATIVEVALUE(r, p,D)
else v ? GETVALUE(r, p)
if v 6= null and RULESOUT(p, v,D) 6= {}
then
{
R? R ? {(p, v)}
D ? D \ RULESOUT(p, v,D)
if D = {}
then
{
if (type, x) ? R for some x
then return (R)
else return (R ? {type, GETVALUE(r, type)})
return (failure)
procedure RULESOUT(p, v,D)
return ({x | x ? D ? GETVALUE(x, p) 6= v})
The incremental content-selection in our algorithm (see
Alg. 4.1) is organised in two main steps: First, see part
(i), disambiguation of the referent by pointing is checked if
the referent is visible for both participants. The decision,
which kind of pointing, object-pointing or region-pointing,
is appropriate is based on an evaluation of their discrimina-
tory power. Object-pointing can only be used if the gesture
is able to indicate the referent in an unambiguous manner.
This is tested by generating a pointing cone with an apex an-
gle of 12 degrees anchored in an approximated hand-position
(covered in the functions GENERATEPOINTINGRAY(r) and
GETPOINTINGMAP((~h,~r), C, ?) with the apex angle ?). If
only the intended referent r is found inside this cone, the
algorithm terminates and referring can be done by object-
pointing. Otherwise, region-pointing is evaluated using the
same functions to narrow down the distractor set D to the
objects found in the cone, now with the wider apex angle ?.
For determining additional discriminating properties (see
part (ii)) we use an adapted version of the incremental algo-
rithm of Dale and Reiter described above. Each property p in
P is evaluated concerning its discriminatory power. If it rules
out some objects in D, these objects are deleted in D and p
and its value v are added to R.
On the one hand we extend the original algorithm account-
ing for properties which are expressed in relation to other ob-
jects in the scene. On the other hand our algorithm is sim-
plified in as much as in our prototypical implementation the
FINDBESTVALUE function defined by Dale and Reiter is re-
placed by the cheaper function GETVALUE. We realise the
search for the appropriate value on a specialisation hierarchy
only for the special case type (?screw? instead of ?pan head
slotted screw? is used). If an appropriate value for type does
not exist (this is the case for some aggregates under construc-
tion in our domain), type is uttered in an unspecific manner
like ?this part?, the value v for the property type is then set
to object, the most general value in the specialisation hierar-
chy. Analogous to [Dale and Reiter, 1995], type is added to
R even if it has no discriminatory power. This complies with
the most frequent kind of over-specification found in our em-
pirical data.
For the other properties like colour we do not need such a
sophisticated search on a specialisation hierarchy in our do-
main. We operate in a highly simplified domain with objects
characterised by properties having only a few and well dis-
tinguished values perceivable by both dialogue participants.
For the property colour, e.g., only the values red, green, blue,
yellow, purple, orange, and brown exist.
In the following we describe the realisation of the essential
modifications proposed in our approach in greater detail, the
evaluation of the discriminating power of pointing and the
consideration of relational properties.
4.1 Considering the Spatial Context:
Object-pointing vs. Region-pointing
If we assume that the spatial context of the interaction de-
termines the discriminatory power of pointing as described
in Section 2 we have to anchor multimodal content-selection
into this context. The central concept for this task is the point-
ing cone. It models the region which is indicated by the point-
ing gesture. The objects inside the cone can not be distin-
guished without further information.
In the course of our multimodal content-selection algo-
rithm the generation of the pointing cone and the identifica-
tion of the objects lying inside it is realised using the follow-
ing functions:
? REACHABLE?(r): Tests if the referent r is visually avail-
able to both dialogue participants.
? GENERATEPOINTINGRAY(r): This function gets the
referent r and computes a pointing ray which is repre-
sented by two vectors, its origin ~h located in the demon-
strating hand and its direction ~r determined by the refer-
ent r.
? GETPOINTINGMAP((~h,~r), C, ?): This function (for de-
tails see Alg. 4.2) gets the pointing ray (~h,~r), a set of ob-
jects C, and an apex angle ? and returns a sorted list of
objects located inside the cone defined by (~h,~r) and ?.
The decision criterion is the apex angle ?. If the vector
originated in~h directed to o ? C spans with the pointing
ray an angle less than ? o is said to be located inside the
cone, otherwise not.
? GETPOSITION(o,~h): Computes the position of object o
w.r.t. the position represented by ~h, in this case the hand
position.
? GETANGLE(~x, ~y): Computes the angle between the vec-
tors ~x and ~y.
? INSERT(o,M,?): Inserts the object o in the map M in
increasing order w.r.t. the angle ?.
Algorithm 4.2: GETPOINTINGMAP((~h, ~r), C, ?)
M ? {}
for each o ? C
do
{
~x? GETPOSITION((o,~h))
? ? GETANGLE(~x, ~r)
if ? ? ?
then INSERT(o,M, ?)
return (M)
In the course of evaluating pointing, it is tested first
whether the referent is reachable by both participants. In our
application domain this implies whether r is a visible object
lying on the table, the construction area. If this is the case,
pointing in general is appropriate, the property location with
the value ? indicating a pointing gesture is added to the list
of restricting properties R.
To decide whether object-pointing or region-pointing is ap-
propriate, the pointing cones for these two kinds of point-
ing have to be generated. This is achieved by generating
the pointing ray first using the function GENERATEPOINT-
INGRAY. To determine the origin of the pointing ray without
synthesising a pointing gesture at this early point of time an
approximated hand position is computed located in a typical
distance in front of the body on a straight line between a point
in-between the shoulders of the demonstrating agent and the
referent r.
The pointing ray is used as an input for the function GET-
POINTINGMAP which stores all objects inside the cone in a
sorted map. First, this is done for a cone with the apex an-
gle ?, the cone for object-pointing. If this map contains at
least one object besides the referent r, disambiguation based
only on a pointing gesture is not possible. Region-pointing
is then chosen to narrow down the set of distractors. Again
the function GETPOINTINGMAP is used to determine the set
of objects which are indicated by pointing, now by region-
pointing. The wider apex angle ? for the pointing cone of
region-pointing is used to ensure robust reference.
4.2 Relational Object Properties
In our corpus we often found properties which are typically
expressed in relation to other objects. The most frequent ex-
amples concern the properties size and location leading to
descriptions like ?the big object? respectively ?the left ob-
ject?. The function RELATIONALPROPERTY?(p) tests for
each property p if it is a property which can be expressed
relationally. To evaluate these properties we use the function
GETRELATIVEVALUE. This function (see Alg. 4.3) com-
pares the absolute value of the referent?s property p with the
corresponding values of the objects in D. If the referent r
holds the maximum or minimum of the values the function
returns the according max or min value, e.g., big or small if
the property is size. To do so, GETRELATIVEVALUE needs a
partial order for each property. In our system this is imple-
mented for size and relative location.
In the case of size we relate the property to the shape of
the objects under discussion. Shape is a property often used
on its own if the type of an object is unknown but it is diffi-
cult to handle in generation because the description of shape,
especially for complex shapes, is highly ambiguous and sub-
jective. However, in our corpus data aspects of shape can be
often found as part of descriptions of size. This can be found
if the shape of an object is characterised by one or two des-
ignated dimensions. For these objects size is substituted by,
e.g., length respectively thickness (?long screw? is used in-
stead of ?big screw?).
In the case of relative location we use a similar kind of
substitution. The relative location is evaluated along the axes
defining the subjective coordinate systems of the dialogue
participants (left-right, ahead-behind, and top-down). E.g.,
GETRELATIVEVALUE returns left if the referent r is the left-
most located object in D ? {r}.
The function GETVALUE(o, p) returns the absolute value v
of the property p of the object o fetched from the knowledge-
base. The search for an appropriate value on a specialisation
hierarchy for the property type, as described above, is realised
within this function.
Algorithm 4.3: GETRELATIVEVALUE(r, p,D)
vr ? GETVALUE(r, p)
if min{v | v = GETVALUE(x, p) ? x ? (D ? {r})} = vr
then
{
vmin ? typically used minV alue(p)
return (vmin)
if max{v | v = GETVALUE(x, p) ? x ? (D ? {r})} = vr
then
{
vmax ? typically used maxV alue(p)
return (vmax)
return (null)
5 Example
The following example illustrates the process of content-
selection as it is realised by the described algorithm (Fig. 2):
The starting point is a query concerning the reference to a
specific object with the technical name five-hole-bar-0 (Fig.
2a). This object lying on the table is visible to both dialogue
participants, therefore pointing is appropriate and the prop-
erty location with the value ? indicating a pointing gesture is
added to R. Now it has to be decided which kind of pointing
is appropriate (Alg. 4.1, part (i)), that means whether pointing
alone (object-pointing) yields the referent in an unambigu-
ous manner. To do so, the pointing cone for object-pointing
is generated. In this example the object density is high and
more than one object is found inside this cone. Therefore,
pointing alone does not yield the referent and region-pointing
is evaluated next. This is illustrated in Fig. 2b) schematically:
The two ellipses mark the intersection of the pointing cones
with the table, the smaller ellipse w.r.t. object-pointing, the
bigger one w.r.t. region-pointing. The smaller ellipse covers
two objects, that means pointing alone can not distinguish be-
tween these two objects, an additional definite description is
needed. Region-pointing is used to narrow down the set of
distractors C for the construction of the definite description.
To make the multimodal reference consisting of pointing and
definite description more robust (in analogy to the empirical
findings) now a wider apex angle is used resulting in the big-
ger ellipse. The objects inside this bigger ellipse, the two bars
five-hole-bar-0 and three-hole-bar-0, a block, a screw, and a
disc constitute the distractor set.
The second part of the algorithm determines the proper-
ties needed for the definite description. It starts with test-
ing the property type. The type five-hole-bar is too spe-
cific, so the super-type bar is chosen. This property rules
out all objects except the two bars (now C = {five-hole-bar-
0, three-hole-bar-0}) and type with the value bar is added
to R. The property colour is tested next; it has no discrim-
inatory power concerning the two bars. But the following
property size discriminates the two objects. The shape of
bars is characterised by one designated dimension. There-
fore, size is substituted by length. In our case the referent
r has the maximum length of all objects in C, the property
length with the value long is added to R. Now C contains
only r, the algorithm terminates and returns R = {(location,
?), (type, bar), (length, long)} (Fig. 2b).
Based on R, a pointing gesture directed to r is specified,
the noun phrase ?die lange Leiste? (the long bar) is gener-
ated, and both are inserted into an utterance template (see Fig.
2c)). The complete utterance is synthesised and uttered by the
agent Max (Fig. 2d).
6 Application in the context of
Human-Computer Interaction in VR
As explained in the introduction, the described approach was
developed in the context of research on interfaces for natu-
ral interaction with an anthropomorphic agent in VR. The
embodied agent Max should be enabled to produce believ-
able deictic references to virtual objects in real-time inter-
action. Following [Dale and Reiter, 2000], the generation
of natural language can be divided into three main steps,
namely, macroplanning (document planning), microplanning,
and surface realisation. Extending this, we add synthesis as
a fourth step, including motorplanning and visualisation for
gestural and a text-to-speech synthesis for verbal utterances.
Content-selection for complex demonstrations is part of mi-
croplanning. The starting point is a logical representation of
the performative of a planned utterance (as illustrated in the
example above, see Fig. 2a)), which will be provided as result
of the reasoning processes of the agent in future work.
The results of the content selection as represented by a list
of attribute-value-pairs are fed into a surface realisation mod-
ule generating a syntactically correct noun phrase. This noun
phrase is combined with a gesture specification and both are
inserted into a template of a multi-modal utterance fetched
from a database and described in MURML [Kranstedt et al,
a) query(five-hole-bar-0)
b)
R = {(location,?), (type, bar), (length, long)}
c) <definition>
<parameter name=?NP?/>
<parameter name=?Object?/>
<utterance>
<specification>
Meinst du <time id=?t1?/> $NP? <time id=?t2?/>
</specification>
<behaviorspec id=?gesture 0?>
<gesture>
<affiliate onset=?t1? end=?t2?/>
<function name=?refer to loc?>
<argument name=?refloc? value=?$Object?/>
<argument name=?frame of reference? value=?world?/>
</function>
</gesture>
</behaviorspec>
</utterance>
</definition>
d)
?Meinst du die lange Leiste??
(Do you mean the long bar?)
Figure 2: Example of the generation of a complex demon-
stration in four steps: a) A query concerning the object five-
hole-bar-o constitutes the starting point; b) pointing cones
for object-pointing and region-pointing are generated, the lat-
ter one specifies the distractor set for further property evalua-
tion; c) the pointing gesture and the noun phrase are inserted
in an utterance description template described in MURML;
d) an appropriate animation (German speech, here with the
visualised pointing cone) is synthesised.
2002] (see Fig. 2c) for illustration). MURML enables the
specification of arbitrary co-verbal gestures. Cross-modal
synchrony is established appending the gesture stroke to the
affiliated word or sub-phrase in the co-expressive speech.
Based on these descriptions, an utterance generator synthe-
sises continuous speech and gesture in a synchronised manner
(for details see [Kopp and Wachsmuth, 2004]).
The VR environment in which the interaction takes place
is realised using the framework Avango [Tramberend, 1999]
which is based on the common scenegraph representation of
virtual worlds. With PrOSA (Patterns On Sequences of At-
tributes, [Latoschik, 2001] this framework was extended for
interacting in immersive virtual reality by means of speech
and gesture. The scenegraph is not only used to model the
environment, it also builds the agent?s knowledgebase of its
environment. Each object represented in the scenegraph can
be correlated with a so-called semantic entity [Latoschik and
Schilling, 2003], which provides arbitrary semantic proper-
ties associated with this entity. During content-selection, the
property values of the objects under discussion are fetched
from these semantic entities.
The vocabulary used is geared to the ontology of the toy-
kit, called Baufix, we use in our setting. It consists of a small
number of generic parts like bars, screws, blocks, discs etc.
(twelve different types, some of them in different size and
colour). All the parts and the values of their properties can
be named. Therefore, all possible descriptions in this small
domain can be generated. Currently, deictic expressions as
part of different types of speech acts can be generated, espe-
cially query, request, and inform. Only a small number of
verb phrases can be used. In sum, the vocabulary currently
available is very small. However, the focus of this work is not
to generate a huge amount of speech output but to investigate
the correlation between speech and gesture in the generation
of multimodal reference.
Up to now we can generate in the course of deictic expres-
sions pointing gestures synchronised with speech for all ob-
jects reachable for the agent without moving. In most cases
moving will not be necessary, respectively more costly than
generating a definite description. But we know that this is not
adequate in all cases. The integration of moving in the course
of content-selection will be an issue of future work.
7 Conclusion
In this paper an approach was presented which enables the
generation of multimodal deictic expressions consisting of a
pointing gesture indicating the location of an object and a def-
inite noun phrase describing the object using its properties.
Taking account of the inherent impreciseness of pointing ges-
tures two referential functions of pointing are distinguished,
object-pointing and region-pointing. With the increasing dis-
tance between demonstrating agent and referent the discrim-
inatory power of the gesture decreases and more additional
properties are needed to identify the referent. A pointing
cone for each referring function of pointing gestures was de-
fined to model the distance dependency of pointing. An algo-
rithm was presented that integrates pointing and definite de-
scriptions by using the objects highlighted by the gesture as
distractor set for the construction of the definite description.
Drawing the attention to a spatial region and the objects lying
inside this region region-pointing ensures that these objects
are in the focus of attention of the addressee ([Dale and Re-
iter, 1995] speak in this context about a navigational function
of the expression).
Dale and Reiter emphasise that their content-selection al-
gorithm is defined domain independently while the prop-
erty list P and the functions MORESPECIFICVALUE, BA-
SICLEVELVALUE, and USERKNOWS define the interface
to the domain of application, especially to the knowledge
about this domain shared by the interlocutors. Analogously,
the functions REACHABLE?, GENERATEPOINTINGRAY, and
GETPOINTINGMAP in our approach can be seen as a link be-
tween the content-selection algorithm and the spatial context
in which the interaction takes place. Implementing the con-
cept of the pointing cone they provide an interface between
the geometrical aspects of pointing gestures and their refer-
ential semantics.
The quality of the generation results using the described
approach depends on the precision of the topology of the
pointing cones and the knowledge about the parameters in-
fluencing this topology. We have started to conduct empirical
studies using tracking technology to collect analytical data
concerning the pointing behaviour of human subjects in vary-
ing pointing domains [Kranstedt et al, 2005].
Up to now, we do not have a comprehensive evaluation
of our approach. But if we compare the generation results
with the empirical data collected in the demonstration games
mentioned in Sec. 1 and with other corpora about instructor-
constructor dialogues in the Baufix-world [Sagerer et al,
1994] we notice a good correspondence with the empirical
findings. A critical point we found in these comparisons is
that the perceivable resolution of pointing in real world is not
exactly the same as in VR. In the latter it depends massively
on kind and quality of the display technology used. There-
fore, mechanisms which adapt the pointing cone?s size and
form to the constraints of the interaction environment seem
to be useful.
Acknowledgment
This research is partially supported by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) in the Collaborative Re-
search Centre SFB 360.
References
[Andre? et al, 1999] E. Andre?, T. Rist, and J. Mu?ller. Em-
ploying AI Methods to Control the Behavior of Animated
Interface Agents. Applied Artificial Intelligence, 13:415?
448, 1999.
[Beun and Cremers, 2001] R.-J. Beun and A. Cremers. Mul-
timodal Reference to Objects: An Empirical Approach. In
Proceedings of Cooperative Multimodal Communication,
Second International Conference, pages 64?86, 2001.
[Claassen, 1992] W. Claassen. Generating Referring Expres-
sions in a Multimodal Environment. In R. Dale et al, edi-
tors, Aspects of Automated Natural Language Generation.
Springer, Berlin, 1992.
[Dale and Reiter, 1995] R. Dale and E. Reiter. Computa-
tional Interpretations of the Gricean Maxims in the Gen-
eration of Referring Expressions. Cognitive Science,
18:233?263, 1995.
[Dale and Reiter, 2000] R. Dale and E. Reiter. Building Nat-
ural Language Generation Systems. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK, 2000.
[Dale, 1992] R. Dale. Generating Referring Expressions:
Constructing Descriptions in a Domain of Objects and
Processes. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1992.
[Gardent, 2002] C. Gardent. Generating Minimal Definite
Descriptions. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting
of the ACL, 2002.
[Horacek, 1997] H. Horacek. An Algorithm for Generating
Referential Descriptions with Flexible Interfaces. In Pro-
ceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the ACL, 1997.
[Kopp and Wachsmuth, 2004] S. Kopp and I. Wachsmuth.
Synthesizing Multimodal Utterances for Conversational
Agents. Comp. Anim. Virtual Worlds, 15:39?52, 2004.
[Krahmer and van der Sluis, 2003] E. Krahmer and
I. van der Sluis. A New Model for the Generation
of Multimodal Referring Expressions. In Proceedings of
ENLG 2003, 2003.
[Krahmer et al, 2003] E. Krahmer, S. van Erk, and A. Ver-
leg. Graphbased Generation of Referring Expressions.
Computational Linguistics, 29(1):53?72, 2003.
[Kranstedt et al, 2002] A. Kranstedt, S. Kopp, and
I. Wachsmuth. MURML: A Multimodal Utterance
Representation Markup Language for Conversational
Agents. In Proceedings of the Workshop Embodied
Conversational Agents ? let?s specify and evaluate them,
AAMAS 2002, 2002.
[Kranstedt et al, 2004] A. Kranstedt, P. Ku?hnlein, and
I. Wachsmuth. Deixis in Multimodal Human Computer In-
teraction: An Interdisciplinary Approach. In A. Camurri
and G. Volpe, editors, Gesture-based Communication in
Human-Computer Interaction, pages 112?123. Springer
(LNAI 2915), Berlin, 2004.
[Kranstedt et al, 2005] A. Kranstedt, A. Lu?cking, T. Pfeif-
fer, H. Rieser, and I. Wachsmuth. Deixis: How to Deter-
mine Demonstrated Objects. Presented at Gesture Work-
shop 2005, Ile de Berder, France, 2005.
[Ku?hnlein and Stegmann, 2003] P. Ku?hnlein and
J. Stegmann. Empirical Issues in Deictic Gesture:
Referring to Objects in Simple Identification Tasks. Tech-
nical Report 2003/3, SFB 360, University of Bielefeld,
2003.
[Latoschik and Schilling, 2003] M. E. Latoschik and
M. Schilling. Incorporating VR Databases into AI
Knowledge Representations: A Framework for Intelligent
Graphics Applications. In Proceedings of the Sixth
IASTED International Conference on Computer Graphics
and Imaging, pages 79?84, 2003.
[Latoschik, 2001] M. E. Latoschik. A General Framework
for Multimodal Interaction in Virtual Reality Systems:
PrOSA. In W. Broll and L. Scha?fer, editors, The Future
of VR and AR Interfaces - Multimodal, Humanoid, Adap-
tive and Intelligent. Proceedings of the Workshop at IEEE
Virtual Reality 2001, pages 21?25, 2001.
[Lester et al, 1999] J. Lester, J. Voerman, S. Towns, and
C. Callaway. Deictic Believability: Coordinating Gesture,
Locomotion, and Speech in Lifelike Pedagogical Agents.
Applied Artificial Intelligence, 13(4-5):383?414, 1999.
[Lu?cking et al, 2004] A. Lu?cking, H. Rieser, and
J. Stegmann. Statistical Support for the Study of
Structures in Multimodal Dialogue: Inter-rater Agreement
and Synchronisation. In Proceedings of the 8th Workshop
on the Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue (Catalog
04), pages 56?64, 2004.
[Lyons, 1977] J. Lyons. Semantics (2 Vols.). Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, UK, 1977.
[Mann, 1988] W. C. Mann. Dialogue Games: Conventions
of Human Interaction. Argumentation, 2:512?532, 1988.
[McNeill, 1992] D. McNeill. Hand and Mind. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois, 1992.
[Noma and Badler, 1997] T. Noma and N. Badler. A Vir-
tual Human Presenter. In Workshop on Animated Interface
Agents: Making them Intelligent, IJCAI?97, pages 45?51,
1997.
[Peirce, 1965] C. S. Peirce. Collected Papers of Charles
Sanders Peirce. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK, 1965.
[Reiter, 1990] E. Reiter. The Computational Complexity of
Avoiding Conversational Implicatures. In Proceedings of
the 28th Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 97?104, 1990.
[Reithinger, 1992] N. Reithinger. The Performance of an In-
cremental Generation Component for Multi-modal Dialog
Contributions. In R. Dale et al, editors, Aspects of Au-
tomated Natural Language Generation. Springer, Berlin,
1992.
[Rickel and Johnson, 1999] J. Rickel and W. L. Johnson.
Animated Agents for Procedural Training in Virtual Re-
ality: Perception, Cognition, and Motor Control. Applied
Artificial Intelligence, 13:343?382, 1999.
[Rieser, 2004] H. Rieser. Pointing in Dialogue. In Proceed-
ings of the 8th Workshop on the Semantics and Pragmatics
of Dialogue (Catalog 04), pages 93?101, 2004.
[Sagerer et al, 1994] G. Sagerer, H. Eikmeyer, and G. Rick-
heit. ?Dies ist ein runder Gegenstand?. Technical report,
University of Bielefeld, SFB 360, 1994.
[Tramberend, 1999] H. Tramberend. Avocado: A Dis-
tributed Virtual Reality Framework. In Proceedings of
IEEE Virtual Reality 1999, pages 14?21, 1999.
[van der Sluis and Krahmer, 2004] I. van der Sluis and
E. Krahmer. The Influence of Target Size and Distance
on the Production of Speech and Gesture in Multimodal
Referring Expressions. In Proceedings of the 8the Interna-
tional Conference on Spoken Language Processing, 2004.
