Proceedings of the Workshop on Information Extraction Beyond The Document, pages 20?28,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Automatic Extraction of Definitions from German Court Decisions 
 
 
Stephan Walter 
Department of Computational Linguistics 
Universit?t des Saarlandes 
66123 Saarbr?cken, Germany 
stwa@coli.uni-saarland.de 
Manfred Pinkal 
Department of Computational Linguistics 
Universit?t des Saarlandes 
66123 Saarbr?cken, Germany 
pinkal@coli.uni-saarland.de 
 
  
 
Abstract 
This paper deals with the use of computa-
tional linguistic analysis techniques for 
information access and ontology learning 
within the legal domain. We present a 
rule-based approach for extracting and 
analysing definitions from parsed text 
and evaluate it on a corpus of about 6000 
German court decisions. The results are 
applied to improve the quality of a text 
based ontology learning method on this 
corpus.1 
1 Motivation 
Methods like ontology based knowledge man-
agement and information access through concep-
tual search have become active research topics in 
the general research community, with practical 
applications in many areas. However the use of 
IT in legal practice (at least in German speaking 
countries) is up to now mainly restricted to 
document preparation and management or Boo-
lean keyword search on full-text collections. Le-
gal ontologies have been proposed in various 
research projects, but they focus on an upper 
level of concepts and are, with only a few excep-
tions, small knowledge repositories that were 
hand-made by experts (for a summary of existing 
legal ontologies, cf. (Valente 2004)).  
It is clear that realistically large knowledge-
based applications in the legal domain will need 
more comprehensive ontologies incorporating 
e.g. up-to-date knowledge from court decisions. 
For this purpose an expert-based approach has to 
                                                 
1 This paper describes research within the project 
CORTE funded by the German Science Foundation, 
DFG PI 154/10-1  
(http://www.coli.uni-saarland.de/projects/corte/) 
be supplemented by automatic acquisition me-
thods. The same is true for large-scale advanced 
information access: Extensive conceptual indexa-
tion of even a fraction of all court decisions pub-
lished in one year seems hardly possible without 
automatic support. However there has been rela-
tively little research on the use of natural lan-
guage processing for this purpose (exceptions are 
(Lame 2005) and (Saias and Quaresma 2005)). 
In this paper we look at the use of computa-
tional linguistic analysis techniques for informa-
tion access and ontology learning within the le-
gal domain. We present a rule-based method for 
extracting and analyzing definitions from parsed 
text, and evaluate this method on a corpus of 
about 6000 German court decisions within the 
field of environmental law. We then report on an 
experiment exploring the use of our extraction 
results to improve the quality of text-based on-
tology learning from noun-adjective bigrams. We 
will start however with a general discussion of 
the role that definitions play in legal language. 
2 Definitions in Legal Language 
Two central kinds of knowledge contained in the 
statutes of a code law system are normative 
knowledge, connecting legal consequences to 
descriptions of certain facts and situations, and 
terminological knowledge, consisting in defini-
tions of some of the concepts used in these de-
scriptions (Valente and Breuker 1994). 
Normative content is exemplified by (1), parts of 
section 324a of the German criminal law. The 
legal consequence consisting in the specified 
punishment is connected to the precondition of 
soil pollution: 
 
(1) Whoever (?) allows to penetrate or re-
leases substances into the soil and thereby pol-
lutes it or otherwise detrimentally alters it:  
20
1. in a manner that is capable of harming (?) 
property of significant value or a body of wa-
ter (?) 
shall be punished with imprisonment for not 
more than five years or a fine. 
 
Terminological knowledge consists in definitions 
of concepts used to describe the sanctioned facts. 
E.g., soil is defined in article 2 of the German 
soil protection law as follows: 
 
(2) Soil within the meaning of this Act is the 
upper layer of the earth's crust (?) including its 
liquid components (soil solution) and gaseous 
components (soil air), except groundwater and 
beds of bodies of water. 
 
If the definitions contained in statutes would 
fully specify how the relevant concepts are to be 
applied, cases could be solved (once the relevant 
statutes have been identified) by mechanically 
checking which of some given concepts apply, 
and then deriving the appropriate legal conse-
quences in a logical conclusion. However such a 
simple procedure is never possible in reality. 
Discussions in courts (and consequently in all 
legal texts that document court decisions) are in 
large parts devoted to pinning down whether cer-
tain concepts apply. Controversies often arise 
because not all relevant concepts are defined at 
all within statutes, and because the terms used in 
legal definitions are often in need of clarification 
themselves. For instance it may be unclear in 
some cases what exactly counts as the bed of a 
body of water mentioned in Example (2). Addi-
tionally, reality is complex and constantly chang-
ing, and these changes also pertain to the appli-
cability of formerly clear-cut concepts. While 
this is especially true of social reality, rather 
physical concepts may also be affected. An often 
cited example is a case where the German 
Reichsgericht had to decide whether electricity 
was to be counted as a thing. 
At the heart of these difficulties lies the fact 
that statutes are written in natural language, not 
in a formalized or a strongly restricted special-
ized language. It is widely assumed in the phi-
losophical literature that most natural language 
concepts do not lend themselves to definitions 
fixing all potential conditions of applicability a 
priori. From the point of view of legal theory this 
open-textured character of natural language con-
cepts is often seen as essential for the functioning 
of any legal system (the term open texture was 
introduced into this discussion by (Hart 1961)). 
The use of natural language expressions allows 
for a continuous re-adjustment of the balance 
between precision and openness. This possibility 
is needed to provide regulations that are on the 
one hand reliable and on the other hand flexible 
enough to serve as a common ground for all 
kinds of social interaction. For the solution of 
concrete cases, the concepts made available 
within statute texts are supplemented by further 
definitions (in a wide sense, covering all kinds of 
modification and adaptation of concepts) given 
in the courts? decisions (in particular within the 
reasons for judgement). Such definitions for in-
stance fix whether a certain stretch of sand 
counts as the bed of a body of water or if some-
thing is of significant value in the case at hand. 
These definitions are generally open for later 
amendment or revision. Still they almost always 
remain binding beyond the case at hand. 
Easy access to definitions in decisions is there-
fore of great importance to the legal practitioner. 
Sections 3 and 4 show how computational lin-
guistic analysis helps answering this need by 
enabling an accurate search for definitions in a 
large collection of court decisions. Accurate 
definition extraction is a prerequisite to building 
up an information system that allows for con-
cept-centred access to the interpretational knowl-
edge spread over tens of thousands of documents 
produced by courts every year.  
Definitions are however not only of direct 
value as a source of information in legal practice. 
They also provide contexts that contain particu-
larly much relevant terminology, and are there-
fore a good place to search for concepts to be 
integrated in a domain ontology. Given the im-
portance and frequency of definitions in legal 
text, such an approach seems particularly prom-
ising for this domain. Section 5 describes how 
automatically extracted definitions improve the 
results of a standard ontology learning method. 
3 Structure of Definitions 
Our current work is based on a collection of 
more than 6000 verdicts in environmental law. 
As a starting point however we conducted a sur-
vey based on a random selection of 40 verdicts 
from various legal fields (none of them is in our 
present test set), which contained 130 definitions. 
Inspection of these definitions has shown a range 
of common structural elements, and has allowed 
us to identify typical linguistic realizations of 
21
these structural elements. We will illustrate this 
with the example definition given in (3): 
(3) [4 Bei einem Einfamilienreihenhaus] [3 liegt] 
ein [1 mangelhafter Schallschutz] [5 dann] [3 vor, 
wenn] [2 die Haustrennwand einschalig errichtet 
wurde] (?). 
(One-family row-houses have insufficient noise 
insulation if the separating wall is one-layered.) 
This definition contains: 
1. The definiendum, i.e. the element that is de-
fined (unzureichender Schallschutz - insufficient 
noise insulation). 
2. The definiens, i.e. the element that fixes the 
meaning to be given to the definiendum (die 
Haustrennwand einschalig errichtet wurde - the 
separating wall is  one-layered). 
Apart from these constitutive parts, it contains: 
3. A connector, indicating the relation between 
definiendum and definiens (liegt?vor, wenn, 
have?, if). 
4. A qualification specifying a domain area of 
applicability, i.e. a restriction in terms of the part 
of reality that the regulation refers to (bei Einfa-
milienreihenh?usern - one-family row-houses). 
5. Signal words that cannot be assigned any clear 
function with regard to the content of the sen-
tence, but serve to mark it as a definition (dann - 
?). 
The connector normally contains at least the 
predicate of the main clause, often together with 
further material (subjunction, relative pronoun, 
determiner). It not only indicates the presence of 
a definition. It also determines how definiens and 
definiendum are realized linguistically and often 
contains information about the type of the given 
definition (full, partial, by examples?). The lin-
guistic realization of definiendum and definiens 
depends on the connector. One common pattern 
realizes the definiendum as the subject, and the 
definiens within a subclause. The domain area is 
often specified by a PP introduced by bei (?in 
the field of?, for), as seen in the example. Further 
possibilities are other PPs or certain subclauses. 
Signal words are certain particles (dann in the 
example), adverbs (e.g. begrifflich - conceptu-
ally) or nominal constructions containing the 
definiendum (e.g. der Begriff des?, the concept 
of?). 
Of course many definitions also contain fur-
ther structural elements that are not present in 
Example (3). For instance certain adverbials or 
modal verbs modify the force, validity or degree 
of commitment to a definition (e.g. only for typi-
cal cases). The field of law within which the 
given definition applies is often specified as a PP 
containing a formal reference to sections of stat-
utes or simply the name of a statute, document, 
or even a complete legal field (e.g. Umweltrecht 
- environmental law). Citation information for 
definitions is standardly included in brackets as a 
reference to another verdict by date, court, and 
reference number. 
4 Automatic extraction of definitions 
The corpus based pilot study discussed in the 
last section has on the one hand shown a broad 
linguistic variation among definitions in reasons 
for judgement. No simple account, for instance 
in terms of keyword spotting or pattern match-
ing, will suffice to extract the relevant informa-
tion from a significant amount of occurrences. 
On the other hand our survey has shown a range 
of structural uniformities across these formula-
tions. This section discusses computational lin-
guistic analysis techniques that are useful to 
identify and segment definitions based on these 
uniformities. 
4.1 Linguistic Analysis 
Our current work is based on a collection of 
more than 6000 verdicts in environmental law 
that were parsed using the Preds-parser (Preds 
stands for partially resolved dependency struc-
ture), a semantically-oriented parsing system that 
has been developed in the Saarbr?cken Computa-
tional Linguistics Department within the project 
COLLATE. It was used there for information 
extraction from newspaper text (Braun 2003, 
Fliedner 2004). The Preds-parser balances depth 
of linguistic analysis with robustness of the 
analysis process and is therefore able to provide 
relatively detailed linguistic information even for 
large amounts of syntactically complex text. 
It generates a semantic representation for its in-
put by a cascade of analysis components. Start-
ing with a topological analysis of the input sen-
tence, it continues by applying a phrase chunker 
and a named entity recognizer to the contents of 
the topological fields. The resulting extended 
topological structure is transformed to a semantic 
representation (called Preds, see above) by a se-
ries of heuristic rules. The Preds-format encodes 
semantic dependencies and modification rela-
tions within a sentence using abstract categories 
22
such as deep subject and deep object. This way it 
provides a common normalized structure for 
various surface realizations of the same content 
(e.g. in active or passive voice).  
The Preds-parser makes use of syntactic under-
specification to deal with the problem of ambigu-
ity. It systematically prefers low attachment in 
case of doubt and marks the affected parts of the 
result as default-based. Later processing steps are 
enabled to resolve ambiguities based on further 
information. But this is not necessary in general. 
Common parts of multiple readings can be ac-
cessed without having to enumerate and search 
through alternative representations. Figure 1 
shows the parse for the definition in Example 
(3).2 The parser returns an XML-tree that con-
tains this structure together with the full linguis-
tic information accumulated during the analysis 
process. 
4.2 Search and processing 
The structures produced by the Preds parser pro-
vide a level of abstraction that allows us to turn 
typical definition patterns into declarative extrac-
tion rules. Figure 2 shows one such extraction 
rule. It specifies (abbreviated) XPath-expressions 
describing definitions such as Example (3). The 
field query contains an expression characterising 
a sentence with the predicate vorliegen and a 
subclause that is introduced by the subjunction 
wenn (if). This expression is evaluated on the 
Preds of the sentences within our corpus to iden-
tify definitions. Other fields determine the loca-
tions containing the structural elements (such as 
definiendum, definiens and domain area) within 
the Preds of the identified definitions. 
 
                                                 
2 Figure 1 and Figure 3 were generated using the SALSA-
Tool (Burchardt et al 2006) 
<pattern> 
description=liegt vor + wenn-Nebensatz 
query=sent/parse/preds/word[@stem="vorliegen" 
 and INDPRES and WENN] 
filters=definite 
definiendum=DSub 
definiens=WENN/arg/word 
area=PPMOD{PREP%bei} 
</pattern> 
 
Figure 2. Extraction rule. 
 
The field filters specifies a set of XSLT-scripts 
used to filter out certain results. In the example 
we exclude definienda that are either pronominal 
(because we do not presently resolve anaphoric 
references) or definite (because these are often 
also anaphoric, or indicate that the sentence at 
hand is valid for that particular case only). Figure 
3 shows how the definition in Example (3) is 
analyzed by this rule. 
4.3 Evaluation 
We currently use 33 such extraction rules 
based on the connectors identified in our pilot 
study, together with various kinds of filters. 
When applied to the reasons for judgement in all 
6000 decisions (containing 237935 sentences) in 
our environmental law corpus, these rules yield 
5461 hits before filtering (since not all patterns 
are mutually exclusive, these hits are all within 
4716 sentences). After exclusion of pronominal 
and in some cases definite definienda (see 
above), as well as definienda containing stop-
words (certain very common adjectives and 
nouns) the number of remaining hits decreases to 
1486 (in 1342 sentences). 
A selection of 492 hits (in 473 sentences; all 
hits for rules with less than 20, at least 20 hits for 
others) was checked for precision by two annota-
tors. The evaluation was based on a very inclu-
sive concept of definition, covering many cases 
of doubt such as negative applicability condi-
tions, legal preconditions or elaborations on the 
use of evaluative terms. Clear ?no?-judgements 
 
 
Figure 1. Grammatical structure for Example (3). 
23
 
 
Figure 3. Structural elements of the definition in Example (3). 
were e.g. given for statements referring only to 
one particular case without any general elements, 
and for purely contingent statements. The overall 
agreement of the judgements given was rela-
tively high, with an overall ? of 0.835. 
 
Total 
33 rules 1486 hits (1342 / 237935 sent) 
Annotator 1 Good: 211/473  (p = 44.6 %) 
Annotator 2 Good: 230/473  (p = 48.6 %) 
Best rules only 
Annotator 1 
17 rules 749 hits (749 / 1342 sent) 
 Good: 176/245  (p = 71.8 %) 
Annotator 2 
18 rules 764 hits (633 / 1342 sent) 
 Good: 173/230  (p = 75.2 %) 
 
Table 1. Annotation results. 
 
Precision values within the checked hits vary 
considerably. However in both cases more than 
50 % of all hits are by patterns that together still 
reach a precision of well above 70 % (Table 1). 
4.4 Discussion 
So far, our focus in selecting rules and filters 
has been on optimizing precision. As our present 
results show, it is possible to extract definitions 
at an interesting degree of precision and still 
achieve a reasonable number of hits. However 
we have not addressed the issue of recall system-
atically yet. The assessment of recall poses 
greater difficulties than the evaluation of the pre-
cision of search patterns. To our knowledge no 
reference corpus with annotated definitions ex-
ists. Building up such a corpus is time intensive, 
in particular because of the large amount of text 
that has to be examined for this purpose. Within 
the 3500 sentences of the 40 decisions examined 
in our pilot study mentioned above, we found 
only about 130 definitions. While this amount is 
significant from the perspective of information 
access, it is quite small from the annotator?s 
point of view. Moreover it has become clear in 
our pilot study that there is a considerable 
amount of definitions that cannot be identified by 
purely linguistic features, and that many of these 
are unclear cases of particular difficulty for the 
annotator. The proportion of such problematic 
cases will obviously be much higher in free text 
annotation than in the evaluation of our extrac-
tion results, which were generated by looking for 
clear linguistic cues. 
Taking the ratio observed in our pilot study 
(130 definitions in 3500 sentences) as an orienta-
tion, the set of rules we are currently using is 
clearly far from optimal in terms of recall. It 
seems that a lot of relatively simple improve-
ments can be made in this respect. A variety of 
obvious good patterns are still missing in our 
working set. We are currently testing a boot-
strapping approach based on a seed of various 
noun-combinations taken from extracted defini-
tions in order to acquire further extraction pat-
terns. We hope to be able to iterate this proce-
dure in a process of mutual bootstrapping similar 
to that described in (Riloff and Jones 1999).  
Moreover all presently employed rules use 
patterns that correspond to the connector-parts 
(cf. Section 3) of definitions. Accumulations of 
e.g. certain signals and modifiers may turn out to 
indicate definitions with equal precision. We 
24
identified a range of adverbial modifiers that are 
highly associated with definitions in the corpus 
of our pilot study, but we have not yet evaluated 
the effect of integrating them in our extraction 
patterns. 
We also assume that there is great potential for 
more fine-grained and linguistically sensitive 
filtering, such that comparable precision is 
achieved without losing so many results.  
Even with all of the discussed improvements 
however, the problem of definitions without 
clear linguistic indicators will remain. Heuristics 
based on domain specific information, such as 
citation and document structure (e.g. the first 
sentence of a paragraph is often a definition), 
may be of additional help in extending recall of 
our method to such cases. 
Apart from integrating further features in our 
extractors and using bootstrapping techniques for 
identifying new patterns, another option is to 
train classifiers for the identification of defini-
tions based on parse features, such as depend-
ency paths. This approach has for instance been 
used successfully for hypernym discovery (cf. 
Snow et al, 2005). For this task, WordNet could 
be used as a reference in the training and evalua-
tion phase. The fact that no comparable reference 
resource is available in our case presents a great 
difficulty for the application of machine learning 
methods. 
5 Ontology Extraction 
Occurrence of a concept within a definition is 
likely to indicate that the concept is important for 
the text at hand. Moreover in court decisions, a 
great deal of the important (legal as well as sub-
ject domain) concepts will in fact have at least 
some occurrences within definitions. This can be 
assumed because legal argumentation (as dis-
cussed in Section 2) characteristically proceeds 
by adducing explicit definitions for all relevant 
concepts. Definition extraction therefore seems 
to be a promising step for identifying concepts, 
in particular within legal text. This section dis-
cusses how extracted definitions can be used to 
improve the quality of text-based ontology learn-
ing from court decisions. For this purpose we 
first examine the results of a standard method ? 
identification of terms and potential class-
subclass-relations through weighted bigrams ? 
and then look at the effect of combining this 
method with a filter based on occurrence within 
definitions. 
5.1 Bigram Extraction 
Adjective-noun-bigrams are often taken as a 
starting point in text based ontology extraction 
because in many cases they contain two concepts 
and one relation (see e.g. Buitelaar et al 2004). 
The nominal head represents one concept, while 
adjective and noun together represent another 
concept that is subordinate to the first one. There 
are however obvious limits to the applicability of 
this concept-subconcept-rule:  
(1) It may happen that the bigram or even al-
ready the nominal head on its own do not corre-
spond to relevant concepts, i.e. that one or both 
of the denoted classes are of no particular rele-
vance for the domain. 
(2) Not all adjective-noun-bigrams refer to a 
subclass of the class denoted by the head noun. 
Adjectives may e.g. be used redundantly, making 
explicit a part of the semantics of the head noun, 
or the combination may be non-compositional 
and therefore relatively unrelated to the class 
referred to by the head noun. 
For these reasons, extracted bigrams generally 
need to be hand-checked before corresponding 
concepts can be integrated into an ontology. This 
time-intensive step can be facilitated by provid-
ing a relevance-ranking of the candidates to be 
inspected. Such rankings use association meas-
ures known from collocation discovery (like ?2, 
pointwise mutual information or log-likelihood-
ratios). But while the elements of a collocation 
are normally associated in virtue of their mean-
ing, they do not necessarily correspond to a do-
main concept just by this fact. Moreover, many 
collocations are non-compositional. An associa-
tion based ranking therefore cannot solve Prob-
lem (2) just mentioned, and only partially solves 
Problem (1). However it seems likely that the 
definiendum in a definition is a domain concept, 
and for the reasons discussed in Section 2, it can 
be assumed that particularly many concepts will 
in fact occur within definitions in the legal do-
main. In order to investigate this hypothesis, we 
extracted all head-modifier pairs with nominal 
head and adjectival modifier from all parsed sen-
tences in our corpus. We then restricted this list 
to only those bigrams occurring within at least 
one identified definiendum, and compared the 
proportion of domain concepts following the 
concept-subconcept-rule on both lists.  
5.2 Unfiltered Extraction and Annotation 
We found a total 165422 bigram-occurrences 
of 73319 types (in the following we use bigrams 
25
to refer to types, not to occurrences) within the 
full corpus. From this list we deleted combina-
tions with 53 very frequent adjectives that are 
mainly used to establish uniqueness for definite 
reference (such as vorgenannt ? mentioned 
above). All types with more than 5 occurrences 
were then ranked by log-likelihood of observed 
compared to independent occurrence of the bi-
gram elements.3 The resulting list contains 4371 
bigrams on 4320 ranks. Each bigram on the first 
600 ranks of this list (601 bigrams, two bigrams 
share rank 529) was assigned one of the follow-
ing five categories: 
 
1. Environmental domain: Bigrams encoding 
concepts from the environmental domain (e.g. 
unsorted construction waste). These occur be-
cause our corpus deals with environmental law. 
2. Legal domain: Bigrams encoding concepts 
from the legal domain. These range from con-
cepts that are more or less characteristic of envi-
ronmental law (e.g. various kinds of town-
planning schemes) to very generic legal concepts 
(such as statutory prerequisite) 
3. No subconcept: Bigrams that would be 
categorized as 1. or 2., but (typically for one of 
the reasons explained above) do not encode a 
subconcept of the concept associated with the 
head noun. An example is ?ffentliche Hand 
(?public hand?, i.e. public authorities ? a non-
compositional collocation). 
4. No concept: All bigrams that - as a bigram 
- do not stand for a domain concept (although the 
nominal head alone may stand for a concept).  
5. Parser error: Bigrams that were obviously 
misanalysed due to parser errors. 
 
Figure 4 shows the distribution of categories 
among the 600 top-ranked bigrams, as well as 
within an additionally annotated 100 ranks to-
wards the end of the list (ranks 3400-3500). 
20 41 94 118 17
36 61 134 163
22
11 33
74 81
0
31 62 186 223
56
2 3 12 16 6
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Top
100
Top
200
Top
500
Top
600
3400-
3500
Parser error
No concept
No subconcept
Legal
Environmental
 
Figure 4. Results of log-likelihood ranking. 
                                                 
3 The ranking was calculated by the Ngram Statistics 
Package described in (Bannerjee and Pedersen 2003) 
For selecting the two categories of central in-
terest, namely those of legal and environmental 
concepts to which the concept-subconcept rule 
applies, the ranking is most precise on the first 
few hundred ranks, and looses much of its effect 
on lower ranks. The percentage of such concepts 
decreases from 56% among the first 100 ranks to 
51% among the first 200, but is roughly the same 
within the first 500 and 600 ranks (with even a 
slight increase, 45.6% compared to 46.8%). Even 
the segment from rank 3400 to 3500 still con-
tains 39% of relevant terminology. There are no 
bigrams of the ?no subconcept? category within 
this final segment. The explanation for this fact 
is probably that such bigrams (especially the 
non-compositional ones) are mostly established 
collocations and therefore show a particularly 
high degree of association. 
It must be noted that the results of our annota-
tion have to be interpreted cautiously. They have 
not yet been double-checked and during the an-
notation process there turned out to be a certain 
degree of uncertainty especially in the subclassi-
fication of the various categories of concepts (1, 
2 and 3). A further category for concepts with 
generic attributes (e.g. permissible, combining 
with a whole range of one-word terms) would 
probably cover many cases of doubt. The binary 
distinction between concepts and non-concepts 
in contrast was less difficult to make, and it is 
surely safe to conclude about general tendencies 
based on our annotation. 
5.3 Filtering and Combined Approach 
By selecting only those bigrams that occur 
within defienda, the 4371 items on the original 
list were were reduced to 227 (to allow for com-
parison, these were kept in the same order and 
annotated with their ranks as on the original list). 
Figure 5 shows how the various categories are 
distributed within the items selected from the top 
segments of the original list, as well as within the 
complete 227 filtering results. 
7 14 24 26 45
12
17
31 35
100
2
3
5 5
10
4 4
17 17
65
0 0 1 1 7
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Top 100
(25 items)
Top 200
(38 items)
Top 500
(78 items)
Top 600
(84 items)
Complete
(227 it.)
Parser error
No concept
No subconcept
Legal
Environmental
 
Figure 5. Filtered results 
26
The proportion of interesting concepts reaches 
about 80% and is higher than 60% on the com-
plete selection. This is still well above the 56% 
precision within the top 100-segment of the 
original list. However the restriction to a total of 
227 results on our filtered list (of which only 145 
are useful) means a dramatic loss in recall. This 
problem can be alleviated by leaving a top seg-
ment of the original list in place (e.g. the top 200 
or 500 ranks, where precision is still at a tolera-
bly high level) and supplementing it with the 
lower ranks from the filtered list until the desired 
number of items is reached. Another option is to 
apply the filtering to the complete list of ex-
tracted bigrams, not only to those that occur 
more than 5 times. We assume that a concept that 
is explicitly defined is likely to be of particular 
relevance for the domain regardless of its fre-
quency. Hence our definition-based filter should 
still work well on concept candidates that are too 
infrequent to be considered at all in a log-
likelihood ranking, and allow us to include such 
candidates in our selection, too. 
We investigated the effect of a combination of 
both methods just described. For this purpose, 
we first extracted all noun-adjective bigrams oc-
curring within any of the identified definienda, 
regardless of their frequency within the corpus. 
After completing the annotation on the 627 re-
sulting bigrams they were combined with various 
top segments of our original unfiltered list. 
Figure 6 shows the distribution of the anno-
tated categories among the 627 bigrams from 
definienda, as well as on two combined lists. 
Cutoff 200/750 is the result of cutting the original 
list at rank 200 and filling up with the next 550 
items from the filtered list. For cutoff 500/1000 
we cut the original list at rank 500 and filled up 
with the following 500 items from the filtered 
one. The distribution of categories among the 
original top 200 is repeated for comparison. 
Figure 6. Log-likelihood and filtering combined. 
 
Precision among the 627 filtering results is 
higher than among the original top 200 (almost 
56% compared to 51%), and only slightly 
smaller even for the 1000 results in the cutoff 
500/1000 setting. Using definition extraction as 
an additional knowledge source, the top 1000 
results retrieved are thus of a quality that can 
otherwise only be achieved for the top 200 re-
sults. 
6 Conclusion 
In this paper we argued that definitions are an 
important element of legal texts and in particular 
of court decisions. We provided a structural 
segmentation scheme for definitions and dis-
cussed a method of applying computational lin-
guistic analysis techniques for their text-based 
extraction and automatic segmentation. We 
showed that a large number of definitions can in 
fact be extracted at high precision using this 
method, but we also pointed out that there is still 
much room for improvement in terms of recall, 
e.g. through the inclusion of further definition 
patterns.  
Our future work in this area will focus on the 
integration of extraction results across docu-
ments (e.g. recognizing and collecting comple-
mentary definitions for the same concept) and on 
a user interface for structured access to this data. 
For this work we have access to a corpus of sev-
eral million verdicts provided to us by the com-
pany juris GmbH, Saarbr?cken. We also demon-
strated how the identification of definitions can 
improve the results of text-driven ontology learn-
ing in the legal domain. When looking for noun-
adjective bigrams encoding relevant concepts, it 
leads to a considerable increase in precision to 
restrict the search to definienda only. This 
method is more precise than selecting the top 
ranks of a log-likelihood ranking. Its great disad-
vantage is the very low total number of results, 
leading to poor recall. However by combining a 
log-likelihood ranking with definition-based 
concept extraction, recall can be improved while 
still achieving better precision than with a log-
likelihood ranking alone. Moreover this com-
bined method also retrieves concepts that are too 
infrequent to be included at all in a log-
likelihood ranking. 
There is however another, maybe even more 
relevant reason to look for definitions in ontol-
ogy learning. Definitions in legal text often very 
explicitly and precisely determine all kinds of 
relational knowledge about the defined concept. 
For instance they specify explicit subordinations 
(as in the classical definitio per genus et differen-
116 140 181 41
231 269 320 61
25 51 90
33
230 278 376
62
25 27 33 3
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Filtered
(627)
Cutoff 200/
750
Cutoff 500/
1000
Top 200
Parser Errors
No concept
No subconcept
Legal
Environmental
27
tiam), introduce restrictions on roles inherited 
from a superconcept, determine the constitutive 
parts of the definiendum, or contain information 
about its causal relations to other concepts. As 
one focus of our future work we plan to investi-
gate how such rich ontological knowledge can be 
extracted automatically. 
References 
Satanjeev Banerjee and Ted Pedersen. 2003. The De-
sign, Implementation, and Use of the Ngram Statis-
tics Package. CICLing 2003: 370-381 
Christian Braun. 2003. Parsing German text for syn-
tacto-semantic structures. In Prospects and Ad-
vances in the Syntax/Semantics Interface, Lorraine-
Saarland Workshop Series, Nancy, France:99-102 
Paul Buitelaar, Daniel Olejnik, Michael Sintek. 2004. 
A Prot?g? Plug-In for Ontology Extraction from 
Text Based on Linguistic Analysis In: Proceedings 
of the 1st European Semantic Web Symposium 
(ESWS), Heraklion, Greece 
Aljoscha Burchardt, Katrin Erk, Anette Frank, Andrea 
Kowalski and Sebastian Pad?. 2006. SALTO -- A 
Versatile Multi-Level Annotation Tool. Proceed-
ings of LREC 2006, Genoa, Italy. 
Gerhard Fliedner. 2004. Deriving FrameNet Repre-
sentations: Towards Meaning-Oriented Question 
Answering. Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Applications of Natural Language to In-
formation Systems (NLDB). Salford, UK. LNCS 
3136/2004. Springer. 64?75. 
Herbert L.A. Hart. 1961. The concept of Law. Oxford 
University Press, London, UK 
Guiraude Lame. 2005. Using NLP Techniques to 
Identify Legal Ontology Components: Concepts 
and Relations, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
Volume 3369:169 ? 184 
Ellen Riloff and Rosie Jones. 1999. Learning Diction-
aries for Information Extraction Using Multi-level 
Boot-strapping, Proceedings of AAAI-99, 474 - 479  
Jos? Saias and Paulo Quaresma. 2005. A Methodol-
ogy to Create Legal Ontologies in a Logic Pro-
gramming Information Retrieval System. Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, Volume 3369:185 - 
200  
Rion Snow, Daniel Jurafsky, and Andrew Y. Ng. 
2005. Learning syntactic patterns for automatic hy-
pernym discovery, Proceedings of NIPS 2004, 
Vancouver, Canada. 
Andre Valente. 2005. Types and Roles of Legal On-
tologies. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol-
ume 3369:65 - 76. 
Andre Valente and Jost Breuker. 1994. A functional 
ontology of law. Towards a global expert system in 
law. CEDAM Publishers, Padua, Italy 
28
