Adding extra input/output modalities to a spoken dialogue system
Janienke STURM, Fusi WANG, Bert CRANEN
A2RT, Dept. Language and Speech, Nijmegen University
Erasmusplein 1
6525 HT Nijmegen, The Netherlands
{janienke.sturm | f.wang | b.cranen}@let.kun.nl
Abstract
This paper describes a prototype of a multi-
modal railway information system that was
built by extending an existing speech-only
system. The purpose of the extensions is to
alleviate a number of shortcomings of
speech-only interfaces.
1
 
Introduction
For a long time, speech has been the only mo-
dality for input and output in telephone-based in-
formation systems. Speech is often considered to
be the most natural form of input for such sys-
tems, since people have always used speech as
the primary means of communication. More-
over, to use a speech-only system a simple tele-
phone suffices and no additional devices are re-
quired. Obviously, in situations where both
hands and eyes are busy, speech is definitely
preferable over other modalities like pen/mouse.
However, speech-only interfaces have also
shown a number of shortcomings that result in
less effective and less efficient dialogues.
The aim of the research described in this paper is
to assess the extent to which multimodal in-
put/output can help to improve effectiveness, ef-
ficiency and user satisfaction of information
systems in comparison with unimodal systems.
This paper describes how, within the framework
of the MATIS1 (Multimodal Access to Transac-
tion and Information Services) project we devel-
oped a prototype of a multimodal railway infor-
mation system by extending a speech-only ver-
sion in such a way that it supports screen output
and point-and-click actions of the user as input.
This system is a typical example of a simple ap-
plication that can be implemented using a slot-
filling paradigm and may stand model for vari-
ous other form filling applications.
First, a number of problems are described that
arise in speech-only interfaces. Then we briefly
describe the architecture of the speech-only
                                                  
1
 http://www.ipo.tue.nl/projects/matis/
railway information system. Next, we describe
in more detail how we added multimodality to
this version of the system and explain why we
think this may help to solve the shortcomings of
speech-only systems. We conclude this paper by
discussing several open issues that we intend to
solve by means of user tests with the multimodal
system.
2 Shortcomings of speech-only interfaces
One of the issues that all dialogue systems with
spoken input have to cope with is the imperfec-
tion of the speech recogniser. Even in very lim-
ited domains and with a small vocabulary speech
recognition is never 100% accurate, if only be-
cause people may use OoD (Out of Domain) or
OoV (Out of Vocabulary) words. To ensure that
the user does not end up with wrong informa-
tion, all slot values entered by the user must be
confirmed. This can be done either explicitly in
a separate question or implicitly, i.e. incorpo-
rated in the next question. Explicit confirmation
results in a lot of extra turns, which means that
the dialogue becomes less efficient and is often
perceived as tedious, especially if all user utter-
ances are understood correctly. Implicit confir-
mation, by contrast, does not necessarily in-
crease the number of turns. However, it appears
that users have difficulty in grasping the concept
of implicit confirmation [Sturm, 1999]. Things
run smoothly as long as the information to be
confirmed is correct. If the speech recognition
result is incorrect and wrong input expressions
are confirmed implicitly, users tend to get con-
fused and fail to repair the mistake that was
made by the speech recogniser.
In order to reduce the need for confirmation,
confidence measures may be used. A confidence
score is an estimate of how certain one can be
that the recognition result is indeed correct. Us-
ing confidence scores in combination with one
or more thresholds, would for instance allow to
decide upon 1) ignoring the recognition result (if
the confidence is minimal), 2) confirming the
recognition result or 3) accepting the recognition
result without confirmation (if the confidence is
maximal). Unfortunately, it is virtually impossi-
ble to define thresholds in such a way that no
false accepts (a user utterance is actually mis-
recognised but has a confidence score that ex-
ceeds the threshold) and no false rejects (user
input was recognised correctly but has a confi-
dence score that falls below the threshold) are
caused. False rejects are not very harmful, al-
though they do cause superfluous confirmation
questions, and thus reduce the efficiency of the
dialogue. False accepts, however, may become
disastrous for the dialogue, since they cause in-
correct values to be accepted without any con-
firmation. As a consequence, this strategy does
not seem very attractive for speech-only sys-
tems.
Another problem with speech-only information
systems is the way in which the eventual infor-
mation is presented to the user. Shadowing ex-
periments with different railway information
systems indicate that users have difficulties un-
derstanding and writing down a travel advice
presented in spoken form, especially if one or
more transfers are involved [Claassen, 2000].
Last, and perhaps foremost, it appears that users
have difficulty in building a correct mental
model of the functionality and the status of a
speech-only system. This lack of understanding
explains problems with exceptions handling, and
the user?s uncertainty as to what one can (or
perhaps must) say at any given moment.
3 Multimodality in MATIS
The first goal of the MATIS project is to inves-
tigate to what extent graphical output along with
speech prompts can solve the problems that are
due to the lack of a consistent mental model. If,
for example, recognition results are not only
confirmed (implicitly) in speech prompts for ad-
ditional input, but also displayed in the corre-
sponding field on the screen, detecting recogni-
tion errors may become easier. The same should
hold for navigation through the list of possible
connections that is returned after the input is
complete and a database query can be per-
formed.
If no keyboard is available speech is ideal for
making selections from long implicit lists, such
as the departure city. However, other fields in a
form may offer only a small number of options,
which can easily be displayed on a screen. In the
railway information system this holds for the
switch that identifies the time as departure or ar-
rival time (and to a large extent also for entering
the date, which usually is today or tomorrow).
Selections from short lists are most easily made
by means of point-and-click operations. There-
fore, we decided to add this input mode to
speech input.
3.1  System Overview
Our multimodal railway information system is
an extended version of the mixed-initiative
speech-only railway information system (OVIS)
developed in the NWO-TST programme2. This is
a very different starting point from most other
projects in multimodal human-machine interac-
tion, that seem to add speech to what is basically
a user-driven desktop application. The user in-
terface consists of a telephone handset in combi-
nation with a screen and a mouse. The MATIS
system inherited an architecture in which mod-
ules communicate with each other using TCP
socket connections under the control of a central
module (Phrisco) (cf. Figure 1). The grey shaded
modules have been added or extended for
MATIS.
Phrisco
Autel Server
Speech
 Recognition
Confidence
Calculation
NLP Database
Multi-modal
Input Event
Handler
Dialogue
Manager
Multi-modal
Output Event
Handler
Natural
Language
Generation
Speech
Synthesis
Screen
Input   Output
Screen output
Speech outputSpeech input
  Point & click input
Figure 1 Overview of the MATIS system
In the next sections we will focus on the mod-
ules that have been added or changed and how
these modules help to solve some of the prob-
lems described in Section 2.
                                                  
2
 http://odur.let.rug.nl:4321/
3.2 Screen output
At the start of a dialogue an empty form is
shown on the screen. In the course of the dia-
logue the fields are filled with the values pro-
vided by the user, who can use speech to fill all
five slots in the form in a mixed-initiative dia-
logue, or use the mouse to select text fields and
to make list selections. Once all slots have been
filled, a travel advice is retrieved from the data-
base and presented to the user in spoken and in
textual form.
3.3 Mouse input
Experiments have been conducted using a Wiz-
ard of Oz simulation of the MATIS system, to
establish to what extent subjects use the mouse
in addition to speech and in what way mouse in-
put is used in an interaction that is essentially the
original mixed-initiative spoken dialogue
[Terken, 2001]. It appeared that half of the sub-
jects used mouse input as well as speech input
and that mouse input was primarily used to
make selections from short lists, and much less
to select editable text fields. The latter was done
mostly in the context of error correction.
3.4 Confidence calculation
Confidence measures (CM) for spoken input can
be calculated in different ways. In the MATIS
system the CM is based on an N-best list of
sentence hypotheses that is generated by the
speech recogniser [R?ber, 1997]. This N-best
confidence score rests on the assumption that
words that occur in more entries in the N-best
list are more likely to be correct:
where P(hi) is the likelihood score of sentence
hypothesis i in the N-best list. In this manner a
CM is calculated for each word in the utterance.
The N-best CM may give rise to a specific
problem: if the N-best list contains only one en-
try, (1) automatically yields a maximum confi-
dence score for each word in the utterance. Off-
line experiments have shown that 3% of all N-
best lists consisting of only one sentence actu-
ally contained recognition errors. Consequently,
even if we only trust words with a maximum
CM score, the false accept rate will be at least
3%. Other off-line experiments have shown that
some improvement may be expected from com-
bining the N-best CM with another CM that
does not have this artefact.
When a user fills a specific slot in the form us-
ing speech (s)he has to indicate which slot needs
to be filled and provide a value for this slot. To
obtain a CM for the slot value, the CMs of all
words that were used to specify this value have
to be combined. In the current implementation
this was done by taking their mean.
3.5 Multimodal Input Event Handler
The information coming from the NLP module
(in response to a spoken prompt) and from the
mouse (that is active all the time) must be prop-
erly combined. This task is taken care of by the
multimodal input event handler. To combine the
information streams correctly, a time stamp must
be attached to the inputs, indicating the temporal
interval in which the action took place. This time
interval is needed to decide which events should
be combined [Oviatt, 1997].
Furthermore, speech and mouse input may con-
tain complementary, redundant or unrelated in-
formation. Complementary information (e.g.
clicking on the ?destination? field and saying
?Rotterdam?) is unified before it is sent to the
dialogue manager. Unrelated information (e.g.
clicking to select departure time while saying
one or more station names) is first merged and
then sent to the dialogue manager. In the case of
redundant information (e.g. clicking on ?tomor-
row? while saying ?tomorrow?), the information
coming from the mouse is used to adapt the CM
score attached to the speech input. Due to speech
recognition errors, ?redundant? information may
be conflicting (if the recogniser returns ?tomor-
row? in the same time slot where ?today? is
clicked). To solve this problem the information
with the highest CM score will be trusted.
3.6 Dialogue management
The dialogue manager of the unimodal system
was adapted in order to be able to use the CMs
to decide on the confirmation strategy. In the
present prototype we use only one threshold to
decide upon the strategy. Values with a CM
score below the threshold are shown on the
screen and confirmed explicitly in the spoken
dialogue. Values with a CM score exceeding the
threshold are only shown on the screen. In case
all or most values have a high CM score, this
strategy speeds up the dialogue considerably.
Preliminary experiments suggest that providing
feedback visually as well as orally helps the user
?
?
=
?=
= N
i
i
N
hWi
i
nbest
hP
hP
CM i
1
:1
)(
)(
(1)
to develop an adequate model of the system.
Also, since the user knows exactly what the in-
formation status of the system is at each point in
the dialogue, correcting errors should be easier,
which in turn will result in more effective dia-
logues. We are convinced that an increase in ef-
fectiveness and efficiency can be achieved, es-
pecially if the visual output is combined with
auditory prompts that are more concise than in
the speech-only system.
3.7 Multimodal Output Event Handler
In a multimodal system a decision has to be
made as to whether the feedback to the user
must be presented orally, visually, or in both
ways. This is the task of the multimodal output
event handler. For the time being we have de-
cided to send all the output from the dialogue
manager to the natural language generation
module and the screen.
4 Discussion and conclusions
In this paper we have described the architecture
of a multimodal train timetable information
system that was built by extending a speech-only
version. Most of the desired functionality of the
modules that we added or changed was specified
on the basis of off-line experiments and findings
in the literature. The system is now ready to be
tested by real users.
Adding visual feedback has been shown to help
in several respects. In Terken (2001) it was
shown that the visual feedback helps the user to
build a mental model of the task at hand. Fur-
thermore, we argued that visual feedback may
be interpreted as a form of implicit verification,
which helps the user to detect recognition errors.
This allows to apply confidence thresholds to
avoid confirmation turns, even if a number of
false accepts occur. This is in contrast with
speech-only systems, where false accepts will
remain unnoticed.
User tests with our present prototype are needed
to verify whether the additional modalities do
indeed help to increase efficiency, effectiveness
and user satisfaction. These tests will be con-
ducted in the near future. In the current proto-
type a number of ad hoc choices were made. We
expect that several of these choices will have to
be revised based on the outcomes of the tests.
CM scores that are calculated for individual
words must be transformed into scores for
slot/value pairs. This can be done in several
ways: by taking the mean score, the maximum
score, weighting the scores for values and slots,
etc. In the current prototype we take the mean of
the scores of the words that yielded a certain
slot/value pair, but more sophisticated methods
may be needed.
In principle it is possible to go beyond the cur-
rent design and give feedback on the status of
the slots (confirmed or not, changeable or not) in
addition to showing their values. This might
prevent the user from getting lost in the dia-
logue. However, it is not yet clear whether addi-
tional visual attributes can be designed that are
self-explanatory and will not confuse the user. It
might be useful to enable the user to correct in-
formation by clicking the field that contains in-
correct information and saying the correct in-
formation. Also, showing a list of alternative
recognition hypotheses from which the user can
select the correct one, might help. In the current
system we have not implemented this option.
Currently, the complete output of the dialogue
manager is sent both to the speech output mod-
ule and the screen. Informal tests have shown
that the speech output designed for a speech-
only system is much too verbose. Especially the
oral presentation of the travel advice can be a
short summary, e.g. consisting of only the de-
parture and arrival times, when the complete ad-
vice is also presented on the screen.
5 Acknowledgement
This work was supported by a grant from Sen-
ter/EZ in the framework of IOP-MMI.
6 References
B. R?ber (1997), Obtaining confidence measures
from sentence probabilities, Proceedings Euro-
speech?97, pp. 739-742.
W. Claassen (2000), Using recall measurements and
subjective ratings to assess the usability of railroad
travel plans presented by telephone, Technical Re-
port #123, NWO Priority Programme on Language
and Speech Technology.
S. Oviatt, A. DeAngeli, and K. Kuhn (1997), Inte-
gration and synchronization of input modes during
multimodal human-computer interaction, in Pro-
ceedings of CHI '97, pp. 415-422.
J. Sturm, E. den Os and L. Boves (1999), Issues in
spoken dialogue systems: Experiences with the
Dutch ARISE system, Proceedings ESCA Work-
shop on Interactive Dialogue in Multimodal Sys-
tems, pp. 1-4.
J. Terken and S. te Riele (2001), Supporting the con-
struction of a user model in speech-only interfaces
by adding multimodality, Submitted to Eurospeech
2001.
