	

		
	
Mandarin-English Information (MEI): 
Investigating Translingual Speech Retrieval 
Helen Meng, 1 Sanjeev Khudanpur, ~ Gina Levow, 3 Douglas W. Oard, 3 Hsin-Min Wang' 
1The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2Johns Hopkins University, 
3University of Maryland and 4Academia Sinica (Taiwan) 
{hmmeng@se.cuhk.edu.hk, sanjeev@clsp.jhu.edu, gina@umiacs.umd.edu, 
oard@, glue.umd.edu, whm@ iis.sinica.edu.tw } 
Abstract 
We describe a system which supports 
English text queries searching for 
Mandarin Chinese spoken documents. 
This is one of the first attempts to tightly 
couple speech recognition with machine 
translation technologies for cross-media 
and cross-language retrieval. The 
Mandarin Chinese news audio are indexed 
with word and subword units by speech 
recognition. Translation of these multi- 
scale units can effect cross-language 
information retrieval. The integrated 
technologies will be evaluated based on 
the performance of translingnal speech 
retrieval. 
1. Introduction 
Massive quantities of audio and multimedia 
programs are becoming available. For example, 
in mid-February 2000, www.real.com listed 
1432 radio stations, 381 Internet-only 
broadcasters, and 86 television stations with 
Internet-accessible content, with 529 
broadcasting in languages other than English. 
Monolingual speech retrieval is now practical, as 
evidenced by services such as SpeechBot 
(speechbot.research.compaq.com), and it is clear 
that there is a potential demand for translingual 
speech retrieval if effective techniques can be 
developed. The Mandarin-English Information 
(MEI) project represents one of the first efforts 
in that direction. 
MEI is one of the four projects elected for 
the Johns Hopkins University (JHU) Summer 
Workshop 2000.1 Our research focus is on the 
integration of speech recognition and embedded 
translation technologies in the context of 
translingual speech retrieval. Possible 
applications of this work include audio and 
video browsing, spoken document retrieval, 
automated routing of information, and 
automatically alerting the user when special 
events occur. 
At the time of this writing, most of the MEI 
team members have been identified. This paper 
provides an update beyond our first proposal 
\[Meng et al, 2000\]. We present some ongoing 
work of our current eam members, as well as 
our ideas on an evolving plan for the upcoming 
JHU Summer Workshop 2000. We believe the 
input from the research community will benefit 
us greatly in formulating ourfinal plan. 
2. Background 
2.1 Translingual Information Retrieval 
The earliest work on large-vocabulary cross- 
language information retrieval from free-text 
(i,e., without manual topic indexing) was 
reported in 1990 \[Landauer and Littman, 1990\], 
and the topic has received increasing attention 
over the last five years \[Oard and Diekema, 
1998\]. Work on large-vocabulary retrieval from 
recorded speech is more recent, with some initial 
work reported in 1995 using subword indexing 
\[Wechsler and Schauble, 1995\], followed by the 
first TREC 2 Spoken Document Retrieval (SDR) 
I http://www.clsp,jhu.edu/ws2000/ 
2 Text REtrieval Conference, http://trec.nist.gov 
23 
evaluation \[Garofolo et al, 2000\]. The Topic 
Detection and Tracking (TDT) evaluations, 
which started in 1998, fall within our definition 
of speech retrieval for this purpose, differing 
from other evaluations principally in the nature 
of the criteria that human assessors use when 
assessing the relevance of a news stow to an 
information eed. In TDT, stories are assessed 
for relevance to an event, while in TREC stories 
are assessed for relevance to an explicitly stated 
information eed that is often subject- rather 
than event-oriented. 
The TDT-33 evaluation marked the first 
case of translingual speech retrieval - the task of 
finding information in a collection of recorded 
speech based on evidence of the information 
need that might be expressed (at least partially) 
in a different language. Translingual speech 
retrieval thus merges two lines of research that 
have developed separately until now. In the 
TDT-3 topic tracking evaluation, recognizer 
transcripts which have recognition errors were 
available, and it appears that every team made 
use of them. This provides a valuable point of 
reference for investigation of techniques that 
more tightly couple speech recognition with 
translingual retrieval. We plan to explore one 
way of doing this in the Mandarin-English 
Information (MEI) project. 
2.2 The Chinese Language 
In order to retrieve Mandarin audio documents, 
we should consider a number of linguistic 
characteristics of the Chinese language: 
The Chinese language has many dialects. 
Different dialects are characterized by their 
differences in the phonetics, vocabularies and 
syntax. Mandarin, also known as Putonglma 
("the common language"), is the most widely 
used dialect. Another major dialect is Cantonese, 
predominant in Hong Kong, Macau, South 
China and many overseas Chinese communities. 
Chinese is a syllable-based language, 
where each syllable carries a lexical tone. 
Mandarin has about 400 base syllables and four 
lexical tones, plus a "light" tone for reduced 
syllables. There are about 1,200 distinct, tonal 
syllables for Mandarin. Certain syllable-tone 
3 http://morph.ldc.upenn.edu/Projects/TDT3/ 
combinations are non-existent in the language. 
The acoustic correlates of the lexical tone 
include the syllable's fundamental frequency 
(pitch contour) and duration. However, these 
acoustic features are also highly dependent on 
prosodic variations of spoken utterances. 
The structure of Mandarin (base) syllables 
is (CG)V(X), where (CG) the syllable onset - C 
the initial consonant, G is the optional medial 
glide, V is the nuclear vowel, and X is the coda 
(which may be a glide, alveolar nasal or velar 
nasal). Syllable onsets and codas are optional. 
Generally C is known as the syllable initial, and 
the rest (GVX) syllable final. 4 Mandarin has 
approximately 21 initials and 39 finals. 5 
In its written form, Chinese is a sequence 
of characters. A word may contain one or more 
characters. Each character is pronounced as a 
tonal syllable. The character-syllable mapping is 
degenerate. On one hand, a given character may 
have multiple syllable pronunciations - for 
example, the character/d" may be pronounced as 
/hang2/, 6/hang4/, or/xing2/. On the other hand, 
a given tonal syllable may correspond to 
multiple characters. Consider the two-syllable 
pronunciation/fu4 shu4/, which corresponds toa 
two-character word. Possible homophones 
include ~, ,  (meaning "rich"), ~ ~tR, ("negative 
number"), ~1~1~, ("complex number" or 
"plural"), ~1~ ("repeat"). 7 
Aside from homographs and homophones, 
another source of ambiguity in the Chinese 
language is the definition of a Chinese word. 
The word has no delimiters, and the distinction 
between a word and a phrase is often vague. The 
lexical structure of the Chinese word is very 
different compared to English. Inflectional 
forms are minimal, while morphology and word 
derivations abide by a different set of rules. A 
word may inherit the syntax and semantics of 
(some of) its compositional characters, for 
4 http://m?rph'ldc'upenn'edu/Pr?jects/Chinese/intr?'html 
5 The corresponding linguistic haracteristics of Cantonese 
are very similar. 
6 These are Mandarin pinyin, the number encodes the tone 
of the syllable. 
7 Example drawn from \[Leung, 1999\]. 
24 
example, 8 ~ means red (a noun or an 
adjective), ~., means color (a noun), and ~. ,  
together means "the color red"(a noun) or 
simply "red" (an adjective). Alternatively, a 
word may take on totally different 
characteristics of its own, e.g. ~. means east (a 
noun or an adjective), ~ means west (a noun or 
an adjective), and .~.~ together means thing (a 
noun). Yet another case is where the 
compositional characters of a word do not form 
independent lexical entries in isolation, e.g. D~ 
means fancy (a verb), but its characters do not 
occur individually. Possible ways of deriving 
new words from characters are legion. The 
problem of identifying the words string in a 
character sequence is known as the segmentation 
/ tokenization problem. Consider the syllable 
string: 
/zhe4 yil wan3 hui4 ru2 chang2 ju3 xing2/ 
The corresponding character string has three 
possible segmentations - all are correct, but each 
involves a distinct set of words: 
(Meaning: It will be take place tonight as usual.) 
(Meaning: The evening banquet will take place 
as usual.) 
(Meaning: If this evening banquet akes place 
frequently...) 
The above considerations lead to a number 
of techniques we plan to use for our task. We 
concentrate on three equally critical problems 
related to our theme of translingual speech 
retrieval: (i) indexing Mandarin Chinese audio 
with word and subword units, (ii) translating 
variable-size units for cross-language 
information retrieval, and (iii) devising effective 
retrieval strategies for English text queries and 
Mandarin Chinese news audio. 
3. Multiscale Audio Indexing 
A popular approach to spoken document 
retrieval is to apply Large-Vocabulary 
s Examples drawn from \[Meng and Ip, 1999\]. 
Continuous Speech Recognition (LVCSR) 9 for 
audio indexing, followed by text retrieval 
techniques. Mandarin Chinese presents a 
challenge for word-level indexing by LVCSR, 
because of the ambiguity in tokenizing a 
sentence into words (as mentioned earlier). 
Furthermore, LVCSR with a static vocabulary is
hampered by the out-of-vocabulary (OOV) 
problem, especially when searching sources with 
topical coverage as diverse as that found in 
broadcast news. 
By virtue of the monosyllabic nature of the 
Chinese language and its dialects, the syllable 
inventory can provide a complete phonological 
coverage for spoken documents, and circumvent 
the OOV problem in news audio indexing, 
offering the potential for greater recall in 
subsequent retrieval. The approach thus supports 
searches for previously unknown query terms in 
the indexed audio. 
The pros and cons of subword indexing for 
an English spoken document retrieval task was 
studied in \[Ng, 2000\]. Ng pointed out that the  
exclusion of lexical knowledge when subword 
indexing is performed in isolation may adversely 
impact discrimination power for retrieval, but 
that some of that impact can be mitigated by 
modeling sequential constraints among subword 
units. We plan to investigate the efficacy of 
using both word and subword units for 
Mandarin audio indexing \[Meng et al, 2000\]. 
Although Ng found that such an approach 
produced little gain over words alone for 
English, the structure of Mandarin Chinese may 
produce more useful subword features. 
3.1 Modeling Syllable Sequence Constraints 
We have thus far used overlapping syllable N- 
grams for spoken document retrieval for two 
Chinese dialects - Mandarin and Cantonese. 
Results on a known-item retrieval task with over 
1,800 error-free news transcripts \[Meng et al, 
1999\] indicate that constraints from overlapping 
bigrams can yield significant improvements in 
retrieval performance over syllable unigrams, 
producing retrieval performance competitive 
9 The lexicon size of a typical large-vocabulary 
continuous speech recognizer can range from 10,000 
to 100,000 word forms. 
25 
with that obtained using automatically tokenized 
Chinese words. 
The study in \[Chen, Wang and Lee, 2000\] 
also used syllable pairs with skipped syllables in 
between. This is because many Chinese 
abbreviations are derived from skipping 
characters, e.g. J .~:~.~t:~  ~ National 
Science Council" can be abbreviated as l~r~ 
(including only the first, third and the last 
characters). Moreover, synonyms often differ by 
one or two characters, e.g. both ~ ' /~4~ and 
~.~,,Ag mean "Chinese culture". Inclusion o f  
these "skipped syllable pairs" also contributed to
retrieval performance. 
When modeling sequential syllable 
constraints, lexical constraints on recognized 
words may be helpful. We thus plan to exp\]Iore 
the potential for integrated sequential model\]ling 
of both words and syllables \[Meng et al, 20013\]. 
4. Multiseale Embedded Translation 
Figures 1 and 2 illustrate two translingual 
retrieval strategies. In query translation, English 
text queries are transformed into Mandarin and 
then used to retrieve Mandarin documents. For 
document translation, Mandarin documents are 
translated into English before they are indexed 
and then matched with English queries. 
McCarley has reported improved effectiveness 
from techniques that couple the two techniques 
\[McCarley, 1999\], but time constraints may 
limit us to explonng only the query translation 
strategy dunng the six-week Workshop. 
4,1 Word  Translat ion 
While we make use of sub-word 
transcription tosmooth out-of-vocabulary(OOV) 
problems in speech recognition as described 
above, and to alleviate the OOV problem :for 
translation as we discuss in the next section, 
accurate translation generally relies on the 
additional information available at the word and 
phrase levels. Since the "bag of words" 
information retrieval techniques do not 
incorporate any meaningful degree of language 
understanding to assess similarity between 
queries and documents, a word-for-word (or, 
more generally, term-for-term) embedded 
translation approach can achieve a useful level 
of effectiveness for many translingual retrieval 
applications \[Oard and Diekema, 1998\]. 
We have developed such a technique for the 
TDT-3 topic tracking evaluation \[Levow and 
Oard, 2000\]. For that work we extracted an 
enriched bilingual Mandarin-English term list by 
combining two term lists: (i) A list assembled 
by the Linguistic Data Consortium from freely 
available on-line resources; and (ii) entries from 
the CETA file (sometimes referred to as 
"Optilex"). This is a Chinese to English 
translation resource that was manually compiled 
by a team of linguists from more than 250 text 
sources, including special and general-purpose 
print dictionaries, and other text sources uch as 
newspapers. The CETA file contains over 
250,000 entries, but for our lexical work we 
extracted a subset of those entries drawn from 
contemporary general-purpose sources. We also 
excluded efinitions uch as "particle indicating 
a yes/no question." Our resulting Chinese to 
English merged bilingual term list contains 
translations for almost 200,000 Chinese terms, 
with average of almost two translation 
alternatives per term. We have also used the 
same resources to construct an initial English to 
Chinese bilingual term list that we plan to refine 
before the Workshop. 
Three significant challenges faced by term- 
to-term translation systems are term selection in 
the source language, the source language 
coverage of the bilingual term list, and 
translation selection in the target language when 
more than one alternative translation is known. 
Word segmentation is a natural by-product of 
large vocabulary Mandarin speech recognition, 
and white space provides word boundaries for 
the English queries. We thus plan to choose 
words as our basic term set, perhaps augmenting 
this with the multiword expressions found in the 
bilingual term list. 
Achieving adequate source language 
coverage is challenging in news retrieval 
applications of the type modelled by TDT, 
because proper names and technical terms that 
may not be present in general-purpose lexical 
resources often provide important retrieval cues. 
Parallel (translation equivalent) corpora have 
proven to be a useful source of translation 
26 
equivalent terms, but obtaining appropriate 
domain-specific parallel corpora in electronic 
form may not be practical in some applications. 
We therefore plan to investigate the use of 
comparable corpora to learn translation 
equivalents, based on techniques in \[Fung, 
1998\]. Subword translation, described below, 
provides a complementary way of handling 
terms for which translation equivalents cannot 
be reliably extracted from the available 
comparable corpora. 
One way of dealing with multiple 
translations is to weight the alternative 
translations using either a statistical translation 
model trained on parallel or comparable corpora 
to estimate translation probability conditioned 
on the source language term. When such 
resources are not sufficiently informative, it is 
generally possible to back off to an 
unconditioned preference statistic based on 
usage frequency of each possible translation i  a 
representative monolingual corpus in the target 
language. In retrospective r trieval applications 
the collection being searched can be used for 
this purpose. We have applied simple versions 
of this approach with good results \[Levow and 
Oard, 2000\]. 
We have recently observed that a simpler 
technique introduced by \[Pirkola, 1998\] can 
produce xcellent results. The key idea is to use 
the structure of the lexicon, in which several 
target language terms can represent a single 
source language term, to induce structure in the 
translated query that the retrieval system can 
automatically exploit. In essence, the translated 
query becomes a bag of bags of terms, where 
each smaller bag corresponds to the set of 
possible translations for one source-language 
term. We plan to implement his structured 
query translation approach using the Inquery 
\[Callan, 1992\] "synonym" operator in the same 
manner as \[Pirkola, 1998\], and to the potential to 
extend the technique to accommodate alternative 
recognition hypothesis and subword units as 
well: 
4.2 Subword  Translat ion 
Since Mandarin spoken documents can be 
indexed with both words and subwords, the 
translation (or "phonetic transliteration") of 
subword units is of particular interest. We plan 
to make use of cross-language phonetic 
mappings derived from English and Mandarin 
pronunciation rules for this purpose. This should 
be especially useful for handling named entities 
in the queries, e.g. names of people, places and 
organizations, etc. which are generally important 
for retrieval, but may not be easily translated. 
Chinese translations of English proper nouns 
may involve semantic as well as phonetic 
mappings. For example, "Northern Ireland" is 
translated as :~b~ttlM - -  where the first 
character ~ means 'north', and the remaining 
characters ~tllllll are pronounced as /ai4-er3- 
lan2L Hence the translation is both semantic 
and phonetic. When Chinese translations strive 
to attain phonetic similarity, the mapping may 
be inconsistent. For example, consider the 
translation of "Kosovo" - sampling Chinese 
newspapers in China, Taiwan and Hong Kong 
produces the following translations: 
~-~r~ /kel-suo3-wo4?, ~-~ /kel-suo3-fo2/, 
~'~&/kel-suo3-ful/f l4"~dt/kel-suo3-fu2/, or 
~/ke  1-suo3-fo2/. 
As can be seen, there is no systematic 
mapping to the Chinese character sequences, but 
the translated Chinese pronunciations bear some 
resemblance to the English pronunciation (/k ow 
s ax vow/). In order to support retrieval under 
these circumstances, the approach should 
involve approximate matches between the 
English pronunciation and the Chinese 
pronunciation. The matching algorithm should 
also accommodate phonological variations. 
Pronunciation dictionaries, or pronunciation 
generation tools for both English words and 
Chinese words / characters will be useful for the 
matching algorithm. We can probably leverage 
off of ideas in the development of universal 
speech recognizers \[Cohen et al, 1997\]. 
5. Mulfiscale Retrieval 
5.1 Coupling Words and Subwords 
We intend to use both words and subwords for 
retrieval. Loose coupling would involve separate 
retrieval runs using words and subwords, 
producing two ranked lists, followed by list 
merging using techniques such as those explored 
by \[Voorhees, 1995\]. Tight coupling, by 
27 
contrast, would require creation of a unified 
index containing both word and subword units, 
resulting in a single ranked list. We hope to 
explore both techniques during the Workshop. 
5.2 Imperfect Indexing and Translat ion 
It should be noted that speech recognition 
exacerbates uncertainty when indexing audio, 
and that translation or transliteration exacerbates 
uncertainty when translating queries and/or 
documents. To achieve robustness for retrieval, 
we have tried three techniques that we have 
found useful: (i) Syllable lattices were used in 
\[Wang, 1999\] and \[Chien et al, 2000\] for 
monolingual Chinese retrieval experiments. The 
lattices were pruned to constrain the search 
space, but were able to achieve robust retrieval 
based on imperfect recognized transcripts. (ii) 
Query expansion, in which syllable transcription 
were expanded to include possibly confusable 
syllable sequences based on a syllable confusion 
matrix derived from recognition errors, was used 
in \[Meng et al, 1999\]. (iii) We have expanded 
the document representation using terms 
extracted from similar documents in a 
comparable collection \[Levow and Oard, 2000\], 
and similar techniques are known to work well 
in the case of query translation (Ballesteros and 
Croft, 1997). We hope to add to this set: of 
techniques by exploring the potential for query 
expansion based on cross-language phonetic 
mapping. 
6. Using the TDT-3 Collection 
We plan to use the TDT-2 collection for 
development testing and the TDT-3 collection 
for evaluation. Both collections provide 
documents from two English newswire sources, 
six English broadcast news audio sources, two 
Mandarin Chinese newswire sources, and one 
Mandarin broadcast news source (Voice of 
America). Manually established story 
boundaries are available for all audio 
collections, and we plan to exploit that 
information to simplify our experiment design. 
The TDT-2 collection includes complete 
relevance assessments for 20 topics, and the 
TDT-3 collection provides the same for 60 
additional topics, 56 of which have at least one 
relevant audio story. For each topic, at least four 
English stories and four Chinese stories are 
known. 
We plan to automatically derive text queries 
based on one or more English stories that are 
presented as exemplars, and to use those queries 
to search the Mandarin audio collection. 
Manually constructed queries will provide a 
contrastive condition. Unlike the TDT "topic 
tracking" task in which stories must be declared 
relevant or not relevant in the order of their 
arrival, we plan to perform retrospective 
retrieval experiments in which all documents are 
known when the query is issued. By relaxing 
the temporal ordering of the TDT topic tracking 
task, we can meaningfully search for Mandarin 
Chinese stories that may have arrived before the 
exemplar story or stories. We thus plan to report 
ranked retrieval measures of effectiveness uch 
as average precision in addition to the detection 
statistics (miss and false alarm) typically 
reported in TDT. 
7.  Summary 
This paper presents our current ideas and 
evolving plan for the MEI project, to take place 
at the Johns Hopkins University Summer 
Workshop 2000. Translingual speech retrieval is 
a long-term research direction, and our team 
looks forward to jointly taking an initial step to 
tackle the problem. The authors welcome all 
comments and suggestions, aswe strive to better 
define the problem in preparation for the six- 
week Workshop. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors wish to thank Patrick Schone, Erika 
Grams, Fred Jelinek, Charles Wayne, Kenney 
? Ng, John Garofolo, and the participants in the 
December 1999 WS2000 planning meeting and 
the TDT-3 workshop for their many helpful 
suggestions. The Hopkins Summer Workshop 
series is supported by grants from the National 
Science Foundation. Our results reported in this 
paper eference thesis work in progress of Wai- 
Kit Lo (Ph.D. candidate, The Chinese Unversity 
of Hong Kong) and Berlin Chen (Ph.D. 
candidate, National Taiwan University). 
28 
References 
Ballesteros and W. B. Croft, "Phrasal 
Translation and Query Expansion Techniques 
for Cross-Language Information Retrieval," 
Proceedings ofACM SIGIR, 1997. 
Callan, J. P., W. B. Croft, and S. M. Harding, 
"The INQUERY Retrieval System," 
Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference 
on Database and Expert Systems Applications, 
1992. 
Carbonnell, J., Y. Yang, R. Frederking and R.D. 
Brown, "Translingual Information Retrieval: A 
Comparative Evaluation," Proceedings ofIJCAI, 
1997. 
Chen, B., H.M. Wang, and L.S. Lee, "Retrieval 
of Broadcast News Speech in Mandarin Chinese 
Collected in Taiwan using Syllable-Level 
Statistical Characteristics," Proceedings of 
ICASSP, 2000. 
Chien, L. F., H. M. Wang, B. R. Bai, and S. C. 
Lin, "A Spoken-Access Approach for Chinese 
Text and Speech Information Retrieval," Journal 
of the American Society for Information 
Science, 51 (4), pp. 313-323, 2000. 
Choy, C. Y., "Acoustic Units for Mandarin 
Chinese Speech Recognition," M.Phil. Thesis, 
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong SAR, China, 1999. 
Cohen, P., S. Dharanipragada, J. Gros, M. 
Mondowski, C. Neti, S. Roukos and T. Ward, 
"Towards a Universal Speech Recognizer for 
Multiple Languages," Proceedings of ASRU, 
1997. 
Fung, P., "A Statistical View on Bilingual 
Lexicon Extraction: From parallel corpora to 
non-parallel corpora," Proceedings of AMTA, 
1998. 
Garofolo, J.S., Auzanne, G.P., Voorhees, E.M., 
"The TREC Spoken Document Retrieval Track: 
A Success Story," Proceedings of the Recherche 
d'informations A sistre par Ordinateur: Content- 
Based Multimedia Information Access 
Conference, April 12-14, 2000,to be published. 
Knight, K. and J. Graehl, "Machine 
Transliteration," Proceedings ofACL, 1997. 
Landauer, T. K. and M.L. Littman, "Fully 
Automatic Cross-Language Document Retrieval 
Using Latent Semantic Indexing," Proceedings 
of the 6 th Annual Conference of the UW Centre 
for the New Oxford English Dictionary, 1990. 
Leung, R., "Lexical Access for Large 
Vocabulary Chinese Speech Recognition," M. 
Phil. Thesis, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China 1999. 
Levow, G. and D.W. Oard, "Translingual Topic 
Tracking with PRISE," Working notes of the 
DARPA TDT-3 Workshop, 2000. 
Lin, C. H., L. S. Lee, and P. Y. Ting, "A New 
Framework for Recognition of Mandarin 
Syllables with Tones using Sub-Syllabic Units," 
Proceedings ofICASSP, 1993. 
Liu~ F. H., M. Picheny, P. Srinivasa, M. 
Monkowski and J. Chen, "Speech Recognition 
on Mandarin Call Home: A Large-Vocabulary, 
Conversational, nd Telephone Speech Corpus," 
Proceedings ofICASSP, 1996. 
McCarley, S., "Should we Translate the 
Documents or the Queries in Cross-Language 
Information Retrieval," Proceedings of ACL, 
1999. 
Meng, H. and C. W. Ip, "An Analytical Study o f  
Transformational Tagging of Chinese Text," 
Proceedings of the Research On Computational 
Lingustics (ROCLING) Conference, 1999. 
Meng, H., W. K. Lo, Y. C. Li and P. C. Ching, 
"A Study on the Use of Syllables for Chinese 
Spoken Document Retrieval," Technical Report 
SEEM1999-11, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, 1999. 
Meng, H., Khudanpur, S., Oard, D. W. and 
Wang, H. M., "Mandarin-English Information 
(MEI)," Working notes of the DARPA TDT-3 
Workshop, 2000. 
Ng, K., "Subword-based Approaches for Spoken 
Document Retrieval," Ph.D. Thesis, MIT, 
February 2000. 
Oard, D. W. and A.R. Diekema, "Cross- 
Language Information Retrieval," Annual 
Review of Information Science and Technology, 
vol.33, 1998. 
Pirkola, A., "The effects of query structure and 
dictionary setups in dictionary-based cross- 
language information retrieval," Proceedings of 
ACM SIGIR, 1998. 
Sheridan P. and J. P. Ballerini, "Experiments in
Multilingual Information Retrieval using the 
29 
SPIDER System," Proceedings of ACM SIGIR, 
1996. 
Voorhees, E., "Learning Collection Fusion 
Strategies," Proceedings of SIGIR, 1995. 
Wang, H. M., "Retrieval of Mandarin Spoken 
Documents Based on Syllable Lattice 
Matching," Proceedings of the Fourth 
International Workshop on Information 
Retrieval in Asian Languages, 1999. 
Wechsler, M. and P. Schaiible, "Speech 
Retrieval Based on Automatic Indexing," 
Proceedings of MIRO- 1995. 
English Text Queries 
(words) 
Words that are present entities and unknown words 
translation dictionary 
\[ Trans'a~on I I Transliteration 
Mand~Sn Queries (with words and syllables) 
Mandarin Spoken Documents \[ 
(indexed with word and subword units) 
"7 
Information Retrieval 
Engine 
I Evaluate Retrieval 
Performance 
Figure 1. Query translation strategy. 
Mandarin Spoken Documents 
(indexed with word and subword units) 
l 
Translation 
Documents in 
English 
English Text Queries 
(words) 
I Information Retrieval 
Engine 
Evaluate 
Retrieval 
Performance 
Figure 2. Document translation strategy. 
3O 
Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1474?1480,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Leveraging Effective Query Modeling Techniques  
for Speech Recognition and Summarization 
 
 Kuan-Yu Chen*?,  Shih-Hung Liu*, Berlin Chen#, Ea-Ee Jan+,  
Hsin-Min Wang*, Wen-Lian Hsu*, and Hsin-Hsi Chen? 
*Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan 
?National Taiwan University, Taiwan 
#National Taiwan Normal University, Taiwan 
+IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, USA 
{kychen, journey, whm, hsu}@iis.sinica.edu.tw, 
berlin@ntnu.edu.tw, hhchen@csie.ntu.edu.tw, ejan@us.ibm.com 
 
Abstract 
Statistical language modeling (LM) that 
purports to quantify the acceptability of a 
given piece of text has long been an in-
teresting yet challenging research area. In 
particular, language modeling for infor-
mation retrieval (IR) has enjoyed re-
markable empirical success; one emerg-
ing stream of the LM approach for IR is 
to employ the pseudo-relevance feedback 
process to enhance the representation of 
an input query so as to improve retrieval 
effectiveness. This paper presents a con-
tinuation of such a general line of re-
search and the main contribution is three-
fold. First, we propose a principled 
framework which can unify the relation-
ships among several widely-used query 
modeling formulations. Second, on top of 
the successfully developed framework, 
we propose an extended query modeling 
formulation by incorporating critical que-
ry-specific information cues to guide the 
model estimation. Third, we further adopt 
and formalize such a framework to the 
speech recognition and summarization 
tasks. A series of empirical experiments 
reveal the feasibility of such an LM 
framework and the performance merits of 
the deduced models on these two tasks. 
1 Introduction 
Along with the rapidly growing popularity of the 
Internet and the ubiquity of social web commu-
nications, tremendous volumes of multimedia 
contents, such as broadcast radio and television 
programs, digital libraries and so on, are made 
available to the public. Research on multimedia 
content understanding and organization has wit-
nessed a booming interest over the past decade. 
By virtue of the developed techniques, a variety 
of functionalities were created to help distill im-
portant content from multimedia collections, or 
provide locations of important speech segments 
in a video accompanied with their corresponding 
transcripts, for users to listen to or to digest. Sta-
tistical language modeling (LM) (Jelinek, 1999; 
Jurafsky and Martin, 2008; Zhai, 2008), which 
manages to quantify the acceptability of a given 
word sequence in a natural language or capture 
the statistical characteristics of a given piece of 
text, has been proved to offer both efficient and 
effective modeling abilities in many practical 
applications of natural language processing and 
speech recognition (Ponte and Croft, 1998; Jelin-
ek, 1999; Huang, et al., 2001; Zhai and Lafferty, 
2001a; Jurafsky and Martin, 2008; Furui et al., 
2012; Liu and Hakkani-Tur, 2011). 
The LM approach was first introduced for the 
information retrieval (IR) problems in the late 
1990s, indicating very good potential, and was 
subsequently extended in a wide array of follow-
up studies. One typical realization of the LM ap-
proach for IR is to access the degree of relevance 
between a query and a document by computing 
the likelihood of the query generated by the doc-
ument (usually referred to as the query-
likelihood approach) (Zhai, 2008; Baeza-Yates 
and Ribeiro-Neto, 2011). A document is deemed 
to be relevant to a given query if the correspond-
ing document model is more likely to generate 
the query. On the other hand, the Kullback-
Leibler divergence measure (denoted by KLM 
for short hereafter), which quantifies the degree 
of relevance between a document and a query 
from a more rigorous information-theoretic per-
spective, has been proposed (Lafferty and Zhai, 
2001; Zhai and Lafferty, 2001b; Baeza-Yates and 
Ribeiro-Neto, 2011). KLM not only can be 
thought as a natural generalization of the query-
likelihood approach, but also has the additional 
merit of being able to accommodate extra infor-
mation cues to improve the performance of doc-
ument ranking. For example, a main challenge 
facing such a measure is that since a given query 
usually consists of few words, the true infor-
mation need is hard to be inferred from the sur-
face statistics of a query. As such, one emerging 
stream of thought for KLM is to employ the 
1474
pseudo-relevance feedback process to construct 
an enhanced query model (or representation) so 
as to achieve better retrieval effectiveness (Hi-
emstra et al., 2004; Lv and Zhai, 2009; Carpineto 
and Romano, 2012; Lee and Croft, 2013). 
Following this line of research, the major con-
tribution of this paper is three-fold: 1) we ana-
lyze several widely-used query models and then 
propose a principled framework to unify the rela-
tionships among them; 2) on top of the success-
fully developed query models, we propose an 
extended modeling formulation by incorporating 
additional query-specific information cues to 
guide the model estimation; 3) we explore a nov-
el use of these query models by adapting them to 
the speech recognition and summarization tasks. 
As we will see, a series of experiments indeed 
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed 
models on these two tasks. 
2 Language Modeling Framework 
2.1 Kullback-Leibler Divergence Measure 
A promising realization of the LM approach to 
IR is the Kullback-Leibler divergence measure 
(KLM), which determines the degree of rele-
vance between a document and a query from a 
rigorous information-theoretic perspective. Two 
different language models are involved in KLM: 
one for the document and the other for the query. 
The divergence of the document model with re-
spect to the query model is defined by  
.)|( )|(log)|()||(KL ? ?? Vw DwP QPQwPDQ
  (1)  
KLM not only can be thought as a natural gener-
alization of the traditional query-likelihood ap-
proach (Yi and Allan, 2009; Baeza-Yates and 
Ribeiro-Neto, 2011), but also has the additional 
merit of being able to accommodate extra infor-
mation cues to improve the estimation of its 
component models in a systematic way for better 
document ranking (Zhai, 2008).  
Due to that a query usually consists of only a 
few words, the true query model P(w|Q)
 
might 
not be accurately estimated by the simple ML 
estimator (Jelinek, 1991). There are several stud-
ies devoted to estimating a more accurate query 
modeling, saying that it can be approached with 
the pseudo-relevance feedback process (Lavren-
ko and Croft, 2001; Zhai and Lafferty, 2001b). 
However, the success depends largely on the as-
sumption that the set of top-ranked documents, 
DTop={D1,D2,...,Dr,...}, obtained from an initial 
round of retrieval, are relevant and can be used to 
estimate a more accurate query language model. 
2.2 Relevance Modeling  
Under the notion of relevance modeling (RM, 
often referred to as RM-1), each query Q is as-
sumed to be associated with an unknown rele-
vance class RQ, and documents that are relevant 
to the semantic content expressed in query are 
samples drawn from the relevance class RQ. 
Since there is no prior knowledge about RQ, we 
may use the top-ranked documents DTop to ap-
proximate the relevance class RQ. The corre-
sponding relevance model can be estimated using 
the following equation (Lavrenko and Croft, 
2001; Lavrenko, 2004): 
.)|()(
)|()|()(  )|(RM ? ? ??
? ? ??
???
?
?????
??
ToprD
ToprD
Qw rr
Qw rrr
DwPDP
DwPDwPDPQwP
D
D
(2) 
2.3 Simple Mixture Model 
Another perspective of estimating an accurate 
query model with the top-ranked documents is 
the simple mixture model (SMM), which as-
sumes that words in DTop are drawn from a two-
component mixture model: 1) One component is 
the query-specific topic model PSMM(w|Q), and 2) 
the other is a generic background model 
P(w|BG). By doing so, the SMM model 
PSMM(w|Q) can be estimated by maximizing the 
likelihood over all the top-ranked documents 
(Zhai and Lafferty, 2001b; Tao and Zhai, 2006): 
? ? ,)|()1()|( ),(SMM?? ?? ????? Topr rD Vw DwcBGwPQwPL D ??
(3) 
where ?  is a pre-defined weighting parameter 
used to control the degree of reliance between 
PSMM(w|Q) and P(w|BG). This estimation will 
enable more specific words to receive more 
probability mass, thereby leading to a more dis-
criminative query model PSMM(w|Q). 
Although the SMM modeling aims to extract 
extra word usage cues for enhanced query mod-
eling, it may confront two intrinsic problems. 
One is the extraction of word usage cues from 
DTop is not guided by the original query. The oth-
er is that the mixing coefficient ?  is fixed across 
all top-ranked documents albeit that different 
documents would potentially contribute different 
amounts of word usage cues to the enhanced 
query model. To mitigate these two problems, 
the regularized simple mixture model has been 
proposed and can be estimated by maximizing 
the likelihood function (Tao and Zhai, 2006; Dil-
lon and Collins-Thompson, 2010) 
? ? ,)|()1()|(    
)|(
),(
RSMM
)|(
RSMM
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
????
??
Topr
r
rrD Vw
Dwc
DD
Vw
QwP
BGwPQwP
QwPL
D
??
?
(4) 
where   is a weighting factor indicating the con-
fidence on the prior information. 
3 The Proposed Modeling Framework 
3.1 Fundamentals 
It is obvious that the major difference among the 
1475
representative query models mentioned above is 
how to capitalize on the set of top-ranked docu-
ments and the original query. Several subtle rela-
tionships can be deduced through the following 
in-depth analysis. First, a direct inspiration of the 
LM-based query reformulation framework can 
be drawn from the celebrated Rocchio?s formula-
tion, while the former can be viewed as a proba-
bilistic counterpart of the latter (Robertson, 1990; 
Ponte and Croft, 1998; Baeza-Yates and Ribeiro-
Neto, 2011). Second, after some mathematical 
manipulation, the formulation of the RM model 
(c.f. Eq. (2)) can be rewritten as 
.)()|(
)()|()|(  )|(RM ? ? ???? ????? ToprD ToprD rr
rrr DPDQP
DPDQPDwPQwP D D
(5) 
It becomes evident that the RM model is com-
posed by mixing a set of document models 
P(w|Dr). As such, the RM model bears a close 
resemblance to the Rocchio?s formulation. Fur-
thermore, based on Eq. (5), we can recast the 
estimation of the RM model as an optimization 
problem, and the likelihood (or objective) func-
tion is formulated as 
1)|( ..
,)|()|(
),(
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
Topr
Topr
D
r
Vw
Qwc
D
rr
QDPts
QDPDwPL
D
D
  (6) 
where the document models P(w|Dr) are known 
in advance; the conditional probability P(Dr|Q) 
of each document Dr is unknown and leave to be 
estimated. Finally, a principled framework can 
be obtained to unify all of these query models, 
including RM (c.f. Eq. (6)), SMM (c.f. Eq. (3)) 
and RSMM (c.f. Eq. (4))), by using a generalized 
objective likelihood function: 
1)( ..
,)()|(
),(
?
???
?
???
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
M
E M
r
i
i
r
M
r
Vw E
Ewc
M
rr
MPts
MPMwPL  (7) 
where E represents a set of observations which 
we want to maximize their likelihood, and M 
denotes a set of mixture components.  
3.2 Query-specific Mixture Modeling 
The SMM model and the RSMM model are in-
tended to extract useful word usage cues from 
DTop, which are not only relevant to the original 
query Q but also external to those already cap-
tured by the generic background model. Howev-
er, we argue in this paper that the ?generic in-
formation? should be carefully crafted for each 
query due mainly to the fact that users? infor-
mation needs may be very diverse from one an-
other. To crystallize the idea, a query-specific 
background model PQ(w|BG) for each query Q 
can be derived from DTop directly. Another con-
sideration is that since the original query model 
P(w|Q) cannot be accurately estimated, it thus 
may not necessarily be the best choice for use in 
defining a conjugate Dirichlet prior for the en-
hanced query model to be estimated. We propose 
to use the RM model as a prior to guide the esti-
mation of the enhanced query model. The en-
hanced query model is termed query-specific 
mixture model (QMM), and its corresponding 
training objective function can be expressed as 
? ??
?
?
?
?
?
?
????
??
Topr
r
rrD Vw
DwcQDD
Vw
QwP
BGwPQwP
QwPL
D
.)|()1()|(    
)|(
),(QMM
)|(QMM RM
??
?
 (8) 
4 Applications 
4.1 Speech Recognition 
Language modeling is a critical and integral 
component in any large vocabulary continuous 
speech recognition (LVCSR) system (Huang et 
al., 2001; Jurafsky and Martin, 2008; Furui et al., 
2012). More concretely, the role of language 
modeling in LVCSR can be interpreted as calcu-
lating the conditional probability P(w|H), in 
which H is a search history, usually expressed as 
a sequence of words H=h1, h2,?, hL, and w is 
one of its possible immediately succeeding 
words. Once the various aforementioned query 
modeling methods are applied to speech recogni-
tion, for a search history H, we can conceptually 
regard it as a query and each of its immediately 
succeeding words w as a (single-word) document. 
Then, we may leverage an IR procedure that 
takes H as a query and poses it to a retrieval sys-
tem to obtain a set of top-ranked documents from 
a contemporaneous (or in-domain) corpus. Final-
ly, the enhanced query model (that is P(w|H) in 
speech recognition) can be estimated by RM, 
SMM, RSMM or QM , and further combined 
with the background n-gram (e.g., trigram) lan-
guage model to form an adaptive language model 
to guide the speech recognition process. 
4.2 Speech Summarization 
On the other hand, extractive speech summariza-
tion aims at producing a concise summary by 
selecting salient sentences or paragraphs from 
the original spoken document according to a pre-
defined target summarization ratio (Carbonell 
and Goldstein, 1998; Mani and Maybury, 1999; 
Nenkova and McKeown, 2011; Liu and 
Hakkani-Tur, 2011). Intuitively, this task could 
be framed as an ad-hoc IR problem, where the 
spoken document is treated as an information 
need and each sentence of the document is re-
garded as a candidate information unit to be re-
trieved according to its relevance to the infor-
mation need. Therefore, KLM can be used to 
quantify how close the document D and one of 
its sentences S are: the closer the sentence model 
P(w|S) to the document model P(w|D), the more 
1476
likely the sentence would be part of the summary. 
Due to that each sentence S of a spoken docu-
ment D to be summarized usually consists of 
only a few words, the corresponding sentence 
model P(w|S) might not be appropriately esti-
mated by the ML estimation. To alleviate the 
deficiency, we can leverage the merit of the 
above query modeling techniques to estimate an 
accurate sentence model for each sentence to 
enhance the summarization performance. 
5 Experimental Setup 
The speech corpus consists of about 196 hours of 
Mandarin broadcast news collected by the Aca-
demia Sinica and the Public Television Service 
Foundation of Taiwan between November 2001 
and April 2003 (Wang et al., 2005), which is 
publicly available and has been segmented into 
separate stories and transcribed manually. Each 
story contains the speech of one studio anchor, as 
well as several field reporters and interviewees. 
A subset of 25-hour speech data compiled during 
November 2001 to December 2002 was used to 
bootstrap the acoustic model training. The vo-
cabulary size is about 72 thousand words. The 
background language model was estimated from 
a background text corpus consisting of 170 mil-
lion Chinese characters collected from the Chi-
nese Gigaword Corpus released by LDC. 
The dataset for use in the speech recognition 
experiments is compiled by a subset of 3-hour 
speech data from the corpus within 2003 (1.5 
hours for development and 1.5 hours for test). 
The contemporaneous (in-domain) text corpus 
used for training the various LM adaptation 
methods was collected between 2001 and 2003 
from the corpus (excluding the test set), which 
consists of one million Chinese characters of the 
orthographic broadcast news transcripts. In this 
paper, all the LM adaptation experiments were 
performed in word graph rescoring. The associ-
ated word graphs of the speech data were built 
beforehand with a typical LVCSR system (Ort-
manns et al., 1997; Young et al., 2006). 
In addition, the summarization task also em-
ploys the same broadcast news corpus as well. A 
subset of 205 broadcast news documents com-
piled between November 2001 and August 2002 
was reserved for the summarization experiments 
(185 for development and 20 for test). A subset 
of about 100,000 text news documents, compiled 
during the same period as the documents to be 
summarized, was employed to estimate the relat-
ed summarization models compared in this paper. 
We adopted three variants of the widely-used 
ROUGE metric (i.e., ROUGE-1, ROGUE-2 and 
ROUGE-L) for the assessment of summarization 
performance (Lin, 2003). The summarization 
ratio, defined as the ratio of the number of words 
in the automatic (or manual) summary to that in 
the reference transcript of a spoken document, 
was set to 10% in this research. 
6 Experimental Results 
In the first part of experiments, we evaluate the 
effectiveness of the various query models applied 
to the speech recognition task. The correspond-
ing results with respect to different numbers of 
top-ranked documents being used for estimating 
their component models are shown in Table 1. 
Also worth mentioning is that the baseline sys-
tem with the background trigram language model, 
which was trained with the SRILM toolkit 
(Stolcke, 2005) and Good-Turing smoothing 
(Jelinek, 1999), results in a Chinese character 
error rate (CER) of 20.08% on the test set. Con-
sulting Table 1 we notice two particularities. One 
is that there is more fluctuation in the CER re-
sults of SMM than in those of RM. The reason 
might be that, for SMM, the extraction of rele-
vance information from the top-ranked docu-
ments is conducted with no involvement of the 
test utterance (i.e., the query; or its correspond-
ing search histories), as elaborated earlier in Sec-
tion 2. When too many feedback documents are 
being used, there would be a concern for SMM 
to be distracted from being able to appropriate 
model the test utterance, which is probably 
caused by some dominant distracting (or irrele-
vant) feedback documents. The other interesting 
observation is that RSMM only achieves a com-
parable (even worse) result when compared to 
SMM. A possible reason is that the prior con-
straint of the RSMM may contain too much 
noisy information so as to bias the model estima-
tion. Furthermore, it is evident that the proposed 
QMM is the best-performing method among all 
the query models compared in the paper. Alt-
hough the improvements made by QMM are not 
as pronounced as expected, we believe that 
QMM has demonstrated its potential to be ap-
plied to other related applications. On the other 
hand, we compare the various query models with 
two well-practiced language models, namely the 
cache model (Cache) (Kuhn and Mori, 1990; 
Jelinek et al., 1991) and the latent Dirichlet allo-
cation (LDA) (Liu and Liu, 2007; Tam and 
Schultz, 2005). The CER results of these two 
models are also shown in Table 1, respectively. 
For the cache model, bigram cache was used 
since it can yield better results than the unigram 
and trigram cache models in our experiments. It 
is worthy to notice that the LDA model was 
trained with the entire set of contemporaneous 
text document collection (c.f. Section 4), while 
all of the query models explored in the paper 
were estimated based on a subset of the corpus 
selected by an initial round of retrieval. The re-
sults reveal that most of these query models can 
achieve superior performance over the two con-
ventional language models. 
1477
In the second part of experiments, we evaluate 
the utilities of the various query models as ap-
plied to the speech summarization task. At the 
outset, we assess the performance level of the 
baseline KLM method by comparison with two 
well-practiced unsupervised methods, viz. the 
vector space model (VSM) (Gong and Liu, 2001), 
and its extension, maximal marginal relevance 
(MMR) (Carbonell and Goldstein, 1998). The 
corresponding results are shown in Table 2 and 
can be aligned with several related literature re-
views. By looking at the results, we find that 
KLM outperforms VSM by a large margin, con-
firming the applicability of the language model-
ing framework for speech summarization. Fur-
thermore, MMR that presents an extension of 
VSM performs on par with KLM for the text 
summarization task (TD) and exhibits superior 
performance over KLM for the speech summari-
zation task (SD). We now turn to evaluate the 
effectiveness of the various query models (viz. 
RM, SMM, RSMM and QMM) in conjunction 
with the pseudo-relevance feedback process for 
enhancing the sentence model involved in the 
KLM method. The corresponding results are also 
shown in Table 2. Two noteworthy observations 
can be drawn from Table 2. One is that all these 
query models can considerably improve the 
summarization performance of the KLM method, 
which corroborates the advantage of using them 
for enhanced sentence representations. The other 
is that QMM is the best-performing one among 
all the formulations studied in this paper for both 
the TD and SD cases.  
Going one step further, we explore to use extra 
prosodic features that are deemed complemen-
tary to the LM cue provided by QMM for speech 
summarization. To this end, a support vector ma-
chine (SVM) based summarization model is 
trained to integrate a set of 28 commonly-used 
prosodic features (Liu and Hakkani-Tur, 2011) 
for representing each spoken sentence, since 
SVM is arguably one of the state-of-the-art su-
pervised methods that can make use of a diversi-
ty of indicative features for text or speech sum-
marization (Xie and Liu, 2010; Chen et al., 
2013). The sentence ranking scores derived by 
QMM and SVM are in turn integrated through a 
simple log-linear combination. The correspond-
ing results are shown in Table 2, demonstrating 
consistent improvements with respect to all the 
three variants of the ROUGE metric as compared 
to that using either QMM or SVM in isolation. 
We also investigate using SVM to additionally 
integrate a richer set of lexical and relevance fea-
tures to complement QMM and further enhance 
the summarization effectiveness. However, due 
to space limitation, we omit the details here. As a 
side note, there is a sizable gap between the TD 
and SD cases, indicating room for further im-
provements. We may seek remedies, such as ro-
bust indexing schemes, to compensate for imper-
fect speech recognition. 
7 Conclusion and Outlook 
In this paper, we have presented a systematic and 
thorough analysis of a few well-practiced query 
models for IR and extended their novel applica-
bility to speech recognition and summarization in 
a principled way. Furthermore, we have pro-
posed an extension of this research line by intro-
ducing query-specific mixture modeling; the util-
ities of the deduced model have been extensively 
compared with several existing query models. As 
to future work, we would like to investigate 
jointly integrating proximity and other different 
kinds of relevance and lexical/semantic infor-
mation cues into the process of feedback docu-
ment selection so as to improve the empirical 
effectiveness of such query modeling.  
Acknowledgements 
This research is supported in part by the ?Aim 
for the Top University Project? of National Tai-
wan Normal University (NTNU), sponsored by 
the Ministry of Education, Taiwan, and by the 
Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan, 
under Grants MOST 103-2221-E-003-016-MY2, 
NSC 101-2221-E-003-024-MY3, NSC 102-
2221-E-003-014-, NSC 101-2511-S-003-057-
MY3, NSC 101-2511-S-003-047-MY3 and NSC 
103-2911-I-003-301. 
  
Table 1. The speech recognition results (in CER 
(%)) achieved by various language models along 
with different numbers of latent topics/pseudo-
relevance feedback documents. 
 16 32 64 128 
Baseline 20.08 
Cache 19.86 
LDA 19.29 19.30 19.28 19.15 
RM 19.26 19.26 19.26 19.26 
SMM 19.19 19.00 19.14 19.10 
RSMM 19.18 19.14 19.15 19.19 
QMM 19.05 18.97 19.00 18.99 
Table 2. The summarization results (in F-scores) 
achieved by various language models along with 
text and spoken documents. 
 
Text Documents (TD) Spoken Documents (SD) 
ROUGE-1 ROUGE-2 ROUGE-L ROUGE-1 ROUGE-2 ROUGE-L 
VSM 0.347 0.228 0.290 0.342 0.189 0.287 
MMR 0.407 0.294 0.358 0.381 0.226 0.331 
KLM 0.411 0.298 0.361 0.364 0.210 0.307 
RM 0.453 0.335 0.403 0.382 0.239 0.331 
SMM 0.439 0.320 0.388 0.383 0.229 0.327 
RSMM 0.472 0.365 0.423 0.381 0.235 0.329 
QMM 0.486 0.382 0.435 0.395 0.256 0.349 
SVM 0.441 0.334 0.396 0.370 0.222 0.326 
QMM+
SVM 
0.492 0.395 0.448 0.398 0.261 0.358 
 
 
 
 
1478
References 
Ricardo Baeza-Yates and Berthier Ribeiro-Neto. 
2011. Modern information retrieval: the con-
cepts and technology behind search, ACM 
Press. 
David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. 
Jordan. 2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. 
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 
pp.993?1022. 
David M. Blei and John Lafferty. 2009. Topic 
models. In A. Srivastava and M. Sahami, 
(eds.), Text Mining: Theory and Applications. 
Taylor and Francis.  
Jaime Carbonell and Jade Goldstein. 1998. The 
use of MMR, diversitybased reranking for 
reordering documents and producing sum-
maries. In Proc. SIGIR, pp. 335?336. 
Claudio Carpineto and Giovanni Romano. 2012. 
A survey of automatic query expansion in in-
formation retrieval. ACM Computing Surveys, 
vol. 44, pp.1?56. 
Stephane Clinchant and Eric Gaussier. 2013. A 
theoretical analysis of pseudo-relevance 
feedback models. In Proc. ICTIR. 
Guihong Cao, Jian-Yun Nie, Jianfeng Gao, and 
Stephen Robertson. 2008. Selecting good 
expansion terms for pseudo-relevance feed-
back. In Proc. SIGIR, pp. 243?250. 
Berlin Chen, Shih-Hsiang Lin, Yu-Mei Chang, 
and Jia-Wen Liu. 2013. Extractive speech 
summarization using evaluation metric-
related training criteria. Information Pro-
cessing & Management, 49(1), pp. 1cess 
Arthur P. Dempster, Nan M. Laird, and Donald 
B. Rubin. 1977. Maximum likelihood from 
incomplete data via the EM algorithm. Jour-
nal of Royal Statistical Society B, 39(1), pp. 
1?38. 
Joshua V. Dillon and Kevyn Collins-Thompson. 
2010. A unified optimization framework for 
robust pseudo-relevance feedback algorithms. 
In Proc. CIKM, pp. 1069?1078. 
Sadaoki Furui, Li Deng, Mark Gales, Hermann 
Ney, and Keiichi Tokuda. 2012. Fundamen-
tal technologies in modern speech recogni-
tion. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 
29(6), pp. 16?17. 
Yihong Gong and Xin Liu. 2001. Generic text 
summarization using relevance measure and 
latent semantic analysis. In Proc. SIGIR, pp. 
19?25. 
Djoerd Hiemstra, Stephen Robertson, and Hugo 
Zaragoza. 2004. Parsimonious language 
models for information retrieval. In Proc. 
SIGIR, pp. 178?185. 
Thomas Hofmann. 1999. Probabilistic latent se-
mantic indexing. In Proc. SIGIR, pp. 50?57.  
Thomas Hofmann. 2001. Unsupervised learning 
by probabilistic latent semantic analysis. 
Machine Learning, 42, pp. 177?196.  
Xuedong Huang, Alex Acero, and Hsiao-Wuen 
Hon. 2001. Spoken language processing: a 
guide to theory, algorithm, and system de-
velopment. Prentice Hall PTR, Upper Saddle 
River, NJ, USA. 
Frederick Jelinek, Bernard Merialdo, Salim Rou-
kos, and M. Strauss. 1991. A dynamic lan-
guage model for speech recognition. In Proc. 
the DARPA workshop on speech and natural 
language, pp. 293?295. 
Frederick Jelinek. 1999. Statistical methods for 
speech recognition. MIT Press. 
Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin. 2008. 
Speech and language processing. Prentice 
Hall PTR, Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA. 
Roland Kuhn and Renato D. Mori. 1990. A 
cache-based natural language model for 
speech recognition. IEEE Transactions on 
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 
12(6), pp. 570?583. 
Solomon Kullback and Richard A. Leibler. 1951. 
On information and sufficiency. The Annals 
of Mathematical Statistics, 22(1), pp. 79?86. 
Chin-Yew Lin. 2003. ROUGE: Recall-oriented 
Understudy for Gisting Evaluation. Availa-
ble: http://haydn.isi.edu/ROUGE/. 
Feifan Liu and Yang Liu. 2007. Unsupervised 
language model adaptation incorporating 
named entity information. In Proc. ACL, pp. 
672?769. 
Yang Liu and Dilek Hakkani-Tur. 2011. Speech 
summarization. Chapter 13 in Spoken Lan-
guage Understanding: Systems for Extract-
ing Semantic Information from Speech, G. 
Tur and R. D. Mori (Eds), New York: Wiley. 
John Lafferty and Chengxiang Zhai. 2001. Doc-
ument language models, query models, and 
risk minimization for information retrieval. 
In Proc. SIGIR, pp. 111?119. 
Victor Lavrenko and W. Bruce Croft. 2001. Rel-
evance-based language models. In Proc. 
SIGIR, pp. 120?127. 
Victor Lavrenko. 2004. A Generative Theory of 
Relevance. PhD thesis, University of Massa-
chusetts, Amherst. 
1479
Shasha Xie and Yang Liu. 2010. Improving su-
pervised learning for meeting summarization 
using sampling and regression. Computer 
Speech & Language, 24(3), pp. 495?514. 
Yuanhua Lv and Chengxiang Zhai. 2009. A 
comparative study of methods for estimating 
query language models with pseudo feed-
back. In Proc. CIKM, pp. 1895?1898. 
Yuanhua Lv and Chengxiang Zhai. 2010. Posi-
tional relevance model for pseudo-relevance 
feedback. In Proc. SIGIR, pp. 579?586. 
Kyung Soon Lee, W. Bruce Croft, and James 
Allan. 2008. A cluster-based resampling 
method for pseudo-relevance feedback. In 
Proc. SIGIR, pp. 235?242. 
Kyung Soon Lee and W. Bruce Croft. 2013. A 
deterministic resampling method using over-
lapping document clusters for pseudo-
relevance feedback. Inf. Process. Manage. 
49(4), pp. 792?806. 
Inderjeet Mani and Mark T. Maybury (Eds.). 
1999. Advances in automatic text summari-
zation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Ani Nenkova and Kathleen McKeown. 2011. 
Automatic summarization. Foundations and 
Trends in Information Retrieval, 5(2?3), pp. 
103?233. 
Stefan Ortmanns, Hermann Ney, and Xavier Au-
bert. 1997. A word graph algorithm for large 
vocabulary continuous speech recognition. 
Computer Speech and Language, pp. 43?72. 
Jay M. Ponte and W. Bruce Croft. 1998. A lan-
guage modeling approach to information re-
trieval. In Proc. SIGIR, pp. 275?281. 
Stephen E. Robertson. 1990. On term selection 
for query expansion. Journal of Documenta-
tion, 46(4), pp. 359?364. 
Andreas Stolcke. 2005. SRILM - An extensible 
language modeling toolkit. In Proc. INTER-
SPEECH, pp.901?904. 
Tao Tao and Chengxiang Zhai. 2006. Regular-
ized estimation of mixture models for robust 
pseudo-relevance feedback. In Proc. SIGIR, 
pp. 162?169. 
Yik-Cheung Tam and Tanja Schultz. 2005. Dy-
namic language model adaptation using vari-
ational Bayes inference. In Proc. INTER-
SPEECH, pp. 5?8. 
Xuanhui Wang, Hui Fang, and Chengxiang Zhai. 
2008. A study of methods for negative rele-
vance feedback. In Proc. SIGIR, pp. 219?226. 
Hsin-Min Wang, Berlin Chen, Jen-Wei Kuo, and 
Shih-Sian Cheng. 2005. MATBN: A Manda-
rin Chinese broadcast news corpus. Interna-
tional Journal of Computational Linguistics 
& Chinese Language Processing, 10(2), pp. 
219?236. 
Xing Yi and James Allan. 2009. A comparative 
study of utilizing topic models for infor-
mation retrieval. In Proc. ECIR, pp. 29?41. 
Steve Young, Dan Kershaw, Julian Odell, Dave 
Ollason, Valtcho Valtchev, and Phil Wood-
land. 2006. The HTK book version 3.4. 
Cambridge University Press. 
Chengxiang Zhai and John Lafferty. 2001a. A 
study of smoothing methods for language 
models applied to ad hoc information re-
trieval. In Proc. SIGIR, pp. 334?342.  
Chengxiang Zhai and John Lafferty. 2001b. 
Model-based feedback in the language mod-
eling approach to information retrieval. In 
Proc. CIKM, pp. 403?410. 
Chengxiang Zhai. 2008. Statistical language 
models for information retrieval: a critical 
review. Foundations and Trends in Infor-
mation Retrieval, 2 (3), pp. 137?213. 
Yi Zhang, Jamie Callan, and Thomas Minka. 
2002. Novelty and redundancy detection in 
adaptive filtering. In Proc. SIGIR, pp. 81?88.  
1480
