A DAML+OIL-Compliant Chinese Lexical Ontology 
 
Yu-Sheng Lai, Ren-Jr Wang and Wei-Tek Hsu 
Advanced Technology Center, 
Computer & Communications Research Laboratories/Industrial Technology Research Institute, 
E000, 195-11, Sec. 4, Chung Hsing Rd. Chutung, Hsinchu, Taiwan 310, R.O.C. 
{laiys, rjwang, whsu}@itri.org.tw 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents an ongoing task that will 
construct a DAML+OIL-compliant Chinese 
Lexical Ontology. The ontology mainly 
comprises three components: a hierarchical 
taxonomy consisting of a set of concepts and 
a set of relations describing the relationships 
among the concepts, a set of lexical entries 
associated with the concepts and relations, 
and a set of axioms describing the 
constraints on the ontology. It currently 
contains 1,075 concepts, 65,961 lexical 
entries associated with the concepts, 299 
relations among the concepts excluding the 
hypernym and hyponym relations, 27,004 
relations between the lexical entries and the 
concepts, and 79,723 relations associating 
the lexical entries with the concepts. 
Introduction 
The Semantic Web relies heavily on formal 
ontologies to structure data for comprehensive 
and transportable machine understanding 
[Maedche and Staab 2001]. Therefore, 
constructing applicable ontologies influences the 
success of Semantic Web largely. An ontology 
mainly consists of a set of concepts and a set of 
relations that describe relationships among the 
concepts. An upper ontology is limited to 
concepts that are abstract, generic, domain-broad, 
and articulate. Cycorp constructed an upper 
ontology ? Upper Cyc? Ontology. It consists of 
approximately 3,000 terms, i.e. concepts and 
relations. It has been used for organizing the 
upper structure of a knowledge base ? the Cyc? 
KB. A working group of IEEE (P1600.1) is also 
trying to standardize the specification of the 
upper ontology. An upper ontology, called IEEE 
SUO (Standard Upper Ontology), is expected to 
enable computers to utilize it for applications, 
such as natural language understanding and 
generation, information retrieval and extraction, 
Semantic Web services [McIlraith et al 2001], 
etc. It is estimated to contain between 1,000 and 
2,500 terms plus roughly ten definitional 
statements for each term. 
 This paper presents an ongoing task that will 
construct an upper-ontology-like ontology for 
Chinese research and applications. We refer to it 
as CLO (Chinese Lexical Ontology). In addition 
to the structural portion, the CLO will contain 
Chinese lexicons associated with the concepts 
and relations. A pure ontology containing 
concepts only (without lexicons) is abstract. A 
lexicon-associated ontology makes the 
substantiation of abstract concepts easier. 
HowNet defines 65,961 Simplified Chinese 
lexical entries by a set of predefined features 
including 6 categories of primary features and 
100 secondary features, and several symbols, in 
which the primary features are in a taxonomy 
with single inheritance. The taxonomy is 
essentially regarded as the taxonomy of the CLO. 
However, the Chinese lexical entries defined in 
HowNet are simplified version. They are not 
suitable for Traditional Chinese research and 
applications. A traditional version of Chinese 
dictionary released by Sinica of R.O.C. is 
frequently used for Traditional Chinese NLP. By 
combining the Traditional Chinese dictionary 
and the HowNet, we attempt to construct the 
CLO and represent it in the semantic markup 
language DAML+OIL since DAML+OIL is 
currently a basis of Web ontology language. 
 The task of constructing the CLO can be 
divided into three portions. Firstly, a hierarchical 
taxonomy of concepts including relations among 
the concepts is required. In our case, we utilize 
the hierarchical primary features of HowNet to 
form the structure. Secondly, a set of lexical 
entries should be associated with the concepts 
and relations. Thirdly, a set of axioms that 
describe additional constraints on the ontology 
are required. This paper addresses the ongoing 
construction task and a brief introduction of 
Web ontology languages. 
1 An Overview of Ontology and Its Languages 
This section will describe the definition of 
ontology from different viewpoints and several 
semantic markup languages frequently used for 
representing ontologies. 
1.1 What is Ontology? 
In WordNet, the word ?ontology? has a sense of 
?the metaphysical study of the nature of being 
and existence.? The term has a long history in 
philosophy. It refers to the subject of existence. 
For AI community, it seems to generate a lot of 
controversy. One definition by Gruber (1993) is 
that ?an ontology is an explicit specification of a 
conceptualisation.? He considered that every 
knowledge base, knowledge-based system, or 
knowledge-level agent is committed to some 
conceptualization explicitly or implicitly. The 
conceptualization includes the objects presumed 
or hypothesized to exist in the world and their 
interrelationships [Genesereth and Nilsson 
1987]. 
 According to Gruber?s definition, an ontology 
basically consists of a set of concepts, i.e. the 
so-called objects, which represent classes of 
objects, and a set of relations, i.e. the so-called 
interrelationships, which are binary relations 
defined on concepts. A special transitive relation 
?subClassOf? represents a subsumption relation 
between concepts and structures a taxonomy. In 
addition to the taxonomy, an ontology typically 
contains a set of inference rules. The inference 
rules enhance the ontology?s power in reasoning. 
 Maedche and Staab (2001) proposed an 
ontology-learning framework for the Semantic 
Web. In their case, they formally defined an 
ontology as an 8-tuple < L , C , CH , R , RH , 
F , G , A >, in which the first primitive L  
denotes a set of strings that describe lexical 
entries for concepts and relations, the middle 6 
primitives structure the taxonomy of the 
ontology, and the last primitive A  is a set of 
axioms that describe additional constraints on 
the ontology. Staab and Maedche (2001) 
considered that the axioms make implicit facts 
more explicit. The ontology is actually a lexical 
ontology since it comprises a set of lexical 
entries. We adopt the ontology?s definition for 
constructing the CLO. 
1.2 Ontology Languages for the Semantic Web 
The Semantic Web is not a separate Web but an 
extension of the current one, in which 
information is given well-defined meaning, 
better enabling computers and people to work in 
cooperation [Berners-Lee et al 2001]. The goal 
of developing the Semantic Web is to facilitate 
the communications of people-to-machine, 
machine-to-people, and machine-to-machine. A 
way to achieve this goal is to give the 
information the Web provided a well-defined 
meaning. Several markup languages are 
developed for this purpose. Fig. 1 shows the 
layer language model for the Web [Fensel 
2000]. 
 
HTML XML
XHTML RDF
RDFS
DAML+OIL
 
Fig. 1 The layer language model for the Web. 
 
 HTML is the most popular markup language 
for structuring documents. Its simplicity enabled 
fast growth of the Web, but also resulted in 
information overload and that knowledge could 
not be shared conveniently and efficiently. An 
extensible metalanguage ? XML was born for 
this reason. One of its instances ? XHTML 
redefined from HTML is more extensible than 
HTML, but is still not powerful enough for the 
Semantic Web. 
 RDF (Resource Description Framework) 
developed by the W3C (World Wide Web 
Consortium) is also an instance of XML. It is a 
foundation of Web metadata processing and 
used for describing relationships between 
resources. In general, any Web resource could 
be described in RDF. The formal model for RDF 
can be represented as triples: < predicate, 
subject, object>. The instances of the model can 
be also viewed as directed labeled graphs, which 
resemble semantic networks [Quillian 1968]. It 
also provides interoperability among 
applications, which enables applications to 
exchange and share machine-understandable 
information on the Web. 
 RDFS stands for RDF Schema. It is an 
extensible, object-oriented type system, which is 
introduced as a layer on top of the basic RDF 
model [Brickley and Guha 2000]. RDFS can be 
viewed as a set of ontological modeling 
primitives on top of RDF [Fensel 2000]. For 
example, two semantic modeling primitives 
?rdfs:Class? and ?rdfs:subClassOf? can be 
used for defining the taxonomy of an ontology. 
 A semantic markup langauge ? DAML+OIL, 
derived from RDF and RDFS, defines more 
primitives, such as daml:complementOf for 
complement relation, daml:sameClassAs for 
equivalence relation, etc., to represent more 
relationships among resources. DAML+OIL was 
built originally from the DAML ontology 
language ? DAML-ONT. It combines many 
language components of the OIL with the formal 
seamtics and reasoning services provided by 
description logic. Summarily, compared to other 
languages, such as XML DTD, XML Schema, 
and RDF(S), DAML+OIL possesses richer 
language features, such as class expressions, 
defined classes, formal semantics, inference, 
local restrictions, and qualified constraints (see 
more at www.daml.org/language/features.html). 
It is currently the basis of W3C?s Web ontology 
language. Therefore, we also follow this 
specification for the CLO. 
2 Construction of the Chinese Lexical Ontology 
As mentioned above, the CLO mainly consists 
of three components: a hierarchical taxonomy of 
concepts, a set of lexicons associated with the 
concepts and relations, and a set of axioms. We 
do not intend to explore the axioms in this paper. 
In the following, we will describe how to 
construct the hierarchical taxonomy and how to 
associate lexicons with the concepts. 
2.1 Conversion of HowNet 
The hierarchical taxonomy is actually a 
conversion of HowNet. One of the important 
portions of HowNet is the methodology of 
defining the lexical entries. In HowNet, each 
lexical entry is defined as a combination of one 
or more primary features and a sequence of 
secondary features with prefixed symbols. The 
primary features indicate the entry?s category, 
which are in a hierarchical taxonomy as shown 
in Fig. 2. Based on the category, the secondary 
features make the entry?s sense more explicit, 
but they are non-taxonomic. Some of the 
secondary features are prefixed with symbols. 
The symbols describe the relationships among 
the lexical entry, the primary feature, and the 
secondary features. 
 
entity|??
thing|??
phisical|??
animate|??
AnimalHuman|??
human|?
time|??
space|??
component|??  
Fig. 2 Taxonomy of partial primary features in 
HowNet. 
 
 For example, HowNet defines the lexical 
entry ??????? (stockbroker) as follows: 
(D.1) ?Human|?, #occupation|??, commercial|
?, *buy|?, *sell|?, #fund|??? 
 The first term ?Human|?? is the so-called 
primary feature. The remaining terms are the 
so-called secondary features, in which the 
secondary feature ?buy|?? is prefixed with the 
symbol ?*.? It indicates that ??????? 
(stockbroker) can be an agent of ?buy|?.? 
 In the following, we will describe how to 
extract hierarchically structured concepts, 
relations among the concepts, and relations 
between the lexical entries and the concepts, and 
how to associate the lexical entries with the 
concepts. 
Hierarchically Structured Concepts 
Totally 1,521 primary features are divided into 6 
upper categories: Event, Entity, Attribute 
Value, Quantity, and Quantity Value. After 
eliminating replica, we obtain 1,075 distinct 
primary features. These primary features are 
well organized into a hierarchical taxonomy. 
Each primary feature can be viewed as a concept 
for an ontology. By the taxonomy, we construct 
a fundamental ontology that consists of a set of 
concepts and a special relation ? ?subClassOf.? 
The ?subClassOf? relation realizes the 
hypernym and hyponym relationships among the 
concepts. 
Relations among the Concepts 
In the two categories, Event and Entity, some 
primary features have auxiliaries for describing 
the relationships to other primary features. For 
example, the primary feature ?human|?? has 
auxiliaries: [!name|??, !wisdom|??, !ability|
??, !occupation|??, *act|??]. It means 
that ?human|?? has attributes: ?name|??,? 
?wisdom|??,? ?ability|??,? ?occupation|?
?,? and can be an agent of ?act|??.? For the 
CLO, these auxiliaries are used for constructing 
the relations among the concepts. 
Relations between the Lexical Entries and the 
Concepts 
A noticeable thing is that, in HowNet, many 
primary features appear in the secondary 
features of many lexical entries to assist 
describing the senses of those lexical entries. 
That is, they play the roles of secondary features. 
For example, in (D.1), the fourth term ?buy|?? 
is a secondary feature for the lexical entry ???
???? (stockbroker). And it is also a primary 
feature of the taxonomy. In other words, these 
secondary features are concepts for the ontology. 
For each of them, its prefixed symbol provides a 
relation between the lexical entry and the 
concept to which it corresponds. 
Associating the HowNet Lexical Entries with 
the Concepts 
As mentioned before, a lexical entry in HowNet 
is defined as a combination of one or more 
primary features and a sequence of secondary 
features with prefixed symbols. Its primary 
features being taxonomic indicate its category. 
And we took the taxonomy as the taxonomy of 
the CLO. Therefore, each HowNet lexical entry 
can be well associated with one or more 
concepts according to its primary features. 
2.2 Classification of the Lexicons 
From HowNet, we constructed the ontology 
taxonomy and obtained Simplified Chinese 
lexical entries. It is still lack of Traditional 
Chinese lexical entries. For the completeness of 
CLO, we need a dictionary supporting 
Traditional Chinese. 
 A Traditional Chinese dictionary compiled by 
Academia Sinica of R.O.C. (www.sinica.edu.tw) 
was released for computational processing of 
Chinese natural language. It consists of 78,322 
words; each is associated with one or more 
parts-of-speech (POS). Taking into account the 
POS, there are totally 80,491 lexical entries. The 
dictionary is an available and necessary 
complement to Traditional Chinese?s research 
and applications. We will refer to it as Sinica 
Dictionary for short. 
 Associating the lexical entries in Sinica 
Dictionary with the concepts is equivalent to 
classifying them into the ontology taxonomy. In 
order to ensure the correctness of the 
classification task, we proceed in a 
semi-automatic approach. Fig. 3 illustrates the 
flow diagram of semi-automatically classifying 
the lexical entries into the ontology taxonomy. 
 
A Traditional
Chinese lexical entry
Code ConversionSearching
Found?
Automated
Classification
YES
Big5-coded
HowNet
GB-coded
HowNet
Chinese Lexical
Ontology
NO
Mapping
Manual
Classification
Mapped? YES
NO
POS-based
Concept
Mapping
Table
 
Fig. 3 The flow diagram of manually classifying 
the Sinica lexical entries into the CLO. 
 
Sinica entries
(80,491)
HowNet entries
(65,961)
Unmatched
(39,899)
Unmatched
(25,369)CompletelyMatched
(26,916)
Incompletely
matched (13,676)
(A) (B)
 
Fig. 4 A diagram matching Sinica?s lexical 
entries with HowNet?s. 
 
 For each lexical entry in Sinica Dictionary, 
we search it in a pool of Big5-coded HowNet 
lexical entries, which are transformed from the 
HowNet originally encoded in GB code. If it can 
be found and its POS is the same as its 
corresponding HowNet lexicl entry?s, then we 
associate it with the concepts which the HowNet 
lexical entry belongs to. There are totally 26,916 
completely matched entries. The remaining 
Sinica lexical entries contains 39,899 unmatched 
entries and 13,676 incompletely matched entries 
whose characters are matched but POSs are not 
matched. (see Fig. 4) 
 Observing the incompletely matched entries, 
in fact, all of them are multi-conceptual. To 
classify each of them into the ontology 
taxonomy according to its primary feature in 
HowNet is resonable. For example, the lexical 
entry ?????? (exciting) is classified into the 
adjective category in HowNet, but has a POS 
?VH11? in Sinica Dictionary. It is a verb in (S.1) 
and an adjective in (S.2). 
(S.1) ??????????? 
  (The movie excited everybody.) 
(S.2) ?????????????? 
  (I saw an exciting movie.) 
 Since the incompletely matched entries are 
multi-conceptual, they must be classified into 
other concepts. Totally 53,575 lexical entries 
(unmatched and incompletely matched) should 
be classified yet. It is very hard to manually 
classify such a large number of lexical entries 
into the large scale ontology consisting of 1,075 
concepts. Therefore, an efficient approach is still 
required. 
 Traditional and Simplified Chinese languages 
are originated from the same people. The 
languages should not be much different. An 
assumption is that most of the lexical entries in 
the two unmatched groups, i.e. regions (A) and 
(B) in Fig. 4, should be almost identical in 
semantics and syntax. Under this assumption, 
we can produce a mapping table between the 
two groups of unmatched entries according to 
their POSs. Thus, we can shorten the time for 
manual classification. This task, i.e. the 
dash-blocked area in Fig. 3, is ongoing. 
Conclusion and Future Work 
 The CLO currently contains 1,075 concepts, 
65,961 lexical entries associated with the 
concepts, 299 relations among the concepts 
excluding the ?subClassOf? relations, 27,004 
relations between the lexical entries and the 
concepts, and 79,723 relations associating the 
lexical entries with the concepts. 
 We are working toward the classification of 
the unmatched Tradictional Chinese lexical 
entries into the CLO. Besides, the relations are 
not associated with lexical entries yet, therefore 
we will research into this problem in the future. 
Acknowledgements 
This paper is a partial result of Project 
A311XS1211 conducted by ITRI under 
sponsorship of the Ministry of Economic Affairs, 
R.O.C. 
References 
Berners-Lee T., Hendler J. and Lassila O. (2001)  
The Semantic Web, Scientific American. 
Brickley D. and Guha R. V. (2000)  Resource 
Description Framework (RDF) Schema 
Specification 1.0, W3C Candidate 
Recommendation 27 March 2000. 
Chinese Knowledge Information Processing Group 
(1993)  Analysis of Chinese Part-of-Speech, 
Technical Report no. 93-05, Institute of 
Information Science, Academia Sinica, R.O.C. 
Fensel D. (2000)  The Semantic Web and Its 
Languages, IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 15, no. 
6, pp. 67-73. 
Genesereth M. R. and Nilsson N. J. (1987)  Logical 
Foundations of Artificial Intelligence, Los Altos, 
California: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc., 
Chap. 2, pp. 9-13. 
Gruber T. R. (1993)  A Translation Approach to 
Portable Ontology Specifications, Knowledge 
Acquisition, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 199-220. 
Maedche A. and Staab S. (2001)  Ontology 
Learning for the Semantic Web, IEEE Intelligent 
Systems, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 72-79. 
McIlraith S. A., Son T. C. and Zeng H. (2001)  
Semantic Web Services, IEEE Intelligent Systems, 
pp. 46-53. 
Quillian M. R. (1968)  Semantic Memory, Semantic 
Information Processing, The MIT Press, pp. 
227-270. 
Staab S. and Maedche A. (2001)  Knowledge 
Portals ? Ontologies at Work, AI Magazine, vol. 
21, no. 2.
 
