Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Student Research Workshop, pages 18?26,
Suntec, Singapore, 4 August 2009.
c
?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Annotating and Recognising Named Entities in Clinical Notes
Yefeng Wang
School of Information Technology
The University of Sydney
Australia 2006
ywang1@it.usyd.edu.au
Abstract
This paper presents ongoing research in
clinical information extraction. This work
introduces a new genre of text which are
not well-written, noise prone, ungrammat-
ical and with much cryptic content. A cor-
pus of clinical progress notes drawn form
an Intensive Care Service has been manu-
ally annotated with more than 15000 clin-
ical named entities in 11 entity types. This
paper reports on the challenges involved in
creating the annotation schema, and recog-
nising and annotating clinical named enti-
ties. The information extraction task has
initially used two approaches: a rule based
system and a machine learning system
using Conditional Random Fields (CRF).
Different features are investigated to as-
sess the interaction of feature sets and the
supervised learning approaches to estab-
lish the combination best suited to this
data set. The rule based and CRF sys-
tems achieved an F-score of 64.12% and
81.48% respectively.
1 Introduction
A substantial amount of clinical data is locked
away in a non-standardised form of clinical lan-
guage, which if standardised could be usefully
mined to improve processes in the work of clin-
ical wards, and to gain greater understanding of
patient care as well as the progression of diseases.
However in some clinical contexts these clinical
notes, as written by a clinicians, are in a less struc-
tured and often minimal grammatical form with
idiosyncratic and cryptic shorthand. Whilst there
is increasing interest in the automatic extraction
of the contents of clinical text, this particular type
of notes cause significant difficulties for automatic
extraction processes not present for well-written
prose notes.
The first step to the extraction of structured in-
formation from these clinical notes is to achieve
accurate identification of clinical concepts or
named entities. An entity may refer to a concrete
object mentioned in the notes. For example, there
are 3 named entities - CT, pituitary macroade-
noma and suprasellar cisterns in the sentence:
CT revealed pituitary macroadenoma in suprasel-
lar cisterns.
In recent years, the recognition of named en-
tities from biomedical scientific literature has be-
come the focus of much research, a large number
of systems have been built to recognise, classify
and map biomedical terms to ontologies. How-
ever, clinical terms such as findings, procedures
and drugs have received less attention. Although
different approaches have been proposed to iden-
tify clinical concepts and map them to terminolo-
gies (Aronson, 2001; Hazlehurst et al, 2005;
Friedman et al, 2004; Jimeno et al, 2008), most
of the approaches are language pattern based,
which suffer from low recall. The low recall rate
is mainly due to the incompleteness of medical
lexicon and expressive use of alternative lexico-
grammatical structures by the writers. However,
only little work has used machine learning ap-
proaches, because no training data has been avail-
able, or the data are not available for clinical
named entity identification.
There are semantically annotated corpora that
have been developed in biomedical domain in the
past few years, for example, the GENIA cor-
pus of 2000 Medline abstracts has been annotated
with biological entities (Kim et al, 2003); The
PennBioIE corpus of 2300 Medline abstracts an-
notated with biomedical entities, part-of-speech
tag and some Penn Treebank style syntactic struc-
tures (Mandel, 2006) and LLL05 challenge task
corpus (N?edellec, 2005). However only a few cor-
pora are available in the clinical domain. Many
corpora are ad hoc annotations for evaluation, and
18
the size of the corpora are small which is not opti-
mal for machine learning strategies. The lack of
data is due to the difficulty of getting access to
clinical text for research purposes and clinical in-
formation extraction is still a new area to explore.
Many of the existing works focused only on clini-
cal conditions or disease (Ogren et al, 2006; Pes-
tian et al, 2007). The only corpus that is anno-
tated with a variety of clinical named entities is
the CLEF project (Roberts et al, 2007) .
Most of the works mentioned above are anno-
tated on formal clinical reports and scientific liter-
ature abstracts, which generally conform to gram-
matical conventions of structure and readability.
The CLEF data, annotated on clinical narrative re-
ports, still uses formal clinical reports. The clini-
cal notes presented in this work, is another genre
of text, that is different from clinical reports, be-
cause they are not well-written. Notes written
by clinicians and nurses are highly ungrammatical
and noise prone, which creates issues in the quality
of any text processing. Examples of problems aris-
ing from such texts are: firstly, variance in the rep-
resentation of core medical concepts, whether un-
consciously, such as typographical errors, or con-
sciously, such as abbreviations and personal short-
hand; secondly, the occurrences of different no-
tations to signify the same concept. The clinical
notes contain a great deal of formal terminology
but used in an informal and unorderly manner, for
example, a study of 5000 instances of Glasgow
Coma Score (GCS) readings drawn from the cor-
pus showed 321 patterns are used to denote the
same concept and over 60% of them are only used
once.
The clinical information extraction problem is
addressed in this work by applying machine learn-
ing methods to a corpus annotated for clinical
named entities. The data selection and annota-
tion process is described in Section 3. The initial
approaches to clinical concept identification using
both a rule-based approach and machine learning
approach are described in Section 4 and Section 5
respectively. A Conditional Random Fields based
system was used to study and analyse the contri-
bution of various feature types. The results and
discussion are presented in Section 6.
2 Related Work
There is a great deal of research addressing con-
cept identification and concept mapping issues.
The Unified Medical Language System Metathe-
saurus (UMLS) (Lindberg et al, 1993) is the
world?s largest medical knowledge source and it
has been the focus of much research. The sim-
plest approaches to identifying medical concepts
in text is to maintain a lexicon of all the entities
of interest and to systematically search through
that lexicon for all phrases of any length. This
can be done efficiently by using an appropriate
data structure such as a hash table. Systems that
use string matching techniques include SAPHIRE
(Hersh and Hickam, 1995), IndexFinder (Zou et
al., 2003), NIP (Huang et al, 2005) and Max-
Matcher (Zhou et al, 2006). With a large lexicon,
high precision and acceptable recall were achieved
by this approach in their experiments. However,
using these approaches out of box for our task is
not feasible, due to the high level of noise in the
clinical notes, and the ad hoc variation of the ter-
minology, will result in low precision and recall.
A more sophisticated and promising approach
is to make use of shallow parsing to identify all
noun phrases in a given text. The advantage of
this approach is that the concepts that do not exist
in the lexicon can be found. MedLEE (Friedman,
2000) is a system for information extraction in
medical discharge summaries. This system uses a
lexicon for recognising concept semantic classes,
word qualifiers, phrases, and parses the text using
its own grammar, and maps phrases to standard
medical vocabularies for clinical findings and dis-
ease. The MetaMap (Aronson, 2001) program
uses a three step process started by parsing free-
text into simple noun phrases using the Special-
ist minimal commitment parser. Then the phrase
variants are generated and mapping candidates are
generated by looking at the UMLS source vocabu-
lary. Then a scoring mechanism is used to evaluate
the fit of each term from the source vocabulary, to
reduce the potential matches (Brennan and Aron-
son, 2003). Unfortunately, the accurate identifica-
tion of noun phrases is itself a difficult problem,
especially for the clinical notes. The ICU clin-
ical notes are highly ungrammatical and contain
large number of sentence fragments and ad hoc
terminology. Furthermore, highly stylised tokens
of combinations of letters, digits and punctua-
tion forming complex morphological tokens about
clinical measurements in non-regular patterns add
an extra load on morphological analysis, e.g. ?4-
6ml+/hr? means 4-6 millilitres or more secreted by
19
the patient per hour. Parsers trained on generic text
and MEDLINE abstracts have vocabularies and
language models that are inappropriate for such
ungrammatical texts.
Among the state-of-art systems for concept
identification and named entity recognition are
those that utilize machine learning or statistical
techniques. Machine learners are widely used in
biomedical named entity recognition and have out-
performed the rule based systems (Zhou et al,
2004; Tsai et al, 2006; Yoshida and Tsujii, 2007).
These systems typically involve using many fea-
tures, such as word morphology or surrounding
context and also extensive post-processing. A
state-of-the-art biomedical named entity recog-
nizer uses lexical features, orthographic features,
semantic features and syntactic features, such as
part-of-speech and shallow parsing.
Many sequential labeling machine learners have
been used for experimentation, for example, Hid-
den Markov Model(HMM) (Rabiner, 1989), Max-
imum Entropy Markov Model (MEMM) (McCal-
lum et al, 2000) and Conditional Random Fields
(CRF) (Lafferty et al, 2001). Conditional Ran-
dom Fields have proven to be the best performing
learner for this task. The benefit of using a ma-
chine learner is that it can utilise both the infor-
mation form of the concepts themselves and the
contextual information, and it is able to perform
prediction without seeing the entire length of the
concepts. The machine learning based systems are
also good at concept disambiguation, in which a
string of text may map to multiple concepts, and
this is a difficult task for rule based approaches.
3 Annotation of Corpus
3.1 The Data
Data were selected form a 60 million token cor-
pus of Royal Prince Alfred Hospital (RPAH)?s In-
tensive Care Service (ICS). The collection con-
sists of clinical notes of over 12000 patients in
a 6 year time span. It is composed of a vari-
ety of different types of notes, for example, pa-
tient admission notes, clinician notes, physiother-
apy notes, echocardiogram reports, nursing notes,
dietitian and operating theatre reports. The corpus
for this study consists of 311 clinical notes drawn
from patients who have stayed in ICS for more
than 3 days, with most frequent causes of admis-
sion. The patients were identified in the patient
records using keywords such as cardiac disease,
Category Example
FINDING lung cancer; SOB; fever
PROCEDURE chest X Ray;laparotomy
SUBSTANCE Ceftriaxone; CO
2
; platelet
QUALIFIER left; right;elective; mild
BODY renal artery; LAD; diaphragm
BEHAVIOR smoker; heavy drinker
ABNORMALITY tumor; lesion; granuloma
ORGANISM HCV; proteus; B streptococcus
OBJECT epidural pump; larnygoscope
OCCUPATION cardiologist; psychiatrist
OBSERVABLE GCS; blood pressure
Table 1: Concept categories and examples.
liver disease, respiratory disease, cancer patient,
patient underwent surgery etc. Notes vary in size,
from 100 words to 500 words. Most of the notes
consist of content such as chief complaint, patient
background, current condition, history of present
illness, laboratory test reports, medications, social
history, impression and further plans. The variety
of content in the notes ensures completely differ-
ent classes of concepts are covered by the corpus.
The notes were anonymised, patient-specific iden-
tifiers such as names, phone numbers, dates were
replaced by a like value. All sensitive information
was removed before annotation.
3.2 Concept Category
Based on the advice of one doctor and one clini-
cian/terminologist, eleven concept categories were
defined in order to code the most frequently used
clinical concepts in ICS. The eleven categories
were derived from the SNOMED CT concept hier-
archy. The categories and examples are listed in
Table 1. Detailed explanation of these categories
can be found in SNOMED CT Reference Guide
1
3.3 Nested Concept
Nested concepts are concepts containing other
concepts and are annotated in the corpus. They are
of particular interest due to their compositional na-
ture. For example, the term left cavernous carotid
aneurysm embolisation is the outermost concept,
which belongs to PROCEDURE. It contains sev-
eral inner concepts: the QUALIFIER left and the
term cavernous carotid aneurysm as a FINDING,
1
SNOMED CT
R
?
Technical Reference Guide - July 2008
International Release. http://www.ihtsdo.org/
20
which also contains cavernous carotid as BODY
and aneurysm as ABNORMALITY.
The recognition of nested concepts is crucial for
other tasks that depend on it, such as coreference
resolution, relation extraction, and ontology con-
struction, since nested structures implicitly con-
tain relations that may help improve their correct
recognition. The above outermost concept may be
represented by embedded concepts and relation-
ships as: left cavernous carotid aneurysm emboli-
sation IS A embolisation which has LATERALITY
left, has ASSOCIATED MORPHOLOGY aneurysm
and has PROCEDURE SITE cavernous carotid.
3.4 Concept Frequency
The frequency of annotation for each concept cat-
egory are detailed in Table 2. There are in total
15704 annotated concepts in the corpus, 12688
are outermost concepts and 3016 are inner con-
cepts. The nested concepts account for 19.21% of
all concepts in the corpus. The corpus has 46992
tokens, with 18907 tokens annotated as concepts,
hence concept density is 40.23% of the tokens.
This is higher than the density of the GENIA and
MUC corpora. The 12688 annotated outermost
concepts, results in an average length of 1.49 to-
kens per concept which is less than those of the
GENIA and MUC corpora. These statistics suggest
that ICU staff tend to use shorter terms but more
extensively in their clinical notes which is in keep-
ing with their principle of brevity.
The highest frequency concepts are FIND-
ING, SUBSTANCE, PROCEDURE, QUALIFIER and
BODY, which account 86.35% of data. The re-
maining 13.65% concepts are distributed into 6
rare categories. The inner concepts are mainly
from QUALIFIER, BODY and ABNORMALITY, be-
cause most of the long and complex FINDING
and PROCEDURE concepts contain BODY, AB-
NORMALITY and QUALIFIER, such as the example
in Section 3.3.
3.5 Annotation Agreement
The corpus had been tokenised using a white-
space tokeniser. Each note was annotated by two
annotators: the current author and a computational
linguist experienced with medical texts. Annota-
tion guidelines were developed jointly by the an-
notators and the clinicians. The guidelines were
refined and the annotators were trained using an
iterative process. At the end of each iteration, an-
notation agreement was calculated and the anno-
Category Outer Inner All
ABNORMALITY 0 926 926
BODY 735 1331 2066
FINDING 4741 71 4812
HEALTHPROFILE 399 0 399
OBJECT 179 23 202
OBSERVABLE 198 227 425
OCCUPATION 139 0 139
ORGANISM 36 17 53
PROCEDURE 2353 39 2392
QUALIFIER 1659 21 1680
SUBSTANCE 2249 361 2610
TOTAL 12688 3016 15704
Table 2: Frequencies for nested and outermost
concept.
tations were reviewed. The guidelines were mod-
ified if necessary. This process was stopped un-
til the agreement reached a threshold. In total
30 clinical notes were used in the development
of guidelines. Inter-Annotator Agreement (IAA)
is reported as the F-score by holding one anno-
tation as the standard. F-score is commonly used
in information retrieval and information extraction
evaluations, which calculates the harmonic mean
of recall and precision as follows:
F =
2? precision? recall
precision+ recall
The IAA rate in the development cycle finally
reached 89.83. The agreement rate between the
two annotators for the whole corpus by exact
matching was 88.12, including the 30 develop-
ment notes. An exact match means both the
boundaries and classes are exactly the same. The
instances where the annotators did not agree were
reviewed and relabeled by a third annotator to gen-
erate a single annotated gold standard corpus. The
third annotator is used to ensure every concept is
agreed on by at least two annotators.
Disagreements frequently occur at the bound-
aries of a term. Sometimes it is difficult to deter-
mine whether a modifier should be included in the
concept: massive medial defect or medial defect,
in which the latter one is a correct annotation and
massive is a severity modifier. Mistakes in anno-
tation also came from over annotation of a gen-
eral term: anterior approach, which should not
be annotated. Small disagreements were caused
by ambiguities in the clinical notes: some medical
21
devices (OBJECT) are often annotated as PROCE-
DURE, because the noun is used as a verb in the
context. Another source of disagreement is due to
the ambiguity in clinical knowledge: it was diffi-
cult to annotate the man-made tissues as BODY or
SUBSTANCE, such as bone graft or flap.
4 Rule Based Concept Matcher
4.1 Proofreading the Corpus
Before any other processing, the first step was
to resolve unknown tokens in the corpus. The
unknown tokens are special orthographies or al-
phabetic words that do not exist in any dic-
tionary, terminologies or gazetteers. Medical
words were extracted from the UMLS lexicon and
SNOMED CT (SNOMED International, 2009),
and the MOBY (Ward, 1996) dictionary was used
as the standard English word list. A list of abbrevi-
ations were compiled from various resources. The
abbreviations in the terminology were extracted
using pattern matching. Lists of abbreviations and
shorthand were obtained from the hospital, and
were manually compiled to resolve the meaning.
Every alphabetic token was verified against the
dictionary list, and classified into Ordinary En-
glish Words, Medical Words, Abbreviations, and
Unknown Words.
An analysis of the corpus showed 31.8% of
the total tokens are non-dictionary words, which
contains 5% unknown alphabetic words. Most
of these unknown alphabetic words are obvious
spelling mistakes. The spelling errors were cor-
rected using a spelling corrector trained on the
60 million token corpus, Abbreviations and short-
hand were expanded, for example defib expands
to defibrillator. Table 3 shows some unknown to-
kens and their resolutions. The proofreading re-
quire considerable amount of human effort to build
the dictionaries.
4.2 Lexicon look-up Token Matcher
The lexicon look-up performed exact matching be-
tween the concepts in the SNOMED CT terminol-
ogy and the concepts in the notes. A hash table
data structure was implemented to index lexical
items in the terminology. This is an extension to
the algorithm described in (Patrick et al, 2006). A
token matching matrix run through the sentence
to find all candidate matches in the sentence to
the lexicon, including exact longest matches, par-
tial matches, and overlapping between matches.
unknown word examples resolution
CORRECT WORD bibasally bibasally
MISSING SPACE oliclinomel Oli Clinomel
SPELLING ERROR dolaseteron dolasetron
ACRONYM BP blood pressure
ABBREVIATION N+V Nausea and vomiting
SHORTHAND h?serous haemoserous
MEASUREMENT e4v1m6 GCS measurement
SLASHWORDS abg/ck/tropt ABG CK Tropt
READINGS 7mg/hr
Table 3: Unknown tokens and their resolutions.
Then a Viterbi algorithm was used to find the best
sequence of non-overlapping concepts in a sen-
tence that maximise the total similarity score. This
method matches the term as it appears in the ter-
minology so is not robust against term variations
that have not been seen in the terminology, which
results in an extremely low recall. In addition, the
precision may be affected by ambiguous terms or
nested terms.
The exact lexicon look-up is likely to fail on
matching long and complex terms, as clinicians do
not necessarily write the modifier of a concept in
a strict order, and some descriptors are omitted.
for example white blood cell count normal can be
written as normal white cell count. In order to
increase recall, partial matching is implemented.
The partial matching tries to match the best se-
quence, but penalise non-matching gaps between
two terms. The above example will be found us-
ing partial matching.
5 CRF based Clinical Named Entity
Recogniser
5.1 Conditional Random Fields
The concept identification task has been formu-
lated as a named entity recognition task, which
can be thought of as a sequential labeling problem:
each word is a token in a sequence to be assigned
a label, for example, B-FINDING, I-FINDING, B-
PROCEDURE, I-PROCEDURE, B-SUBSTANCE, I-
SUBSTANCE and so on. Conditional Random
Fields (CRF) are undirected statistical graphical
models, which is a linear chain of Maximum En-
tropy Models that evaluate the conditional prob-
ability on a sequence of states give a sequence
of observations. Such models are suitable for se-
quence analysis. CRFs has been applied to the task
22
of recognition of biomedical named entities and
have outperformed other machine learning mod-
els. CRF++
2
is used for conditional random fields
learning.
5.2 Features for the Learner
This section describes the various features used in
the CRF model. Annotated concepts were con-
verted into BIO notation, and feature vectors were
generated for each token.
Orthographic Features: Word formation was
genaralised into orthographic classes. The present
model uses 7 orthographic features to indicate
whether the words are captialised or upper case,
whether they are alphanumeric or contains any
slashes, as many findings consist of captialised
words; substances are followed by dosage, which
can be captured by the orthography. Word prefixes
and suffixes of character length 4 were also used
as features, because some procedures, substances
and findings have special affixes, which are very
distinguishable from ordinary words.
Lexical Features: Every token in the training
data was used as a feature. Alphabetic words
in the training data were converted to lowercase,
spelling errors detected in proofreading stage were
replaced by the correct resolution. Shorthand and
abbreviations were expanded into bag of words
(bow) features. The left and right lexical bi-
grams were also used as a feature, however it only
yielded a slight improvement in performance. To
utilise the context information, neighboring words
in the window [?2,+2] are also added as features.
Context window size of 2 is chosen because it
yields the best performance. The target and previ-
ous labels are also used as features, and had been
shown to be very effective.
Semantic Features: The output from the
lexical-lookup system was used as features in the
CRF model. The identified concepts were added
to the feature set as semantic features, because
the terminology can provide semantic knowledge
to the learner such as the category information of
the term. Moreover, many partially matched con-
cepts from lexicon-lookup were counted as incor-
rectly matching, however they are single term head
nouns which are effective features in NER.
Syntactic features were not used in this exper-
iment as the texts have only a little grammatical
structure. Most of the texts appeared in fragmen-
2
http://crfpp.sourceforge.net/
Experiment P R F-score
no pruning 58.76 26.63 36.35
exact matching 69.48 37.70 48.88
+proofreading 74.81 52.42 61.65
+partial matching 69.39 59.60 64.12
Table 4: Lexical lookup Performance.
tary sentences or single word or phrase bullet point
format, which is difficult for generic parsers to
work with correctly.
6 Evaluation
This section presents experiment results for both
the rule-based system and machine learning based
system. Only the 12688 outermost concepts are
used in the experiments, because nested terms re-
sult in multi-label for a single token. Since there
is no outermost concepts in ABNORMALITY, the
classification was done on the remaining 10 cate-
gories. The performances were evaluated in terms
of recall, precision and F-score.
6.1 Token Matcher Performance
The lexical lookup performance is evaluated on
the whole corpus. The first system uses only ex-
act matching without any pre-processing of the
lexicon. The second experiment uses a pruned
terminology with ambiguous categories and un-
necessary categories removed, but without proof-
reading of the corpus. The concept will be re-
moved if it belongs to a category that is not used
in the annotation. The third experiment used the
proofreaded corpus with all abbreviations anno-
tated. The fourth experiment was conducted on
the proofread corpus allowing both exact match-
ing and partial matching. The results are outlined
in Table 4.
The lexicon lookup without pruning the ter-
minologies achieved low precision and extremely
low recall. This is mainly due to the ambiguous
terms in the lexicon. By removing unrelated terms
and categories in the lexicon, both precision and
recall improved dramatically. Proofreading, cor-
recting a large number of unknown tokens such as
spelling errors or irregular conventions further in-
creased both precision and recall. The 14.72 gain
in recall mainly came from resolution and expan-
sion of shorthand, abbreviations, and acronyms in
the notes. This also suggest that this kind of clin-
ical notes are very noisy, and require a consider-
23
able amount of effort in pre-processing. Allow-
ing partial matching increased recall by 7.18, but
decreased precision by 5.52, and gave the overall
increase of 2.47 F-score. Partial matching discov-
ered a larger number of matching candidates us-
ing a looser matching criteria, therefore decreased
in precision with compensation of an increase in
recall.
The highest precision achieved by exact match-
ing is 74.81, confirming that the lexical lookup
method is an effective means of identifying clin-
ical concepts. However, it requires extensive ef-
fort on pre-processing both corpus and the termi-
nology and is not easily adapted to other corpora.
The lexical matching fails to identify long terms
and has difficult in term disambiguation. The low
recall is caused by incompleteness of the terminol-
ogy. However, the benefit of using lexicon lookup
is that the system is able to assign a concept iden-
tifier to the identified concept if available.
6.2 CRF Feature Performance
The CRF system has been evaluated using 10-fold
cross validation on the data set. The evaluation
was performed using the CoNLL shared task eval-
uation script
3
.
The CRF classifier experiment results are
shown in Table 5. A baseline system was built
using only bag-of-word features from the training
corpus. A context-window size of 2 and tag pre-
diction of previous token were used in all experi-
ments. Without using any contextual features the
performance was 48.04% F-score. The baseline
performance of 71.16% F-score outperformed the
lexical-look up performance. Clearly the contex-
tual information surrounding the concepts gives a
strong contribution in identification of concepts,
while lexical-lookup hardly uses any contextual
information.
The full system is built using all features de-
scribed in Section 5.2, and achieved the best result
of 81.48% F-score. This is a significant improve-
ment of 10.32% F-score over the baseline system.
Further experimental analysis of the contribution
of feature types was conducted by removing each
feature type from the full system. ?bow means
bag-of-word features are removed from the full
system. The results show only bow and lexical-
lookup features make significant contribution to
the system, which are 5.49% and 4.40% sepa-
3
http://www.cnts.ua.ac.be/conll2002/ner/bin/
Experiment P R F-score
baseline 76.86 66.26 71.16
+lexical-lookup 82.61 74.88 78.55
full 84.22 78.90 81.48
?bow 81.26 73.32 77.08
?bigram 83.17 78.74 80.89
?abbreviation 83.20 77.26 80.12
?orthographic 83.67 78.24 80.87
?affixes 83.16 77.01 79.97
?lexical-lookup 79.06 73.15 75.99
Table 5: Experiment on Feature Contribution for
the ICU corpus.
rately. Bigram, orthographic, affixes and abbrevi-
ation features each makes around ? 1% contribu-
tion to the F-score, which is individually insignif-
icant, however the combination of them makes a
significant contribution, which is 4.83% F-score.
The most effective feature in the system is the
output from the lexical lookup system. Another
experiment using only bow and lexical-lookup fea-
tures showed a boost of 7.39% F-score. This is
proof of the hypothesis that using terminology in-
formation in the machine learner would increase
recall. In this corpus, about one third of the con-
cepts has a frequency of only 1, from which the
learner as unable to learn anything from the train-
ing data. The gain in performance is due to the
ingestion of semantic domain knowledge which is
provided by the terminology. This knowledge is
useful for determining the correct boundary of a
concept as well as the classification of the concept.
6.3 Detailed CRF Performance
The detailed results of the CRF system are shown
in Table 6. Precision, Recall and F-score for each
class are reported. There is a consistent gap be-
tween Recall and Precision across all categories.
The best performing classes are among the most
frequent categories. This is an indication that suf-
ficient training data is a crucial factor in achieving
high performance. SUBSTANCE, PROCEDURE and
FINDING are the best three categories due to their
high frequency in the corpus. However, QUALI-
FIER achieved a lower F-score because qualifiers
usually appear at the boundaries of two concepts,
which is a source of error in boundary recognition.
Low frequency categories generally achieved
high precision and low recall. The recall decreases
as the number of training instances decreases, be-
24
Class P R F-score
BODY 72.00 64.29 67.92
FINDING 83.17 78.74 80.89
BEHAVIOR 83.87 72.22 77.61
OBJECT 75.00 27.27 40.00
OBSERVABLE 89.47 56.67 69.39
ORGANISM 0.00 0.00 0.00
PROCEDURE 87.63 81.09 84.24
QUALIFIER 75.80 75.32 75.56
OCCUPATION 87.50 41.18 56.00
SUBSTANCE 91.90 88.53 90.19
Table 6: Detailed Performance of the CRF system.
cause there is not enough information in the train-
ing data to learn the class profiles. It is a chal-
lenge to boost the recall of rare categories due to
the variability of the terms in the notes. It is not
likely that the term would match to the terminol-
ogy, and hence there would be no utilisation of the
semantic information.
Another factor that causes recognition errors is
the nested concepts. BODY achieved the least pre-
cision because of the high frequency of nested
concepts in its category. The nested construction
also causes boundary detection problems, for ex-
ample C5/6 cervical discectomy
PROCEDURE
is
annotated as C5/6
BODY
and cervical discectomy
PROCEDURE
.
The results presented here are higher than those
reported in biomedical NER system. Although it
is difficult to compare with other work because of
the different data set, but this task might be easier
due to the shorter length of the concepts and fewer
long concepts (avg. 1.49 in this corpus vs. avg.
1.70 token per concept in GENIA). Local features
would be able to capture most of the useful infor-
mation while not introducing ambiguity.
7 Future Work and Conclusion
This paper presents a study of identification of
concepts in progressive clinical notes, which is
another genre of text that hasn?t been studied to
date. This is the first step towards information ex-
traction of free text clinical notes and knowledge
representation of patient cases. Now that the cor-
pus has been annotated with coarse grained con-
cept categories in a reference terminology, a pos-
sible improvement of the annotation is to reevalu-
ate the concept categories and create fine grained
categories by dividing top categories into smaller
classes along the terminology?s hierarchy. For ex-
ample, the FINDING class can be further divided
into SYMPTOM/SIGN, DISORDER and EVALUA-
TION RESULTS. The aim would be to achieve bet-
ter consistency, less ambiguity and greater cover-
age of the concepts in the corpus.
The nested concepts model the relations be-
tween atomic concepts within the outermost con-
cepts. These structures represent important rela-
tionships within this type of clinical concept. The
next piece of work could be the study of these rela-
tionships. They can be extended to represent rela-
tionships between clinical concepts and allow for
representing new concepts using structured infor-
mation. The annotation of relations is under de-
velopment. The future work will move from con-
cept identification to relation identification and au-
tomatic ontology extension.
Preliminary experiments in clinical named en-
tity recognition using both rule-based and machine
learning approaches were performed on this cor-
pus. These experiments have achieved promising
results and show that rule based lexicon lookup,
with considerable effort on pre-processing and
lexical verification, can significantly improve per-
formance over a simple exact matching process.
However, a machine learning system can achieve
good results by simply adapting features from
biomedical NER systems, and produced a mean-
ingful baseline for future research. A direction
to improve the recogniser is to add more syntac-
tic features and semantic features by using depen-
dency parsers and exploiting the unlabeled 60 mil-
lion token corpus.
In conclusion, this paper described a new anno-
tated corpus in the clinical domain and presented
initial approaches to clinical named entity recog-
nition. It has demonstrated that practical accept-
able named entity recognizer can be trained on the
corpus with an F-score of 81.48%. The challenge
in this task is to increase recall and identify rare
entity classes as well as resolve ambiguities intro-
duced by nested concepts. The results should be
improved by using extensive knowledge resource
or by increasing the size and improving the quality
of the corpus.
Acknowledgments
The author wish to thank the staff of the Royal
Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney : Dr. Stephen
Crawshaw, Dr. Robert Herks and Dr Angela Ryan
25
for their support in this project.
References
R. Aronson. 2001. Effective mapping of biomedical
text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: the MetaMap pro-
gram. In Proceeding of the AMIA Symposium,17?
21.
F. Brennan and A. Aronson 2003. Towards link-
ing patients and clinical information: detecting
UMLS concepts in e-mail. Journal of Biomedical
Informatics,36(4/5),334?341.
A. C?ot?e and American Veterinary Medical Associa-
tion and College of American Pathologists. 2009.
Snomed International. College of American Pathol-
ogists.
C. Friedman 2000. A broad coverage natural language
processing system. In Proceedings of the AMIA
Symposium,270?274.
C. Friedman, L. Shagina, Y. Lussier, and G. Hripc-
sak. 2004. Automated Encoding of Clinical
Documents Based on Natural Language Process-
ing. Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association,11(5),392?402.
B. Hazlehurst, R. Frost, F. Sittig, and J. Stevens. 2005.
MediClass: A System for Detecting and Classifying
Encounter-based Clinical Events in Any Electronic
Medical Record. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association,12(5),517?529.
R. Hersh, and D. Hickam. 1995. Information re-
trieval in medicine: The SAPHIRE experience.
Journal of the American Society for Information
Science,46(10),743?747.
Y. Huang, J. Lowe, D. Klein, and J. Cucina. 2005.
Improved Identification of Noun Phrases in Clini-
cal Radiology Reports Using a High-Performance
Statistical Natural Language Parser Augmented with
the UMLS Specialist Lexicon. Journal of the Amer-
ican Medical Informatics Association,12(3),275?
285.
A. Jimeno, et al 2008. Assessment of disease named
entity recognition on a corpus of annotated sen-
tences. BMC Bioinformatics,9(3).
D. Kim, T. Ohta, Y. Tateisi, and J. Tsujii. 2003.
GENIA corpus - a semantically annotated cor-
pus for bio-textmining. Journal of Bioinformatics,
19(1),180?182.
J. Lafferty et al 2001. Conditional Random Fields:
Probabilistic Models for Segmenting and Label-
ing Sequence Data Machine learning-international
workshop then conference, 282?289.
A. Lindberg et al 1993. The Unified Medical Lan-
guage System. Methods Inf Med.
M. Mandel 2006. Integrated Annotation of Biomedi-
cal Text: Creating the PennBioIE corpus. Text Min-
ing Ontologies and Natural Language Processing in
Biomedicine, Manchester, UK.
A. McCallum, et al 2000. Maximum entropy Markov
models for information extraction and segmentation
Proc. 17th International Conf. on Machine Learn-
ing, 591?598.
C. N?edellec. 2005. Learning Language in Logic -
Genic Interaction Extraction Challenge. Proceed-
ings of the ICML05 Workshop on Learning Lan-
guage in Logic, Bonn, 31?37.
V. Ogren, G. Savova, D. Buntrock, and G. Chute.
2006. Building and Evaluating Annotated Corpora
for Medical NLP Systems. AMIA Annu Symp Pro-
ceeding..
J. Patrick, Y. Wang, and P. Budd. 2006. Automatic
Mapping Clinical Notes to Medical Terminologies
In Proceedings of Australasian Language Technol-
ogy Workshop.
P. Pestian, C. Brew, P. Matykiewicz, J. Hovermale, N.
Johnson, K. Cohen, and W. Duch. 2007. A Shared
Task Involving Multi-label Classification of Clinical
Free Text In Proceedings of BioNLP workshop.
R. Rabiner 1989. A tutorial on hidden Markov models
and selected applications inspeech recognition Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE,77(2), 257?286.
A. Roberts, R. Gaizauskas, M. Hepple, G. Demetriou,
Y. Guo, A. Setzer, I. and Roberts. 2007. The
CLEF Corpus: Semantic Annotation of Clinical
Text. AMIA Annu Symp Proceeding., Oct 11:625?
629.
R. Tsai, L. Sung, J. Dai, C. Hung, Y. Sung, and L. Hsu.
2006. NERBio: using selected word conjunctions,
term normalization, and global patterns to improve
biomedical named entity BMC Bioinformatics.
G. Ward 1996. Moby thesaurus.
http://etext.icewire.com/moby/.
K. Yoshida, and J. Tsujii. 2007. Reranking for
Biomedical Named-Entity Recognition Proceed-
ings of BioNLP 2007: Biological, translational, and
clinical language processing, 209?216.
G. Zhou, J. Zhang, J. Su, D. Shen, and L. Tan. 2004.
Recognizing Names in Biomedical Texts: a Machine
Learning Approach BioInformatics, 20(7) 1178?
1190.
X. Zhou, et al 2006. MaxMatcher: Biological Concept
Extraction Using Approximate Dictionary Lookup.
Proc PRICAI,1145?1149.
Q. Zou. 2003. IndexFinder: A Method of Extract-
ing Key Concepts from Clinical Texts for Indexing.
Proc AMIA Symp,763?767.
26
BioNLP 2007: Biological, translational, and clinical language processing, pages 191?192,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Developing Feature Types for Classifying Clinical Notes
Jon Patrick, Yitao Zhang and Yefeng Wang
School of Information Technologies
University of Sydney
NSW 2006, Australia
{jonpat, yitao, ywang1}@it.usyd.edu.au
Abstract
This paper proposes a machine learning ap-
proach to the task of assigning the inter-
national standard on classification of dis-
eases ICD-9-CM codes to clinical records.
By treating the task as a text categorisa-
tion problem, a classification system was
built which explores a variety of features in-
cluding negation, different strategies of mea-
suring gloss overlaps between the content
of clinical records and ICD-9-CM code de-
scriptions together with expansion of the
glosses from the ICD-9-CM hierarchy. The
best classifier achieved an overall F1 value
of 88.2 on a data set of 978 free text clinical
records, and was better than the performance
of two out of three human annotators.
1 Introduction
Despite the rapid progress on text categorisation in
the newswire domain, assigning meaningful labels
to clinical notes has only recently emerged as a topic
for computational linguists although health infor-
matics researchers have been working on the prob-
lem for over 10 years. This paper describes con-
structing classifiers for the Computational Medicine
Center?s 2007 Medical Natural Language Process-
ing Challenge which aims to assign ICD-9-CM
codes to free text radiology reports. (Computational
Medicine Center, 2007) It addresses the difficulties
of medical text categorisation tasks by incorporating
medical negations, term variations, and clues from
hierarchy of medical ontologies as additional fea-
tures.
2 The task of assigning ICD-9-CM codes
The corpus used in this study is a collection of
radiology reports from the Cincinnati Children?s
Hospital Medical Center, Department of Radiol-
ogy. (Computational Medicine Center, 2007) The
data set is divided into a training set and a test set.
The training set consists of 978 records and the test
set consists of 976 records and 45 ICD-9-CM code.
The task was considered as a multi-label text cate-
gorisation problem. For each code found in the cor-
pus, we created a separate classifier which makes
binary ?Yes? or ?No? decisions for the target code
of a clinical record. Maximum Entropy Modeling
(MaxEnt) (Berger et al, 1996) and Support Vector
Machine (SVM) (Vapnik, 1995) were used to build
the classifiers in our solution.
3 Features
A variety of features were developed to represent
what we believed were the important determiners of
the ICD-9-CM codes.
Bag-of-words (BOW) features: include only un-
igrams and bigrams in the text.
Negation features: were used in the classification
system to capture the terms that are negated or un-
certain, for example ?pneumonia? vs ?no evidence
of pneumonia?. We created a negation-finding sys-
tem which uses an algorithm similar to (Chapman
et al, 2001) to identify the negation phrase and the
scope of negations.
Gloss matching feature: The ICD-9-CM pro-
vides detailed text definition for each code. This sec-
tion explores different strategies for measuring gloss
191
Name Description P R F1
S0 BOW baseline 83.9 78.4 81.1
S1 S0 + negation 88.5 78.2 83.0
S2 S1 + gloss
matching
89.2 80.6 84.7
S3 feature engi-
neering
89.7 86.0 87.8
S4 S3 + low-freq 89.7 86.9 88.2
Table 1: Experiment results for all ICD-9-CM codes
matchings between the content of a clinical record
and the definition of an ICD-9-CM code.
Feature engineering: In experiments with a uni-
form set of feature types for all ICD-9-CM codes,
we noticed that different codes tend to have a pref-
erence for different combinations of feature types.
Therefore, different combinations of feature types
for each individual code were used. The intuition
is to explore different combination of feature types
quickly instead of doing further feature selection
procedures. The system trained on the best combina-
tion of feature types are reported as the final results
for the target code.
Low frequency codes modeling: A rule-based
system was also used to model low frequency ICD-
9-CM codes which have only one occurrence in the
corpus, or have achieved F1 value of 0.0 by machine
learning. The system assigns a low frequent code to
a clinical record if the content of the record matches
the words of the code definition.
4 Result
Table 1 shows the experiment results. Since the
gold-standard annotation of the test dataset has not
been released so far, the experiment was done on the
978 documents training dataset using 10-fold cross-
validation. 1 The baseline system S0 was created
using only BOW features. Adding negation features
gives S1 an improvement of 1.9% on F1 score. The
gloss matching features gives a further increase of
1.7% on F1 score.
In order to understand more about the ICD-9-
CM code assignment task, this section evaluates the
1The official score of our system on the test dataset is
F1 = 86.76 which was ranked 7th among 44 systems. See
http://www.computationalmedicine.org/challenge/res.php
Name P R F1 N
company1 78.3 89.8 83.7 1397
company2 82.6 95.2 88.5 1404
company3 90.4 75.0 82.0 1011
S4 89.7 86.9 88.2 1180
Table 2: Performances of Annotators
performance of the three annotators. Table 2 com-
pares the performance of each annotator to the gold-
standard codes. The item ?N? in Table 2 stands for
the total number of ICD-9-CM codes which an an-
notator has assigned to the whole corpus.
5 Conclusion
This paper presents an approach to the problem
of assigning ICD-9-CM codes to free text medical
records. We created a classification system which
consists of multiple machine-learned classifiers on
high-frequency codes, and a rule-based modeling
module of low-frequency codes. By incorporating
negations and a variety of gloss matching features,
we successfully outperformed the baseline with only
bag-of-words features by 7.1% on F1 value. The
best reported score is also considered as compara-
ble to the performance of the best human annotator.
We also consider the way our system selected the
best combination of feature types for each individ-
ual ICD-9-CM code has a major contribution to the
classification task of clinical records.
References
Adam L. Berger, Stephen Della Pietra, and Vincent
J. Della Pietra. 1996. A Maximum Entropy Approach
to Natural Language Processing. Computational Lin-
guistics, 22(1):39?71.
W.W. Chapman, W. Bridewell, P. Hanbury, G.F. Cooper,
and B.G. Buchanan. 2001. A Simple Algorithm
for Identifying Negated Findings and Diseases in Dis-
charge Summaries. Journal of Biomedical Informat-
ics, 34(5):301?310.
Computational Medicine Center. 2007. 2007
Medical Natural Language Processing Challenge.
http://www.computationalmedicine.org/challenge/.
Vladimir N. Vapnik. 1995. The Nature of Statistical
Learning Theory. Springer.
192
BioNLP 2008: Current Trends in Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages 102?103,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Mapping Clinical Notes to Medical Terminology at Point of Care 
Yefeng Wang School of Information Technologies University of Sydney New South Wales 2006, Australia ywang1@it.usyd.edu.au 
Jon Patrick School of Information Technologies University of Sydney New South Wales 2006, Australia jonpat@it.usyd.edu.au 
  Abstract Clinicians write the reports in natural lan-guage which contains a large amount of in-formal medical term. Automating conver-sion of text into clinical terminologies al-lows reliable retrieval and analysis of the clinical notes. We have created an algor-ithm that maps medical expressions in clinical notes into a medical terminology. This algorithm indexes medical terms into an augmented lexicon. It performs lexical searches in text and finds the longest pos-sible matches in the target terminology, SNOMED CT. The mapping system was run on a collection of 470,000 clinical notes from an Intensive Care Service (ICS). The evaluation on a small part of the cor-pus shows the precision is 70.4%. 1 Introduction A substantial amount of clinical data is locked away in a non-standardised form of clinical lan-guage which if standardised could be usefully mined to gain greater understanding of patient care and the progression of diseases. Clinical notes on a patient's health are written in natural language which contains a great deal of formal terminology but used in an informal and unorderly manner. These medical notes need to be converted to a formal terminology to enable accurate retrieval and to compile aggregated statistics of the medical care. To satisfy these needs, we developed a medical concept identifier that is able to identify concepts in clinical notes and mapped to medical codes in a terminology. The algorithm has been  implemented 
to tag medical concepts in a collection of 470,000 clinical notes from an Intensive Care Service. A total of 9,135,000 instances of about 20,000 medi-cal concepts were identified. These medical con-cepts are used to study the medical language used by Intensive Care clinical staff, and the identified concepts are used to index patient clinical records for targeted information retrieval activities.  2 Related Work There has been a large effort spent on automatic recognition of medical and biomedical concepts and mapping them to medical terminology.  The Unified Medical Language System Meta-thesaurus (UMLS) is the world's largest medical knowledge source and it has been the focus of much research. One of the prominent systems to map free text to UMLS are MetaMap (Aronson, 2001),  3 Constructing the Lexicon The Augmented Lexicon is a data structure devel-oped to keep track of the words that appear in the concepts of the medical terminology. The Aug-mented Lexicon is built from the individual words in the gloss or the definition of the medical term. For example, Myocardial Infarction has the atomic words Myocardial and Infarction. Each concept is normalised which includes removal of stop words, stemming, and spelling variation generation. For each word, a list of the concept ids that contain that word is stored in the Augmented Lexicon. An ad-ditional table is stored alongside the augmented lexicon, called the ?atomic term count? to record the number of atomic terms that comprise each description.  
102
4 Token Matching Algorithm The algorithm performs string alignment between the source text and a target medical terminology. The best matches are determined by scoring algor-ithms for both perfect matching and partial match-ing. To find all possible matches, the algorithm iteratively performs matches for sub-strings using dynamic programming, so that the algorithm doesn?t have to generate all combination of sub-strings for the input sentence. Each previously computed substrings matches are stored and in a matching matrix so don?t require recalculation. 
  The data stored in each cell is a list of medical term ids that are in all the tokens that comprise the cell. The score is then calculated using the "atomic term count", which stores the number of tokens that make up that term. The score is the number of tokens in the current cell that have the term id in common divided by the number of tokens in the full description. 5 Recognition of Clinical Entities Before medical term identification, Clinical enti-ties such as measurement, demography, quantities are recognised and normalised to their classes.   Entity Class Examples Blood Pressure 105mm of Hg Demography 69 year-old man Datetime 20/11 2030 Quantity 55 mm  Table 1. Clinical Entities and Examples 
6 Evaluation The token matching algorithm has been imple-mented as a module in a terminology server that can provide real time text to medical concept en-coding. The system was installed in the Intensive Care Service that provides web interfaces for users to submit clinical notes and it computed SNOMED CT codes in real-time. The web interface has been implemented in several clinical forms templates at the RPAH, allowing data to be captured as the doc-tors fill in these forms. A feedback form has been implemented allowing clinicians to submit com-ments, identify terms that are missed by the system and submit corrections to incorrectly labeled terms. This was seen as a rare opportunity to collect an expert corrected corpus of clinical notes. Unfortu-nately, there was little adherence to the correction part of the program and so we do not yet have suf-ficient material to be precise about recall values. To evaluate the accuracy our systems, we col-lected a set of bedside clinical notes of patient monitoring chart information. 487 documents and 4,054 medical concepts were tagged with SNOMED CT codes and have been evaluated by medical experts. There are 2,852 correctly identi-fied concepts and 1,202 incorrectly identified con-cepts, results in a precision rate of 70.4%. The re-call rate hasn?t been fully evaluated. 7 Conclusions In conclusion, we have proposed a system to find medical terms in free text clinical notes and map them into a medical terminology. We have implemented the algorithm as a web-service sys-tem. The algorithm uses an augmented lexicon to index concept descriptors in SNOMED CT, which allow a much faster mapping of longest spanning concepts in the system than a na?ve word searching approach, which can then create more effective information retrieval and information extraction.  References Aronson, A. R. (2001). Effective mapping of biomedical text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: the MetaMap pro-gram. Proc AMIA Symp 17: 21.  
Figure 1: Token Matching Matrix 
A AB ABC ABCD  B BC BCD   C CD    D List of ids whose term contains BCD Term 3 Term 4 Term 5 ? 
List of ids whose term contains AB Term 1 Term 2 
y0 
y1 
y2 
y3 
x0 x1 x2 x3 
103
