Domain Knowledge Engineering  
Based on Encyclopedias and the Web Text*
SUI Zhifang 
Institute of 
Computational 
Linguistics,
Peking University 
szf@pku.edu.cn
CUI Gaoying
Institute of 
Computational 
Linguistics,
Peking University 
cuigy@pku.edu.cn
DING Wansong 
Institute of 
Computational 
Linguistics,
Peking University 
dws@pku.edu.cn
ZHANG Qinlong
Institute of 
Computational 
Linguistics,
Peking University 
zql@pku.edu.cn
                                                          
*  This  research was funded by 973 Natural Basic Research Program of China 2004CB318102 and Natural Sciences 
Foundation of Beijing 4052019 
Abstract
Domain knowledge is the fundamental 
resources required by all intelligent 
information processing systems. With 
the upsurge of new technology and new 
products in various domains, the 
manual construction and updating of 
domain knowledge base can hardly 
meet the real needs of application 
systems, in terms of coverage or 
effectiveness. 
Based on natural language text analysis, 
this paper intends to draw a basic 
framework for the construction of 
domain knowledge base. Using 
encyclopedia resources and text 
information resources on the Web, we 
focus on the method of constructing 
domain knowledge base through 
technologies in natural language text 
analysis and machine learning. 
Moreover, an open network platform 
will be developed, through which 
common users can work with domain 
experts to contribute domain 
knowledge.
The technology can be applied to the 
construction and updating of domain 
knowledge base for intelligent 
information processing, and it can also 
provide help for the knowledge 
updating of encyclopedias. 
Keywords: Domain knowledge base, 
Natural language text analysis, machine 
learning, encyclopedia, open platform 
1 Introduction 
Domain knowledge is the indispensable resource 
for an intelligent information processing system. 
With the XSsurge of technology, more and more 
new technology, new product and new 
techniques come into being. The manual 
construction and updating domain knowledge 
base can hardly meet the real needs of 
application systems, in terms of coverage or 
effectiveness. In order to improve the robust of 
an information system, we need to study a 
computer-aided method to solve the bottleneck 
of domain knowledge acquisition.  
The Institute of Computational Linguistics, 
Peking University, now cooperates with 
Encyclopedia of China Publishing Hall on the 
project of human-machine interactive 
encyclopedia knowledge engineering. We want 
to study how to exploit, use and update 
encyclopedia resource properly. We will use the 
technique of natural language processing, 
machine learning and text mining to acquire 
domain knowledge semi-automatically from 
1
both encyclopedia and the Web text. 
Furthermore, we set up an open platform for 
domain knowledge acquisition, so that common 
network users and domain experts can work 
together to contribute new domain knowledge. 
Based on this technology, we can build domain 
knowledge base on each domain. This 
technology can be used as an important method 
of constructing and updating the domain 
knowledge base for the intelligent information 
retrieval and extraction systems. In the same 
time, it can also provide help for the knowledge 
updating of encyclopedias. 
2 Related works 
The researches on knowledge acquisition can be 
divided into three parts: artificial construction, 
semi-automatic construction and automatic 
construction. 
Artificial methods are usually used in 
constructing the common sense knowledge base, 
such as CYC[1], WordNet[2], EuroWordNet[3], 
HowNet[4], and CCD[5] etc. That?s because 
common sense is steady comparatively and it 
can not be affected by the task, also it can be 
reused by various kinds of system when 
constructed. For instance, since the WordNet 
was established in 1985, it had been widely used 
in IR, Text categorization, QA system etc. 
Similarly, the HowNet is being used in many 
Chinese information procession systems. It?s 
worthy of large-scale devotion for long-time 
using.
On the contrary, domain knowledge is tied 
with some concrete domain. Once the 
application domain changed, we need to re-
construct the domain knowledge base. 
Furthermore, domain knowledge updates 
continually, so that the domain knowledge base 
should be updates frequently. So it?s unrealistic 
to construct the domain knowledge base 
manually.  
In the way of constructing domain knowledge 
base, the semi-automatic method is mainly used. 
[6][7][8][9][10] established the platform of 
human-computer interactively working for the 
construction of domain knowledge base. They 
use various kinds of text processing and 
language analysis tools, which have the 
functions of morphological analysis, partial 
syntactic analysis, partial semantic analysis, 
with the mode of online cooperation, helping 
knowledge engineers or domain experts to find 
the domain concepts and the relations among 
them. The acquired knowledge can be added 
into the domain knowledge base. All these 
methods try to use pattern matching or various 
layers of NLP technology to acquire domain 
knowledge from large-scale free text. Free text 
is easy to get, however, it comes from different 
kinds of domain, including complicated 
language phenomenon hence is hard to 
understand. It?s difficult to extract knowledge 
reliably using current technology of NLP and 
machine learning from such free text. If there 
not exists a pre-defined basic domain knowledge 
architecture, it is difficult to acquire the 
concepts and the relations relative to the domain. 
Also, among the above-mentioned methods, the 
construction of domain knowledge base depends 
on the expert?s point of view and opinions. 
However, it?s very difficult to let experts to 
construct the ?real-time? domain architecture 
objectively and roundly and hence express it 
clearly in the given time. 
3 Domain Knowledge Engineering 
Based on Encyclopedias and the Web 
text
In this paper, we propose a technology of 
domain knowledge engineering based on 
encyclopedias and the web text. (ncyclopedia is 
the embodiment of the systematization and 
centralization of existed domain knowledge. The 
knowledge has been compiled and modified by 
many experts. Compared with free text, there are 
more canonical and NLP technologies can be 
used comparatively easily to extract knowledge 
from it. Since the knowledge in encyclopedia is 
more systematic, we can easily construct the 
basic frame of domain knowledge. So we will 
use NLP technology and machine learning 
method to construct the kernel of domain 
knowledge based on the analysis of the 
encyclopedia. Then based on the kernel of 
domain knowledge base, we can extract domain 
knowledge from other text resources. 
There exist some researches on extracting 
knowledge from the encyclopedia [11] [12] [13] 
[14]. These researches use the encyclopedias as 
the only source to acquire knowledge. However, 
with the high-speed improvement in each 
2
domain, there is severe knowledge lag in 
encyclopedias. So it is inadequate to use 
encyclopedias as the only source for knowledge 
acquisition. We need to learn more domain 
knowledge from other text resource besides 
encyclopedias. 
With the surge of Internet, information in it is 
increasing exponentially. Abundant knowledge 
lies in this huge Web resource. If we can extract 
knowledge from the Web, we could update and 
expand domain knowledge base most efficiently. 
Standing in the computational linguistics? point, 
we focus on retrieving information from the 
content rather than from the structure of the 
Web.
This paper studies the technology of domain 
knowledge engineering. Using encyclopedia 
resource and text information resource on the 
Web, we focus on the method of constructing 
domain knowledge base through technologies in 
natural language text analysis and machine 
learning. Moreover, an open network platform 
will be developed, through which common users 
can work together with domain experts to 
contribute domain knowledge. 
4 Strategy and Research Plan 
4.1 Learning the style of knowledge-
dense text from encyclopedias 
The compilation of encyclopedias always 
follows some specified compilatory model. 
Encyclopedias have the relatively formal diction 
and different compilatory model for different 
kinds of entries. Because of that, the 
paraphrasable text in encyclopedias has clearer 
model to express the relation among concepts in 
most cases. For instance, ?X is a kind of ?Y?, 
?X is composed of A, B, C and D?, ?A, B and C 
make up D?, ?X can be divided into A, B and C?. 
Through recognizing the terms and partial 
parsing for the paraphrasable text in the 
encyclopedia, we could learn the patterns, which 
express the relations among concepts. 
Furthermore, we could learn the styles of 
knowledge dense text based on those patterns. 
Next step, we will follow the styles and combine 
the HTML target set to acquire more knowledge 
dense text fragments from the web. Based on 
such knowledge-dense text, some deeper natural 
language processing technologies could be used 
to extract domain knowledge reliably. 
4.2 Automatic extraction of terms 
Through analyzing the characters and expression 
forms of Chinese terms, we learn term 
knowledge from large-scale domain corpus and 
term bank. Using natural language processing 
method combing rule and statistics, we can 
automatically extract Chinese terms from corpus. 
A term is a kind of phrases, whose 
components are close related. Further more, it 
has strong domain feature. The close relation of 
the components in a term can be captured 
through calculating the static association rate 
between the words that compose a term 
candidate. The linguistic feature can be captured 
through analysis the grammatical structural 
information of the terms. While the domain 
feature of a term can be captured through the 
domain component that has the possibility of 
composing a term. For example, ?movable 
terminal? and ?social economy? are both 
composed by the close related components. 
While, the former is a term in the domain of 
information science and technology, and the 
latter is just a common phrase instead of a term. 
The reason lies in that the former has the domain 
feature comes from one of its components? 
terminal?, while the latter has not the domain 
feature.
We will use the above characteristic and 
representation forms of a term to perform 
automatic term extraction. The system of 
automatic term extraction includes two phases: 
learning stage and application stage. 
In the stage of learning, we use a series of 
machine learning methods to get various kinds 
of integrated knowledge for automatic term 
extraction from a large-scale corpus and a term 
bank. These knowledge includes the inner 
structural knowledge of terms, the statistical 
domain features of term component, the 
statistical mutual information between the 
components of terms, the outer environment 
features of terms and the distinct text-level 
features of term recognition etc... In the stage of 
application, through an efficient model, we use 
all these various types of knowledge into 
automatic term extraction. 
3
4.3 Design and implementation of 
partially analysis technology 
oriented for knowledge-dense text 
The knowledge-dense text fragments (including 
encyclopedia and the Web text segments whose 
style is similar to encyclopedias) is relatively 
simple. Therefore, it?s possible to implement 
deeper analysis on it using the natural language 
processing technology. 
We use comprehensive language knowledge 
and statistical technique together to design 
language analysis method oriented for 
knowledge-dense text. We will use the 
comprehensive language knowledge resource, 
such as The Grammatical Dictionary-base of 
Contemporary Chinese, Chinese Semantic 
Dictionary, Chinese Concept Dictionary (CCD), 
and Termbank of Information Technology, 
which was developed by Institute of 
Computational Linguistics (ICL) of Peking 
University. Moreover, we will design a natural 
language partial parsing and understanding 
technology combining statistic technology base 
on the 80,000,000 words IT corpus. Concretely, 
on the base of the developed software such as 
word segmentation, POS tagging, term 
extraction and identification, skeletal 
dependency analysis of sentence, we will 
combine semantic restrict information with 
syntax rules, so that during syntax analysis we 
can get the semantic restrict information 
between syntax components at the same time. 
We will label semantic roles for predicate-head 
and its central valency components using 
Chinese Semantic Dictionary. So we can get 
shallow case frames of sentences after natural 
language partial parsing and understanding for 
text sentences. And domain knowledge will be 
extracted in the later stage from this analysis 
result.
4.4 Establishing the basic knowledge 
description frame based on the 
encyclopedia
The knowledge of encyclopedia is relatively 
systematic, mature and intensive. On this 
foundation, it is easier to set up a basic domain 
knowledge base which includes the kernel of 
domain knowledge. In the encyclopedia, every 
subject is described by attributes, and different 
subjects are organized hierarchically. 
Figure1: An example of the fragments of 
domain knowledge framework 
For example as showed in Figure1, aiming at 
the subject ?Input equipment? in the domain of 
computer hardware, the encyclopedia describes 
the basic knowledge around the subject from 
many of point of views such as components, 
function, classification etc, which we call 
attributes here. On the other hand, ?Input 
equipment?, ?Output equipment?, ?Terminal 
unit? constitute the subject ?computer I/O 
equipment?; furthermore, ?Input equipment?, 
?Computer storage equipment?, ?Network 
equipment? are also components of the 
?Computer hardware?. This paper will make the 
?classification + Attribute? as the basic 
knowledge description method for constructing 
the basic domain knowledge base. When the 
basic knowledge description method is set up, 
we take every entry in the encyclopedia as a 
subject, through analyzing the correlative 
sentence and recognizing the key terms in the 
paraphrase text and the relations among the 
terms, we can describe the basic knowledge on 
this subject. In the next step, we may couple 
several subjects in the same domain gradually in 
order to construct the basic domain knowledge 
base in this domain. 
4.5 Using bootstrapping method to 
expand domain knowledge base 
The structure of the web text is incompact, and 
the diction is not canonical enough. However, 
the web text is easy to get and contains a great 
amount of new knowledge. So based on the 
4
basic domain knowledge base, we can select the 
knowledge dense text fragments from the web 
resource as the source to acquire more new 
knowledge.
We collect language patterns, which are 
known showing some kind of domain 
knowledge from encyclopedia. Using the 
language patterns as the seed set, we could learn 
more language patterns from the web text using 
boot strapping machine learning method.  Using 
the expanded seed set, we could learn more 
language patterns from the larger text. This 
technique can expand domain knowledge base 
iteratively. 
The system structure is as Figure2. 
Figure2: The system structure for domain 
knowledge acquisition. 
4.6 Developing open platform for 
domain knowledge collecting 
With the rapid development of Internet, people 
could communicate and collaborate without face 
to face. They can share work and collaborate 
through the web. So we constructed an open 
human-computer interactive platform to call on 
domain knowledge experts and spacious 
common network users to collaborate together 
and contribute new domain knowledge. This 
platform could also assist the experts of 
encyclopedia in editing and managing new 
domain knowledge. 
5 Current result 
5.1 Automatic extraction of terms 
We have exploited a term extraction system, 
including term extraction, human-computer 
interactive updating etc. The system is made up 
of basic source layer, learning layer, application 
layer and service layer. 
We select the texts from 16 representative 
Chinese journals in the field of science and 
technology to construct the testing set.  
The Principles for Testing 
First of all, we manually tagged the terms in the 
testing texts. The principles we used in term 
tagging is very strict, that is, we only tag the 
longest terms in the texts, while ignore any of 
the term fragments in a longest term. For 
example, for the word sequence ??? ?? ?
?  (Interface Technology Specification)?, we 
only select ??? ?? ??  (Interface 
Technology Specification)? as a term, while 
ignore ??? ??  (Interface Technology?, 
although it may be also a term in other context.  
Similarly, for word sequence ??? ?? ?
? (Digital Television Signal)?, we only select 
??????? (Digital Television Signal)? as 
a term, while ignore ??? ??  (Digital 
Television)?.
The above testing principles may result in a 
great decrease of the precision and recall of term 
recognition. However, through these principles, 
we can find more problems existed in the term 
recognition algorithm.   
The Testing Results 
Based on the above testing principles, we get the 
precision and recall of term recognition as Table 
1.
RECALL PRECISION THE JOURNALS 
OF THE 
TESTING
TEXTS
% %
Semi-Conductor 
Technology (1999-
01)
65.6 55.1
Telecom Science 
(1998-01) 
52.9 60.4
Computer and the 
Peripheral
Equipments (1999-
01)
52.9 71.2
5
The Research and 
Progress of Solid 
Electronics (2000-
01)
57.6 62.4
Compute-Aided 
Design and (1999-
01)
60.0 54.6
Computer 
Engineering (1999-
04)
65.1 73.4
Computer 
Application (1999-
01)
57.2 68.9
Automatic
Measure and 
Control (1998-02) 
51 59.5
Control Theory 
and Application 
(1999-01) 
49.4 64.1
Software (1998-01) 52.6 54.1
Micro-Electronics 
(1999-01) 
65.6 55.0
Wireless
Communication 
Technology (2000-
01)
57.7 69.6
Remote Sensing 
(1999-01) 
67.1 62.1
System Emulation 
(1999-01) 
64.9 75.4
Motional
Communication 
(1999-01) 
61 51.3
Chinese Cable 
Television (2000-
01)
60.0 57.0
AVERAGE 57.8 62.2
Table 1: Testing Result 
There is no unique standard for term?s 
determination. What is a term? What is a 
common word? What is a term fragment? It is 
difficult to give an objective and unique 
standard that is operable for computers. 
Therefore, what the automatic term recognition 
system find can only be taken as the term 
candidates attached with the confidences. We 
still need the human terminology experts to give 
a final confirmation of the terms.  
Our software includes human-computer 
interactive updating interface besides automatic 
term extraction. The interactive updating 
interface is as Figure3: 
Figure3: The interactive updating interface after 
term extraction 
5.2 Set up the basic database of 
encyclopedia
A lot of key concepts in the encyclopedia are 
well-marked with hyperlinks, titles, bookmarks 
and other Html tags according to different kinds 
of information respectively in the paraphrasable 
text. Using the information supplied by ?China 
encyclopedia? e-press, we put encyclopedia 
subject information, relationship between 
subjects and term hierarchy into database to 
form an encyclopedia database for a primary 
domain knowledge base. 
The core structure of encyclopedia database is 
presented as (main entry, relation term, 
relationship). Main entry is the entry that is 
listed in the encyclopedia. Relation terms are the 
hyperlink, bookmark, subtitle and so on. The 
relationship between main term and these 
elements now is null that need to be added with 
human assistance. 
For example, the paraphrasable text of term 
?frequency divider? is showed in the database as 
Table2.
Main entry Relation term Relationship
Frequency 
divider
Crystal 
oscillator
Unknown
Frequency 
divider
Impulse 
frequency 
divider
Unknown
Frequency 
divider
Trigger Unknown
Frequency Regenerate Unknown
6
divider frequency 
divider
Frequency 
divider
Trigger Unknown
Frequency 
divider
Regenerate
frequency 
divider
Unknown
Table2: the database fragment for the term 
?frequency divider? 
5.3 Attribute relation template 
extraction
attribute relation type template example 
definition xxx?/??/??/?
??/???/???/
??
substitutable name 
mark
xxx?/??/? xxx
country xxx????xxx?
nationality xxx?/??
native place or home 
place
???/?? xxx/xxx
?
experience ??? xxx?? xxx
??
literature ??/??/??/??
xxx/??? xxx/??
? xxx/???? xxx
working experience xxx?? xxx?xxx?
? xxx?? xxx??
? xxx??? xxx?
??? xxx???
xxx???? xxx
achievement and 
influence
??? xxx/? xxx?
?/xxx???
Table3: The examples of the attribute 
relation template of human entry 
We have semi-automatically extracted several 
attribute relation templates for human entries 
from encyclopedia text. The attribute relation 
template of human entry examples are as Table3. 
5.4 Open platform for domain 
knowledge collection
We design the open platform for domain 
knowledge collection using ASP.NET network 
programming technology. We establish 
interactive working relation among domain 
knowledge engineers, domain experts and 
common users through the platform. The 
functions including: 
z Domain knowledge requirement collection: 
on-line collection of new term entries of 
current domain, which are needed by the 
users.
z Domain knowledge supply collection: on-
line collection of more detailed attribute 
information of the new terms. 
z On-line management: system 
administrators manage new term 
information, which were submitted on line 
by the users. 
The interface of the platform is as Figure4. 

Figure4: The interface of the open platform for 
domain knowledge collection 
6 Conclusion
The construction of domain knowledge base is a 
kind of high intelligent knowledge engineering. 
Since there is still have big gap between current 
level of technological development and real 
need, it is unrealistic to build domain knowledge 
base using automatic method or manual method 
only. However, in the human-computer 
interaction process, how to sufficiently absorb 
the knowledge resource which human being has 
already mastered and use it to supervise 
7
automatic acquisition of new knowledge? How 
to call together knowledge engineers, domain 
experts and common network users and realize 
multi-member collaboration during the updating 
and extending process of domain knowledge 
base? These are the key problems to be settled in 
the knowledge engineering domain. This paper 
tries to do some exploration on these aspects. 
References 
[1] http://www.opencyc.org/
[2] http://www.cogsci.princeton.edu/~wn
[3] http://www.illc.uva.nl/EuroWordNet/
[4] http://www.keenage.com
[5] Yu Jiangshen, Liu Yang, Yu Shiwen, The 
specification of the Chinese Concept Dictionary, 
Journal of Chinese Language and Computing, 
Vol.13, 2003.  
[6]A.Maedche, S.Staab, Semi-Automatic 
Engineering of Ontologies from text, Proceedings 
of International Conference on Software 
Engineering and Knowledge Engineering (SEKE' 
2000), Chicago, IL, USA, 2000 
[7] Szpakowicz,S., Semi-automatic acquisition of 
conceptual structure from technical texts, 
International journal of Man-machine Studies, 
33(4),385-397,1990 
[8] Biebow, B., Szulman, S., TERMINAE: a 
linguistic-based tool for the building of domain 
ontology. In Dieter fensel, Rudi Studer (eds.), 
Knowledge Acquisition, Modeling and 
Management, pp.49-66, 1999 
[9] Lapalut, S., How to handle multiple expertise 
from several experts: a general text clustering 
approach. In F. Maurer (Ed.), Proc. 2nd Knowledge 
Engineering Forum (KEF?96), Karlsruhe, Jan., 
1996. 
[10] Mikheev, A., Finch, S., A workbench for 
acquisition of ontological knowledge from natural 
text. In proc. Of the 7th conference of the 
European Chapter for Computational Linguistics 
(EACL?95), Dublin, Ireland, pp. 194-201, 1995 
[11] Richard Hull, Fernando Gomez, Automatic 
acquisition of biographic knowledge from 
encyclopedic texts, ExpertSystems with 
Applications, 16(1999), pp.261-270, 1999 
[12] Fernando Gomez, Richard Hull, Carlos Segami, 
1994, Acquiring Knowledge from Encyclopedic 
Texts, Proceedings of the 4th ACL Conference on 
Applied Natural Language Processing, Stuttgart, 
Germany, 1994 
[13] Song Rou, Xu Yong, An Experiment on 
Knowledge Extraction from an Encyclopedia 
Based on Lexicon Semantics, pp.101-112, 2002 
[14] Gu Fang, Cao Cungen, Biological Knowledge 
Acquisition from the Electronic Encyclopedia of 
China, Proceedings of ICYCS?2001, pp.1199-
1203, 2001 
8
