Category competition drives contrast maintenance within an exemplar-based
production/perception loop.
Andrew WEDEL
Department of Linguistics
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ, 85721
wedel@u.arizona.edu
Abstract
The evolution of competing lexical categories
is simulated within a model in which lexical
outputs are organized as sequences of
articulatory gestures. When exemplar-based
categories compete for assignment and storage
of incoming exemplars in a production/storage
loop,  contrast  between categories
spontaneously emerges and remains stable,
driven by the differences in storage
consistency between more contrastive and less
contrastive variants. Further, when lexical
outputs are biased toward use of previously
produced gestures, the set of exemplars in the
lexicon evolve to be derived from a small set
of contrastive units used in combination,
despite the absence of direct selection for
contrast at the sub-lexical level.
1 Introduction
The probability of accurate information
transmission is dependent on the perceptibility of
difference between differently signifying forms,
that is, contrast. The possible mechanisms by
which contrast arises and is preserved in lexical
forms, on the other hand, have been less clear.
Many grammatical theories of the last century
assume that the language faculty is constituted to
directly optimize contrast in some way, e.g.,
(Martinet 1955), (Flemming 1995), and much
computational work also operates within the
assumption that contrast between units of form is
maintained through some kind of direct monitoring
and manipulation of contrast, e.g., (Lindblom
1986), (de Boer 2000). In all of these approaches,
contrast is a property of forms. Here, I will present
evidence within an exemplar model of lexical
production and perception (Goldinger 2000),
(Pierrehumbert 2001) that the fact of a distinction
between categories themselves, rather than the
forms that instantiate them, can be indirectly
responsible for driving contrast preservation
through the statistics of assignment of forms to
categories.
Within exemplar models of linguistic category
structure, the act of categorizing a percept does not
strip that percept of all non-contrastive detail, e.g.,
(Johnson 1997), (Pierrehumbert 2001). When we
take into account evidence that production of an
output of a lexical category may be based on
details of previously perceived instances of that
category (Goldinger 2000), we see that a
production-perception feedback loop is closed, in
which details in what is perceived can be
subsequently reflected in the details of what is
produced (Pierrehumbert 2001), (Oudeyer 2002).
Whenever a system exhibits variation among
elements, selection of variants over some criterion,
and subsequent reproduction of selected elements,
the system will evolve through natural selection on
the basis of that criterion. Hence, any factors
within the production-perception loop that bias the
distribution of forms that are produced, the
distribution of forms that are perceived, or the way
that percepts are categorized, will result in
evolution of category contents. Within the model
presented here, lexical categories are populated by
exemplars that have been previously categorized as
correspondents of that category, and the output of a
given category follows a distribution defined in
part by the range of exemplars of that category,
e.g., (Goldinger 2000), (Pierrehumbert 2001,
2002). Outputs are recognized as correspondents of
a given category by comparison to exemplars
already stored within that category (Pierrehumbert
2001); see also (Luce and Pisoni, 1998). Because
outputs of a category can be re-stored as new
exemplars within that category within a
community of speakers, any asymmetries in either
the form of outputs, or the likelihood of
recognition and storage of those outputs, will result
in a shift in the contents of that category over time
(Pierrehumbert 2001), (Oudeyer 2002), and
(Wedel 2004).
Here, I show simulation results suggesting that
contrast between distinct form-meaning pairings
can arise indirectly from asymmetries in the
                                                                  Barcelona, July 2004
                                              Association for Computations Linguistics
                       ACL Special Interest Group on Computational Phonology (SIGPHON)
                                                    Proceedings of the Workshop of the
consistency of categorization of more contrastive,
versus less contrastive outputs
1
. Because more
contrastive outputs make up a relatively greater
proportion of the regularly stored exemplars in a
given category than less contrastive outputs, they
should have a proportionally greater influence on
the evolution of that category. This asymmetry in
the statistics of recognition and storage results in
biased evolution of categories towards greater
contrast.
1.1 Contrast  preservat ion  through
categorization in morphology.
Within linguistics, the notion that contrast
maintenance is an indirect effect of contrast?s
effect on a hearer/acquirer?s categorization
behavior has been suggested by Pierrehumbert
(2002), and by Gregory Guy (1996) on the basis of
corpus data on preservation of morphological
contrasts. Guy notes that data from production
corpora will always underestimate the true extent
of speakers? failure to produce a given meaningful
contrast. For example, if a transcriber perceives the
utterance ?I cook the chicken?, in the absence of
additional information s/he is likely to simply
transcribe it as such, even if the speaker actually
intended the sentence to be in past tense, but elided
the [-t] past tense marker. Guy notes that language
acquirers are no different from transcribers, such
that the perception data from which a language
learner develops a grammar will be biased towards
the more contrastive utterances in the production
data set. This steady selection of more contrastive
forms in the categorized utterance set upon which
acquisition is based should result in a tendency for
grammatical processes to emerge that appear to
function to preserve contrast, when they in fact
only act to reproduce the patterns in the data set
that the acquirer perceives.
1.2 Contrast maintenance as a form of niche
specialization.
This mechanism for category separation through
competition for category members is formally
parallel to a proposed mechanism of sympatric
speciation first proposed by Darwin (1859, chap.
4) and further developed in recent theoretical
research on the effects of resource competition on
the distribution of phenotypes in a population
(Kondrashov and Kondrashov 1999), (Dieckmann
and Doebeli 1999 and references therein). In this
model of sympatric speciation (speciation in the
absence of geographical separation), phenotypic
                                                       
1
 The simulations presented here assume that the
result of lexical access is a unique output-category
match, e.g., (Luce and Pisoni 1998).
divisions within a population and subsequent
speciation can be driven by inequalities in the
degree of competition experienced by individuals
lying at different points on a distribution of
phenotypes relating to resource exploitation.
Individuals exhibiting intermediate phenotypes
compete against a larger fraction of the population,
while more extreme phenotypes have fewer
competitors, and therefore greater individual
access to resources. The higher fitness of
individuals lying at the extremes of a phenotypic
distribution can eventually produce a split in the
population along this phenotypic dimension,
setting the stage for subsequent speciation.
The same statistical influence of resource
competition on fitness has also been proposed to
drive ?niche specialization? among separate species
occupying overlapping niches (Schoener 1974),
(Dieckmann and Doebeli 1999). For example, if
two species that utilize an overlapping set of
resources jointly colonize a new environment, they
tend to evolve to specialize on different portions of
the resource distribution. This is proposed to occur
because phenotypic variants of each species that
happen to focus on an extreme of the resource
distribution experience less competition than those
who prefer the center of the distribution.
Within the exemplar based model proposed here
for contrast maintenance, lexical categories are
formally parallel to competing species undergoing
selection for niche specialization. A category will
be less often matched with a percept that is also
close to another category than a percept that is
close to no other category. Further, because the
matching behavior of a category is determined by
its contents, a category will evolve to be more
specific for those percepts most often identified as
members of that category. In this way, categories
will tend to evolve to split the available percept
space evenly, minimizing regions of overlap (see
(Pierrehumbert 2002) for additional discussion of
overlap minimization in evolving exemplar-based
categories).
2 Modeling contrast maintenance through
category competition.
To provide a simple illustration of the
phenomenon of category boundary maintenance
through patterns of category assignment, I show
below results of a simple simulation of two
interacting categories. Each category contains ten
numerical ?exemplars? that can vary in value
within a range from zero to ten. In each round,
each category produces all of its exemplars one by
one. Noise is introduced in production by adding to
each output a random value between +/-0.4;
increasing the amount of noise in outputs increases
the distribution of exemplars within a category,
and increases the rate of change in category
contents over simulation cycles.
Produced exemplars are subsequently re-stored
in one of the two categories, based on how close
the produced exemplar is to the average of each
category. For exemplars lying between the
averages of the two categories, the likelihood of
assignment to a given category is proportional to
the relative distance to that category?s average. For
example, if the average exemplar values in the two
categories are 5 and 7 respectively, a produced
exemplar with the value 3 will be re-stored in the
first category, while an exemplar with the value 6
has an equal chance of being stored in either
category. In this way, the two categories can be
said to compete for produced exemplars on the
basis of their own contents. Re-storage is
accompanied by random deletion of a previously
stored exemplar, such that the number of
exemplars in each category remains constant.
A simulation begins with each category pre-
seeded with 10 exemplars, all with the value 5.
Figure 1A below shows the evolution of the value
averages of the two categories over 2000 rounds of
production and storage. Note that the averages
diverge immediately from their originally shared
value of 5, and over the run of the simulation,
occasionally approach one another, but never
cross.
Figure 1A
As a control, Figure 1B shows the results of a
similar simulation in which categories do not
compete for exemplars, but where exemplars are
always re-stored in their category of origin. In this
case, the category averages approach and cross one
another multiple times, as we expect, given that
their pathways through the simulation are
independent.
Figure 1B.
This difference is robust: when a simulation like
that shown in Figure 1A was run 100,000 rounds,
there were no crossovers of category averages,
while 100,000 rounds of a simulation like that
shown in Figure 1B produced 491 crossovers. The
failure of the averages to cross in simulations in
which categories compete for exemplars is due to
the fact that exemplars located between the
category averages are less often stored in any given
category than exemplars lying to one side. Because
the average value of categories depend on what has
been previously stored, categories tend to shift
their averages away from each other over time, in
effect minimizing competition between them.
These simulations can be instructively compared
to Janet Pierrehumbert?s simulations of merger
between exemplar-based phonetic categories under
a leniting bias in a similar production/storage loop
(2001, 2002). In Pierrehumbert?s simulations, the
number of outputs of a category in a given round is
proportional to the number of exemplars stored
there, such that a category that is more successful
in competing for outputs grows more highly
populated at the expense of another that is less
successful, with the result that it may eventually
subsume the less successful category, which then
ceases to exist. If we assume that the notion of
contrast only has functional substance in the
context of an actual form-meaning pairing, then
this is reasonable, because sub-morphemic
categories do not have independent meaning of
their own, but only contribute to marking a
meaning difference in larger sound sequences. In
contrast, in the simulations detailed above, the two
categories always produce the same number of
outputs in every round, regardless of their
historical competitive success. This behavior
seems reasonable for lexical categories, which can
be anchored in physical and social experience
outside the linguistic system. As such, distinctions
in meanings may remain intact, even if
Evolution under Inter-category 
Competition
0
5
10
1 401 801 1201 1601 2001
Rounds
C
a
t
e
g
o
r
y
 
A
v
e
r
a
g
e
 
 
Evolution with No Inter-category 
Competition
0
5
10
1 401 801 1201 1601 2001
Rounds
C
a
t
e
g
o
r
y
 
A
v
e
r
a
g
e
corresponding forms merge. For example, if the
lexical form for the category ?sand? were to merge
with that for ?hand?, we presumably would not
suddenly find ourselves significantly less
interested in talking about ?sand? than we were
before. The same cannot be said for the merger of
sub-morphemic categories, as they have no
independent correspondent in meaning.
3 The interaction of contrast maintenance
and motor consolidation.
Given the hypothesis that contrast maintenance
is driven through category competition between
form-meaning pairings, we then need an account
for the observation that morphemes themselves do
not appear to be the minimal unit of contrast in
phonological systems. Rather, we find that
phonological systems can be described in terms of
sub-morphemic contrastive features and featural
groupings. In the simulations presented in this
section, I explore the possibility that contrastive,
sub-morphemic units can arise indirectly through
category competition for the larger lexical forms of
which they are a part.
The simulation architecture employed here
consists of a single speaker/hearer pair, each
equipped with small lexicons of categories
populated with stored exemplars. In a given round,
one of the pair utters the contents of its lexicon to
the other, which attempts to categorize and store
each utterance by comparing it to the exemplars
stored in its lexicon. The sophistication of the
simulation architecture is purposely kept very low
to enable us to better assess the hypothesis that the
simulation results are due to patterns of
information flow in the system, rather than
particular details of implementation.
The simulation architecture used here is based
on the proposal that the articulatory gesture is a
basic unit of phonological organization (Browman
and Goldstein 1990), (see also Oudeyer 2002).
Further, these simulations model the finding that
practiced gestural targets serve as attractors in
motor planning and execution, e.g., (Saltzman and
Munhall 1989), (Shadmehr and Bashers-Krug
1997), and (Bybee 2001). Stated another way,
because motor behavior is reinforced by repetition,
the more highly practiced a given movement
pattern, the more likely a future movement will
follow that pattern. The neural mechanism for the
consolidation of motor patterns is not under study
in the simulations below, and so for computational
simplicity it is simply stipulated. Simulations that
model neural mechanisms for the development and
action of attractors in developing systems can be
found in e.g., (Guenther and Gjaja 1996) and
(Oudeyer 2002).
At the start of a simulation, each speaker/hearer
is provided with a starting lexicon of comprising a
number of categories, each containing 9 exemplars.
Exemplars are structured as an ordered sequence of
gestural targets. Two articulators are provided in
the simulation, labeled X and Y, where X can vary
in a range from 0.00 ? 0.30, and Y from 0.00 ?
0.10. Each exemplar consists of four ordered pairs
(?segments?) of articulator targets, as for example:
[X: 0.03] [Y: 0.10]; [X: 0.21] [Y: 0.03];
[X: 0.12] [Y: 0.06]; [X: 0.00] [Y: 0.08].
A tight linkage between acoustic/perceptual and
articulatory maps is assumed (e.g., (Oudeyer 2002)
and references therein), and because structure
potentially emerging from the interactions between
perceptual and articulatory mappings is not at issue
here, recorded exemplars and outputs of
production are both encoded in the same units for
computational simplicity.
Unless otherwise specified, at the beginning of
each simulation the lexicons of each speaker/hearer
are seeded with fully randomized exemplars. In a
given round, one of the pair produces three
randomly chosen exemplars from each of its
lexical categories for the other, which categorizes
and stores the produced outputs by comparison to
the stored contents of its own lexical categories.
Production proceeds by selecting a single
random exemplar from a category, and then
assembling a corresponding output. To simulate
the warping of motor targets toward more highly
practiced outputs, each speaker/hearer retains a
record of what articulatory targets have been
produced over the previous six rounds. An output
target value for each target value recorded in the
chosen exemplar is established by comparing the
reference exemplar target value to every target
value recently produced by that articulator.
Recently produced target values are activated in
Gaussian proportion to their proximity to the
reference exemplar target value
2
.The probability
that a particular target value will be chosen is
                                                       
2
 The formula used to calculate the activation of a
stored target value through its frequency of previous use
and proximity to the corresponding exemplar value is:
A = n(2.141
(-25(a-b))
2
)
where n is the number of times that the target value
under consideration has been produced in the previous
six rounds, a is the target value, and b is the reference
target value in the exemplar under current production.
directly proportional to its activation with respect
to the corresponding position in the exemplar
under production.
For example, if the particular target value
recorded in the exemplar chosen as the basis for
production has been produced often by the current
speaker, it is likely to be faithfully reproduced in
the output. On the other hand, if it has rarely been
produced, but a nearby target value has been
produced more often, the actual output target will
likely match the more commonly produced, nearby
target. The result is a steady tendency to
consolidate motor patterns over time.
Finally, each production target is produced with
Gaussian noise: in the simulations shown here, the
variance in the noise distribution was such that
each intended target had a 10% chance of being
modified +/-.01 on the target scale. Up to a point,
increases in the breadth and amplitude of the noise
distribution increase the rate at which the system
explores new states; beyond this point, the system
begins to lose stability as production events
become increasingly random.
Category assignment on the part of the hearer
proceeds by comparing the speaker output to all
exemplars stored in the hearer?s lexicon. Whether a
hearer exemplar will be counted as matching the
speaker?s output is assessed by comparing each
output target value to the corresponding target
value in the stored exemplar, where the probability
of target matching follows a normal distribution
with a match probability of 1 at equal target values
and a standard deviation of 0.1 on the scale of
possible target values.
After all matches have been determined within
the hearer?s lexicon, the output is assigned to and
stored in a single lexical category, where the
probability of category assignment is proportional
to the square of the number of matching exemplars
in each category
3
. For example, if an output is
successfully matched to 2 exemplars in lexical
category A, and 1 exemplar in B, it is four times as
likely to be assigned to A as B. This matching and
assignment procedure is intended to approximate
probabilistic activation and competition between
lexical entries in lexical access (Luce and Pisoni,
1998). If an output lies an equivalent distance
between two categories (i.e., it is matched to equal
numbers of exemplars in the two categories), it has
                                                       
3
 Varying the scaling between relative number of
matches and probability of category assignment within a
reasonable range does not change the behavior of the
simulation. As the exponent is raised, variation in
category assignment decreases, resulting in slower
evolution of the system. As the exponent is lowered on
the other hand, category assignment becomes less
dependent on the relative goodness of match.
an equal chance of assignment to each category.
Only if a speaker output is matched to no exemplar
in the hearer?s lexicon will it fail to be assigned to
any category. When an output is assigned to a
category and stored there as a new exemplar, a
randomly chosen exemplar from a previous round
is discarded.
3.1 Evolution of lexical categories in the
absence of inter-category competition.
The tendency to warp output target values
toward those values that have been produced
before results in a steady reversion to mean target
values over the course of the simulation,
counteracting the dispersive effects of noise in
production (Wedel 2004)
4
. This can be seen in a
simulation in which category competition in lexical
access is disabled by providing the speaker/hearers
with an additional channel of communication, such
that each speaker output is stored directly in the
corresponding hearer category without regard to
similarity any other category?s contents. Figure 2A
shows the distribution of values for the X target
over four lexical categories from one of the
speaker/hearers at the beginning of such a
simulation, and 2B the distribution of X target
values over these lexical categories after 1000
rounds.
While the target values for both articulators are
distributed across their possible ranges at the
beginning of the simulation, steady feedback
pressure for output target values to become more
alike results in the evolution of a system with only
one possible target value for each articulator, and
as a result, all lexical categories evolve to contain
the same set of exemplars. Figure 2C shows the
consensus target values for each of the four lexical
categories at round 1000. At 1000 rounds, Y values
have settled around a single value as well (not
shown).
                                                       
4
 Reversion to the mean in production can also be
created by selecting multiple exemplars from a category
and averaging them in production (e.g., Pierrehumbert
(2001)). The category-sharpening effect of motor
consolidation renders this unnecessary in this model.
Figure 2A. X values at Round 0
Figure 2B. X values at Round 1000
Figure 2C. Consensus target values:
Round 1000.
Category X/Y X/Y X/Y X/Y
A .14/.02 .14/.02 .14/.02 .14/.02
B .15/.02 .14/.02 .14/.02 .14/.02
C .14/.02 .14/.02 .14/.03 .13/.02
D .14/.03 .14/.02 .14/.02 .14/.02
3.2 Inter-category competition supports
maintenance of contrast.
When category competition is reintroduced,
however, something quite different happens:
although target values still show significant
consolidation over the course of the simulation,
sufficient distinctions remain to preserve contrast
between lexical categories. Figure 3A shows the
range of X target values, and 3B the lexicon at
round 1000 of a simulation that incorporates
category competition..
Figure 3A. X values at Round 1000.
Figure 3B. Consensus target values: Round
1000.
Category X/Y X/Y X/Y X/Y
A .20/.06 .20/.05 .20/.05 .03/.06
B .03/.06 .20/.06 .20/.06 .20/.06
C .03/.05 .03/.06 .20/.06 .21/.06
D .20/.06 .20/.06 .20/.06 .20/.06
In Figure 3B, equivalent ?segments? are shaded
equivalently. Each lexical category is distinct from
every other. In runs with larger numbers of lexical
categories, two Y target values often develop as
well, assorting with two or more X target values to
provide sufficient numbers of contrastive units (not
shown).
Note that this effect is not dependent on less
contrastive variants being less often stored. In the
numerical simulations described above in section
2, every output was stored in a category. In the
simulations described in this section, every variant
form was stored in some category, provided it
could be matched to at least one exemplar. A
variant lying between two categories has then in
fact a greater chance of being matched and stored
than a variant that lies an equivalent distance away
from a single category, even though the latter is
functionally more contrastive. This generous
assignment and storage procedure was chosen to
make it less likely that the development and
maintenance of contrast within the simulations
could be due to differential rates of storage, as
opposed to differential consistency of storage.
Previous work (Wedel 2004) showed that in
similar simulations in which outputs matching
multiple categories were at a disadvantage in
storage efficiency relative to those matching just
one category, development and maintenance of
contrast was yet more robust than in the
simulations shown here. Phenomena such as the
neighborhood density effect in lexical access
indicate that outputs activating multiple lexical
categories may in fact be at a disadvantage in
0
10
20
30
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3
X Target Values
T
o
k
e
n
s
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3
X Target Values
T
o
k
e
n
s
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3
X Target Values
T
o
k
e
n
s
recognition (reviewed in (Luce and Pisoni 1998)).
However, the simulation results presented here
suggest that in addition to the effect of any
disadvantage in storage of poorly contrastive
forms, lower storage consistency of less
contrastive forms alone can contribute to contrast
maintenance between lexical categories.
3.3 Local lexical contrasts can support global
sub-morphemic contrasts.
Because similar target values are bound together
in a single unit of motor production, a given target
value that is required to maintain contrast between
two categories can support the persistence of that
target value elsewhere, even if it would otherwise
tend to merge with another nearby target value. To
illustrate this phenomenon, Figures 4A and B
compare the results of simulations beginning from
two distinct, non-random starting points. Each
simulation uses eight lexical categories, pre-seeded
with exemplars consisting of three X target values
([0.30], [0.15], and [0.05]), and one Y value [0.00].
The X [0.05] value (found only in categories A, B,
and C) is in the minority relative to the [0.15]
target value, and therefore will be under pressure
from motor consolidation to merge with it.
In the starting lexicon shown in Figure 4A, the
minority X value [0.05] can increase and merge
with the more frequent X value [0.15] without any
loss of category contrast, because categories A, B
and C differ from every other category by at least
two positions. (The identical Y values across the
lexicons in Figures 4A and B are irrelevant to
contrast, and so are omitted for clarity).
Figure 4A. Starting target values: Round 0.
Category X X X X
A .30 .15 .30 .05
B .15 .15 .30 .05
C .30 .30 .30 .05
D .15 .30 .15 .30
E .15 .30 .30 .15
F .15 .30 .30 .30
G .30 .30 .15 .15
H .30 .30 .30 .30
For example, if the X target value [0.05] in
category A were to increase to [0.15], category A
would still remain distinct from every other
category. When simulations are run with this
starting lexicon, the minority [0.05] values do in
fact tend to quickly merge with the more frequent
[0.15] value. In ten runs of the simulation with this
starting lexicon, merger always took place within
400 rounds.
Figure 4B shows a starting lexicon that is nearly
identical, except that if the [0.05] target values of
categories A and B increase to [0.15], these
categories will lose contrast with categories D and
E, respectively. The [0.05] target value of category
C can still merge with [0.15] with no loss of
category contrast.
Figure 4B. Starting target values: Round 0.
Category X X X X
A .15 .15 .30 .05
B .30 .15 .30 .05
C .30 .30 .30 .05
D .15 .15 .30 .15
E .30 .15 .30 .15
F .30 .30 .30 .30
G .30 .30 .15 .15
H .15 .30 .30 .30
In this case, in ten simulations run out to 1000
rounds, the [0.05] target values of categories A and
B did not ever merge with the [0.15] target value,
as expected. Interestingly, in eight of these runs,
the [0.05] target value of category C also failed to
merge, even though this value was not required for
contrast in category C. Note that the starting
lexicons shown in Figures 4A and B have the same
relative numbers of [0.30], [0.15] and [0.05] X
target values; it is only their distribution in the
lexicon, and therefore their functional load that is
different. The difference in evolutionary pathways
of these lexicons illustrates that within this
simulation architecture, category competition
resting on a given target value in one part of the
lexicon can stabilize that target value throughout
the lexicon, even in regions of the lexicon where
its functional load is low.
As suggested by the simulation architecture, this
effect is dependent on the details of frequency:
ceteris paribus, the ratio of contrast-bearing to
non-contrast bearing instances of a target value
influences the probability of merger (see (Labov
1994:328ff) for similar arguments on mergers in
vowel systems). In the lexicon in 4B for example,
two of the three instances of the target value [0.05]
functioned to maintain lexical contrast. If the
lexicon is altered such that only one of the three
instances of that target value bears responsibility
for contrast in a lexical category, then in a
significant number of runs, the other two instances
of the [0.05] value merge with [0.15], and in the
process drag the contrast-bearing [0.05] value with
them, producing a pair of ?homophonic? categories
in the lexicon with identical contents (not shown).
Within this simulation architecture, the attractor
formed by identical target values in output
assembly is stronger than the statistical force
pressuring different category contents to diverge in
storage, such that once homophonic categories
form, they never split and regain contrast. This
appears to be largely true for actual lexical
categories as well (but see e.g., (Yaeger-Dror
1996) and (Jurafsky et al 1996) for evidence that
homophonous categories may be able to split under
some circumstances).
4 Discussion
The simulation results described here illustrate
that competition between categories for form
variants in a production/storage loop indirectly
supports maintenance of contrast across form-
category pairs. As suggested by (Guy 1996) and
(Pierrehumbert 2002) in linguistics, and by
theoretical work in niche specialization in
evolutionary biology (Schoener 1974),
(Deickmann and Doebeli 1997), this phenomenon
rests on unequal partitioning of variants across
self-reproducing categories: those variants that are
split among multiple categories contribute less to
the evolving form of any given category than those
variants that are more consistently stored, with the
result that the lexicon evolves to reflect the more
contrastive variants.
Is this a potential mechanism contributing to
contrast maintenance at the sub-morphemic level?
In support of this possibility, speakers have been
shown to produce more contrastive phonetic detail
when producing words in high-density lexical
neighborhoods, e.g., (Goldinger and Summers
1989), (Wright 1996), and (Brown 2002), which
could be a reflection of the distribution of phonetic
details stored in the lexical categories in high
density neighborhoods.
The structure of exemplars in the simulations in
section 3 reflect the fact that lexical forms consist
of multiple, temporally ordered articulatory
gestures. This structure allows, but does not
dictate, the development of a combinatorial system
in which simulated gestures or gestural groupings
are reused in distinct lexical forms. However,
evidence strongly suggests that practice of
coordinated muscular gestures results in
consolidation into larger-scale motor programs,
which then serve as attractors in motor planning
and execution (Shadmehr and Bashers-Krug 1997
and references therein). To simulate this effect, in
output assembly target values and larger groupings
of target values were warped towards those values
that had been frequently produced in the speaker?s
recent history. The resulting tendency to minimize
target value differences conflicts with the statistical
reward enjoyed by more contrastive forms,
resulting in a optimization in which lexical entries
evolve to contain contrastive exemplars, which are
themselves composed of a small number of
contrastive units. Rather than being stipulated
anywhere in the system, the contrastiveness of
these sub-lexical units evolves indirectly through
competition between the actual form-category
pairs that contain them. Interestingly, as we saw in
the simulations described in conjunction with
Figures 4A and B, the tight association of target
values as ?motor units? allows a functionally
unnecessary contrast to persist in a given lexical
category, if that contrast is functionally required in
another.
The potential influence of contrast on sound
change suggested by these results is supported by
at least two well-described phonological patterns.
First, certain exceptions to otherwise regular sound
change, sometimes referred to as 'anti-homophony
effects', occur precisely where sound change would
give rise to loss of a paradigmatic contrast. In this
case, data from unrelated languages supports a
cross-linguistic tendency for contrastive exemplars
to be preferred exactly where lexical categories are
in greatest competition (Blevins to appear), and
(Gessner & Hansson 2004). A second finding is
that rare phonological contrasts (e.g., a three-way
contrast in vowel or consonant length, or a three-
way contrast in nasalization) are not randomly
distributed in the lexicon. Rather in languages
making use of rare contrasts, these contrasts are
frequently the exponents of contrastive
morphological features, and hence are only
contrastive in contexts of lexical competition
(Blevins 2004, chapter 8). The simulations
presented here can account for both these findings
in terms of contrast-driven statistical selection of
exemplars at category extremes. In the case of
antigemination, this selection inhibits the
progression of a sound change in limited contexts
where morphemes compete. In the case of rare
contrasts, selection inhibits expected mergers in
limited contexts where that contrast is the sole
exponent of contrast.
Finally, the results of these simulations
contribute to an ongoing discussion of the
divergent relationship between lexical frequency
and morphological, versus phonological
?regularity? (see e.g., Pierrehumbert 2002). The
well-known tendency to morphological irregularity
in high-frequency forms can be explained as an
effect of frequency on lexical access: the higher
resting activation level of frequent forms should
allow them to be identified holistically, rather than
through identification of their individually
contrastive morphemes. Similarly then, we might
expect that highly frequent words should be able to
evolve to be phonologically exceptional, for
example by resisting a sound change sweeping
through the rest of the lexicon, or developing an
otherwise unattested phone. However, in general
we find just the opposite: highly frequent forms do
conform to sound changes initiated elsewhere, tend
to be the most lenited, and tend as well to comprise
more common sounds (see Bybee (2002) and
Pierrehumbert (2002) for discussion). This can be
explained within a model in which phonological,
but not morphological categories tend to be
coextensive with motor units, if we assume a
tendency toward effort minimization in production.
Ceteris paribus, highly practiced motor scores are
deployed more rapidly and accurately than less
practiced motor scores (Shadmehr and Bashers-
Krug 1997 and references therein), and so we can
consider lexical evolution toward use of more
common motor scores a form of lenition, defined
with respect to the particular language use of
speakers in a speech community. If a sound change
sweeps through most of a lexicon altering a motor
score into another, highly frequent forms might
also be expected to shift away from the original,
now infrequent motor score to the new highly
frequent one, not because they must, but because
their high frequency encourages lenition (reviewed
in Bybee 2001). Preliminary simulation results
exploring the interaction of exemplar frequency
and warping toward frequent target values support
this hypothesis.
5 Acknowledgements
Thanks to Adam Albright, Juliette Blevins,
Brian Ort, Jaye Padgett and two anonymous
reviewers for invaluable comments. All errors
remain my own.
References
J. Blevins. (to appear) Understanding
antigemination. In Papers from the International
Symposium on Linguistic Diversity. Zygmunt
Frajzyngier ed., John Benjamins, Amsterdam.
J. Blevins. 2004. Evolutionary Phonology: The
emergence of sound patterns. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
C. Browman and L. Goldstein. 1990. Gestural
specification using dynamically-defined
articulatory structures. Journal of Phonetics
18:299-320.
R. A. Brown. 2002. Effects of Lexical
Confusability on the Production of
Coarticulation. UCLA Working Papers in
Linguistics, no. 101.
J. Bybee. 2001. Phonology and language use.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
J. Bybee. 2002. Word frequency and context of use
in the lexical diffusion of phonetically
conditioned sound change. Language Variation
and Change 14:261-290.
C. Darwin. 1859. On the origin of species by
means of natural selection. J. Jurray, London.
B. de Boer. 2001. The origins of vowel systems.
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
U. Dieckmann. and M. Doebeli. 1999. Theoretical
considerations of sympatric divergence.
American Naturalist 107:256-274.
E. Flemming. 1995. Auditory Representations in
Phonology. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of
California, Los Angeles.
S. Gessner and G. Hansson. 2004. Anti-
homophony effects in Dakelh (Carrier)Valence
Morphology. To appear in Proceedings of
Berkeley Linguistics Society 30.
S. D. Goldinger. 2000. The role of perceptual
episodes in lexical processing. In Proceedings of
SWAP (Spoken Word Access Processes), A.
Cutler, J. M McQueen, and R. Zondervan, ed.,
pp.  155-8.  Max-Planck-Insti tute for
Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen.
S. D.Goldinger and W. V. Summers. 1989. Lexical
neighborhoods in speech production: a first
report. Research on Speech Perception Progress
Report, No. 15:331-342. Bloomington.
F. H. Guenther and M. N. Gjaja. 1996. The
perceptual magnet effect as an emergent property
of neural map formation. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 100:1111-1121.
G. R. Guy. 1996. Form and function in linguistic
variation. In Variation,  Change and
Phonological Theory. G. Guy, C. Feagin, J.
Baugh, D. Schiffrin, and M. B. Kac., ed., pp.
125-43. Benjamins, Amsterdam.
K. Johnson. 1997. Speech perception without
speaker normalization. In K. Johnson. and J. W.
Mullennix, ed., Talker Variability in Speech
Processing. Academic Press, San Diego.
A. S. Kondrashov and F. A. Kondrashov, 1999.
Interactions among quantitative traits in the
course of sympatric speciation. Nature 400:351-
354.
W. Labov. 1994. Principles of linguistic change,
Vol. 1, Internal factors. MA: Blackwell, Oxford
and Cambridge.
B. Lindblom. 1986. Phonetic Universals in vowel
systems. In Experimental Phonology. J. J. Ohala
and J. J. Jaeger, ed., pp. 13-44. Academic Press,
Orlando.
P. A. Luce and D. B. Pisoni. 1998. Recognizing
Spoken Words: the neighborhood activation
model. Ear and Hearing 19:1-36.
A. Martinet. 1955. Economie des changements
phon?tiques. Francke, Berne.
P-Y. Oudeyer. 2002. A Unified Model for the
Origins of Phonemically Coded Syllable
Systems. In Proceedings of the 24th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. B.
Bel and I. Marlien, ed., Laurence Erlbaum
Associates.
J. Pierrehumbert. 2001. Exemplar dynamics: Word
frequency, lenition, and contrast. In Frequency
effects and the emergence of linguistic structure.
Bybee, J and P. Hopper, ed. pp. 137-157. John
Benjamins, Amsterdam.
J. Pierrehumbert. 2002. Word-specific phonetics.
In Laboratory Phonology 7. C. Gussenhoven and
N. Warner, ed. Mouton, Berlin; New York.
E. Saltzman. and K. G. Munhall. 1989. A
dynamical approach to gestural patterning in
speech production. Ecological Psychology
1:333-382.
R. Shadmeh. and T. Bashers-Krug. 1997.
Functional stages in the formation of human
long-term motor memory. Journal of
Neuroscience 17: 409-419.
T. W. Schoener. 1974. Resource partitioning in
ecological communities. Science 185:27-37.
A. Wedel. 2004. Self organization and categorical
behavior in phonology. Ph.D. dissertation,
University of California, Santa Cruz.
R. Wright. 1996. Lexical Competition and
Reduction in Speech: A Preliminary Report. In
Research On Spoken Language Processing:
Progress Report No. 21 (1996-1997), Indiana
University.
M. Yaeger-Dror. 1996. Phonetic evidence or the
evolution of lexical classes: The case of
Montreal French vowel shift. In Towards a
Social Science of Language, G. Guy, C. Feagin,
J. Baugh, and D. Schiffrin, ed. pp. 263-87.
Benjamins, Amsterdam.
