Proceedings of the BioNLP Workshop on Linking Natural Language Processing and Biology at HLT-NAACL 06, pages 1?8,
New York City, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
The Semantics of a Definiendum Constrains both the Lexical Semantics 
and the Lexicosyntactic Patterns in the Definiens 
 
Hong Yu Ying Wei 
Department of Health Sciences Department of Biostatistics 
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Columbia University 
Milwaukee, WI  53201 New York, NY 10032 
Hong.Yu@uwm.edu Ying.Wei@columbia.com 
 
Abstract 
Most current definitional question an-
swering systems apply one-size-fits-all 
lexicosyntactic patterns to identify defini-
tions. By analyzing a large set of online 
definitions, this study shows that the se-
mantic types of definienda constrain both 
lexical semantics and lexicosyntactic pat-
terns of the definientia. For example, 
?heart? has the semantic type [Body Part, 
Organ, or Organ Component] and its 
definition (e.g., ?heart locates between the 
lungs?) incorporates semantic-type-
dependent lexicosyntactic patterns (e.g., 
?TERM locates ??) and terms (e.g., 
?lung? has the same semantic type [Body 
Part, Organ, or Organ Component]). In 
contrast, ?AIDS? has a different semantic 
type [Disease or Syndrome]; its definition 
(e.g., ?An infectious disease caused by 
human immunodeficiency virus?) consists 
of different lexicosyntactic patterns (e.g., 
??causes by??) and terms (e.g., ?infec-
tious disease? has the semantic type [Dis-
ease or Syndrome]). The semantic types 
are defined in the widely used biomedical 
knowledge resource, the Unified Medical 
Language System (UMLS).  
1 Introduction 
 
Definitional questions (e.g., ?What is X??) consti-
tute an important question type and have been a 
part of the evaluation at the Text Retrieval Confer-
ence (TREC) Question Answering Track since 
2003. Most systems apply one-size-fits-all lexico-
syntactic patterns to identify definitions (Liang et 
al. 2001; Blair-Goldensohn et al 2004; 
Hildebrandt et al 2004; Cui et al 2005). For ex-
ample, the pattern ?NP, (such as|like|including) 
query term? can be used to identify the definition 
?New research in mice suggests that drugs such as 
Ritalin quiet hyperactivity? (Liang et al 2001).  
 
Few existing systems, however, have explored the 
relations between the semantic type (denoted as 
SDT) of a definiendum (i.e., a defined term (DT)) 
and the semantic types (denoted as SDef) of terms in 
its definiens (i.e., definition). Additionally, few 
existing systems have examined whether the lexi-
cosyntactic patterns of definitions correlate with 
the semantic types of the defined terms.  
 
By analyzing a large set of online definitions, this 
study shows that 1) SDef correlates with SDT, and 2) 
SDT constrains the lexicosyntactic patterns of the 
corresponding definitions. In the following, we 
will illustrate our findings with the following four 
definitions: 
 
  a. Heart[Body Part, Organ, or Organ Component]: The hol-
low[Spatial Concept] muscular[Spatial Concept] organ[Body Part, 
Organ, or Organ Component,Tissue]
 located[Spatial Concept] be-
hind[Spatial Concept] the sternum[Body Part, Organ, or Organ Com-
ponent] and between the lungs[Body Part, Organ, or Organ 
Component]
. 
   b. Kidney[Body Part, Organ, or Organ Component]: The kid-
neys are a pair of glandular organs[Body Part, Organ, or 
Organ Component]
 located[Spatial Concept] in the abdomi-
nal_cavities[Body Part, Organ, or Organ Component] of mam-
mals[Mammal] and reptiles[Reptile].    
   c. Heart attack[Disease or Syndrome]: also called myo-
cardial_infarction[Disease or Syndrome]; damage[Functional 
Concept]
 to the heart_muscle[Tissue] due to insufficient 
1
blood supply[Organ or Tissue Function] for an extended[Spatial 
Concept]
 time_period[Temporal Concept]. 
   d. AIDS[Disease or Syndrome]: An infec-
tious_disease[Disease or Syndrome] caused[Functional Concept] 
by human_immunodeficiency_virus[Virus]. 
 
In the above four definitions, the superscripts in 
[brackets] are the semantic types (e.g., [Body Part, 
Organ, or Organ Component] and [Disease or Syn-
drome]) of the preceding terms. A multiword term 
links words with the underscore ?_?. For example, 
?heart? IS-A [Body Part, Organ, or Organ Compo-
nent] and ?heart_muscle? IS-A [Tissue]. The se-
mantic types are defined in the Semantic Network 
(SN) of the Unified Medical Language System 
(UMLS), the largest biomedical knowledge re-
source. Details of the UMLS and SN will be de-
scribed in Section 2. We applied MMTx (Aronson 
et al 2004) to automatically map a string to the 
UMLS semantic types. MMTx will also be de-
scribed in Section 2.  
 
Simple analysis of the above four definitions 
shows that given a defined term (DT) with a se-
mantic type SDT (e.g., [Body Part, Organ, or Organ 
Component]), terms that appear in the definition 
tend to have the same or related semantic types 
(e.g., [Body Part, Organ, or Organ Component] 
and [Spatial Concept]). Such observations were 
first reported as ?Aristotelian definitions? 
(Bodenreider and Burgun 2002) in the limited do-
main of anatomy. (Rindflesch and Fiszman 2003) 
reported that the hyponym related to the definien-
dum must be in an IS-A relation with the hy-
pernym that is related to the definiens. However, 
neither work demonstrated statistical patterns on a 
large corpus as we report in this study. Addition-
ally, none of the work explicitly suggested the use 
of patterns to support question answering.  
 
In addition to statistical correlations among seman-
tic types, the lexicosyntactic patterns of the defini-
tions correlate with SDT. For example, as shown by 
sentences a~d, when SDT is [Body Part, Organ, or 
Organ Component], its lexicosyntactic patterns 
include ??located??. In contrast, when SDT is 
[Disease or Syndrome], the patterns include 
??due to?? and ?? caused by??.  
 
In this study, we empirically studied statistical cor-
relations between SDT and SDef and between SDT and 
the lexicosyntactic patterns in the definitions. Our 
study is a result of detailed statistical analysis of 
36,535 defined terms and their 226,089 online 
definitions. We built our semantic constraint model 
based on the widely used biomedical knowledge 
resource, the UMLS. We also adapted a robust in-
formation extraction system to generate automati-
cally a large number of lexicosyntactic patterns 
from definitions. In the following, we will first 
describe the UMLS and its semantic types. We will 
then describe our data collection and our methods 
for pattern generation. 
2 Unified Medical Language System 
The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) is 
the largest biomedical knowledge source main-
tained by the National Library of Medicine. It pro-
vides standardized biomedical concept relations 
and synonyms (Humphreys et al 1998). The 
UMLS has been widely used in many natural lan-
guage processing tasks, including information re-
trieval (Eichmann et al 1998), extraction 
(Rindflesch et al 2000), and text summarization 
(Elhadad et al 2004; Fiszman et al 2004).  
 
The UMLS includes the Metathesaurus (MT), 
which contains over one million biomedical con-
cepts and the Semantic Network (SN), which 
represents a high-level abstraction from the UMLS 
Metathesaurus. The SN consists of 134 semantic 
types with 54 types of semantic relations (e.g., is-a 
or part-of) that relate the semantic types to each 
other. The UMLS Semantic Network provides 
broad and general world knowledge that is related 
to human health. Each UMLS concept is assigned 
one or more semantic types.  
 
The National Library of Medicine also makes 
available MMTx, a programming implementation 
of MetaMap (Aronson 2001), which maps free text 
to the UMLS concepts and associated semantic 
types. MMTx first parses text into sentences, then 
chunks the sentences into noun phrases.  Each 
noun phrase is then mapped to a set of possible 
UMLS concepts, taking into account spelling and 
morphological variations; each concept is 
weighted, with the highest weight representing the 
most likely mapped concept. One recent study has 
evaluated MMTx to have 79% (Yu and Sable 
2005) accuracy for mapping a term to the semantic 
2
type(s) in a small set of medical questions. Another 
study (Lacson and Barzilay 2005) measured 
MMTx to have a recall of 74.3% for capturing the 
semantic types in another set of medical texts. 
 
In this study, we applied MMTx to identify the 
semantic types of terms that appear in their defini-
tions. For each candidate term, MMTx ranks a list 
of UMLS concepts with confidence. In this study, 
we selected the UMLS concept that was assigned 
with the highest confidence by MMTx. The UMLS 
concepts were then used to obtain the correspond-
ing semantic types. 
3 Data Collection 
We collected a large number of online definitions 
for the purpose of our study. Specifically, we ap-
plied more than 1 million of the UMLS concepts as 
candidate definitional terms, and searched for the 
definitions from the World Wide Web using the 
Google:Definition service; this resulted in the 
downloads of a total of 226,089 definitions that 
corresponded to a total of 36,535 UMLS concepts 
(or 3.7% of the total of 1 million UMLS concepts). 
We removed from definitions the defined terms; 
this step is necessary for our statistical studies, 
which we will explain later in the following sec-
tions. We applied MMTx to obtain the correspond-
ing semantic types.   
4 Statistically Correlated Semantic Types 
We then identified statistically correlated semantic 
types between SDT and SDef based on bivariate tabu-
lar chi-square (Fleiss 1981). 
 
 
 
Specifically, given a semantic type STYi, i=1,2,3,?, 134 
of any defined term, the observed numbers of defi-
nitions that were and were not assigned the STYi 
are O(Defi) and O(Defi). All indicates the total 
226,089 definitions. The observed numbers of defi-
nitions in which the semantic type STYi, did and did 
not appear were O(Alli) and O(Alli). 134 represents 
the total number of the UMLS semantic types. We 
applied formulas (1) and (2) to calculate expected 
frequencies and then the chi-square value (the de-
gree of freedom is one). A high chi-square value 
indicates the importance of the semantic type that 
appears in the definition. We removed the defined 
terms from their definitions prior to the semantic-
type statistical analysis in order to remove the bias 
introduced by the defined terms (i.e., defined terms 
frequently appear in the definitions). 
 
      ( )iDefE = N
NN iDef *
, ( )
i
DefE = N
NN iDef *
, 
( )iAllE = N
NN iAll *
, ( )iAllE = N NN iAll *               (1) 
     
( )? ?= E
OE 22?
                                     (2) 
To determine whether the chi-square value is large 
enough for statistical significance, we calculated 
its p-value. Typically, 0.05 is the cutoff of signifi-
cance, i.e. significance is accepted if the corre-
sponding p-value is less than 0.05. This criterion 
ensures the chance of false significance (incor-
rectly detected due to chance) is 0.05 for a single 
SDT-SDef pair. However, since there are 134*134 
possible SDT-SDef pairs, the chance for obtaining at 
least one false significance could be very high. To 
have a more conservative inference, we employed 
a Bonferroni-type correction procedure (Hochberg 
1988).  
 
Specifically, let )()2()1( mppp ??? L be the or-
dered raw p-values, where m is the total number of 
SDT-SDef pairs. A SDef is significantly associated 
with a SDT if SDef?s corresponding p-value 
)1/()( +??? imp i ?  for some i. This correction 
procedure allows the probability of at-least-one-
false-significance out of the total m pairs is less 
than alpha (=0.05). 
 
The number of definitions for each SDT ranges from 
4 ([Entity]), 10 ([Event]), 17 ([Vertebrate]) to 
8,380 ([Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein]) and 
18,461 ([Organic Chemical]) in our data collection.  
As the power of a statistical test relies on the sam-
ple size, some correlated semantic types might be 
undetected when the number of available defini-
tions is small. It is therefore worthwhile to know 
what the necessary sample size is in order to have a 
decent chance of detecting difference statistically. 
3
For this task, we assume P0 and P1 are true prob-
abilities that a STY will appear in NDef and NAll. 
Based upon that, we calculated the minimal re-
quired number of sentences n such that the prob-
ability of statistical significance will be larger than 
or equal to 0.8. This sample size is determined 
based on the following two assumptions: 1) the 
observed frequencies are approximately normally 
distributed, and 2) we use chi-square significance 
to test the hypothesis P0 = P1 at significance level 
0.05 ( 2
10 PPP
+
= ). 
2
10
2
00112.0025.0
)(
))1()1()1(2(
PP
PPPPzPPz
n
?
?+?+?
>        (3) 
5 Semantic Type Distribution  
Our null hypothesis is that given any pair of 
{SDT(X), SDT(Y)}, X ? Y, where X and Y represent 
two different semantic types of the total 134 se-
mantic types, there are no statistical differences in 
the distributions of the semantic types of the terms 
that appear in the definitions.  
 
We applied the bivariate tabular chi-square test to 
measure the semantic type distribution. Following 
similar notations to Section 4, we use OXi and OYi  
for the corresponding frequencies of not being ob-
served in SDef(X) and SDef(Y). 
 
For each semantic type STY, we calculate the ex-
pected frequencies of being observed and not being 
observed in SDef(X) and SDef(Y), respectively, and 
their corresponding chi-square value according to 
formulas (3) and (4): 
 
      
iX
E =
iYiX
NN
OON
+
+ )*(
iYiXiX
, 
iX
E =
iYiX
iX
NN
OON
+
+ )(*
iYiX
,  
iY
E =
iYiX
NN
OON
+
+ )*(
iYiXiY
,
iY
E =
iYiX
iY
NN
OON
+
+ )(*
iYiX
     (4) 
( ) ( )? ? ?+?=
iY
iY
iX
iX
iYX E
OE
E
OE 2
iY
2
iX2
,,
?
               (5)                               
where NX and NY are the numbers of sentences in 
SDef(X) and SDef(Y), respectively, and in both (4) 
and (5), 134,...,2,1=i , and (X, Y)=1,2,?, 134 and 
X ? Y. The degree of freedom is 1. The chi-square 
value measures whether the occurrences of STYi, 
are equivalent between SDef(X) and SDef(Y). The 
same multiple testing correction procedure will be 
used to determine the significance of the chi-
square value. Note that if at least one STYi has 
been detected to be statistically significant after 
multiple-testing correction, the distributions of the 
semantic types are different between SDef(X) and 
SDef(Y).  
6 Automatically Identifying Semantic-Type-
Dependent Lexicosyntactic Patterns 
Most current definitional question answering sys-
tems generate lexicosyntactic patterns either 
manually or semi-automatically. In this study, we 
automatically generated large sets of lexicosyntac-
tic patterns from our collection of online defini-
tions. We applied the information extraction 
system Autoslog-TS (Riloff and Philips 2004) to 
automatically generate lexicosyntactic patterns in 
definitions. We then identified the statistical corre-
lation between the semantic types of defined terms 
and their lexicosyntactic patterns in definitions. 
AutoSlog-TS is an information extraction system 
that is built upon AutoSlog (Riloff 1996). 
AutoSlog-TS automatically identifies extraction 
patterns for noun phrases by learning from two sets 
of un-annotated texts relevant and non-relevant. 
AutoSlog-TS first generates every possible lexico-
syntactic pattern to extract every noun phrase in 
both collections of text and then computes statis-
tics based on how often each pattern appears in the 
relevant text versus the background and outputs a 
ranked list of extraction patterns coupled with sta-
tistics indicating how strongly each pattern is asso-
ciated with relevant and non-relevant texts.  
We grouped definitions based on the semantic 
types of the defined terms. For each semantic type, 
the relevant text incorporated the definitions, and 
the non-relevant text incorporated an equal number 
of sentences that were randomly selected from the 
MEDLINE collection. For each semantic type, we 
applied AutoSlog-TS to its associated relevant and 
non-relevant sentence collections to generate lexi-
cosyntactic patterns; this resulted in a total of 134 
sets of lexicosyntactic patterns that corresponded 
to different semantic types of defined terms. Addi-
tionally, we identified the common lexicosyntactic 
patterns across the semantic types and ranked the 
lexicosyntactic patterns based on their frequencies 
across semantic types. 
 
4
We also identified statistical correlations between 
SDT and the lexicosyntactic patterns in definitions 
based on chi-square statistics that we have de-
scribed in the previous two sections. For formula 
1~4, we replaced each STY with a lexicosyntactic 
pattern. Our null hypothesis is that given any SDT, 
there are no statistical differences in the distribu-
tions of the lexicosyntactic patterns that appear in 
the definitions. 
 
 
Figure 1: A list of semantic types of de-
fined terms with the top five statistically 
correlated semantic types (P<<0.0001) that 
appear in their definitions.  
7 Results 
Our chi-square statistics show that for any pair of 
semantic types {SDT(X), SDT(Y)}, X ? Y, the distri-
butions of SDef are statistically different at al-
pha=0.05; the results show that the semantic types 
of the defined terms correlate to the semantic types 
in the definitions. Our results also show that the 
syntactic patterns are distributed differently among 
different semantic types of the defined terms (al-
pha=0.05). 
 
Our results show that many semantic types that 
appear in definitions are statistically correlated 
with the semantic types of the defined terms. The 
average number and standard deviation of statisti-
cally correlated semantic types is 80.6?35.4 at 
P<<0.0001.  
Figure 1 shows three SDT ([Body Part, Organ, or 
Organ Component], [Disease or Syndrome], and 
[Organization]) with the corresponding top five 
statistically correlated semantic types that appear 
in their definitions. Our results show that in a total 
of 112 (or 83.6%) cases, SDT appears as one of the 
top five statistically correlated semantic types in 
SDef, and that in a total of 94 (or 70.1%) cases,  SDT 
appears at the top in SDef. Our results indicate that 
if a definitional term has a semantic type SDT, then 
the terms in its definition tend to have the same or 
related semantic types. 
 
We examined the cases in which the semantic 
types of definitional terms do not appear in the top 
five semantic types in the definitions. We found 
that in all of those cases, the total numbers of defi-
nitions that were used for statistical analysis were 
too small to obtain statistical significance. For ex-
ample, when SDT is ?Entity?, the minimum size for 
a SDef  was 4.75, which is larger than the total num-
ber of the definitions (i.e., 4). As a result, some 
actually correlated semantic types might be unde-
tected due to insufficient sample size. 
 
Our results also show that the lexicosyntactic pat-
terns of definitional sentences are SDT-dependent. 
Our results show that many lexicosyntactic pat-
terns that appear in definitions are statistically cor-
related with the semantic types of defined terms. 
The average number and standard deviation of sta-
tistically correlated lexico-syntactic patterns is 
1656.7?1818.9 at P<<0.0001. We found that the 
more definitions an SDT has, the more lexicosyntac-
tic patterns. 
 
Figure 2 shows the top 10 lexicosyntactic patterns 
(based on chi-square statistics) that were captured 
by Autoslog-TS with three different SDT; namely, 
[Disease or Syndrome], [Body Part, Organ, or 
Organ Component], and [Organization]. Figure 3 
shows the top 10 lexicosyntactic patterns ranked 
by AutoSlog-TS which incorporated the frequen-
cies of the patterns (Riloff and Philips 2004). 
 
Figure 4 lists the top 30 common patterns across 
all different semantic types SDT. We found that 
many common lexicosyntactic patterns (e.g., 
??known as??, ??called?, ??include??) have 
been identified by other research groups through 
either manual or semi-automatic pattern discovery 
(Blair-Goldensohn et al 2004). 
 
5
 Figure 2: The top 10 lexicosyntactic patterns that appear in definitions based on chi-square statis-
tics. The defined terms have one of the three semantic types [Disease_or_Syndrome], [Body Part, 
Organ, or Organ Component], and [Organization].  
 
 
Figure 3: The top 10 lexicosyntactic patterns ranked by Autoslog-TS. The defined terms have 
one of the three semantic types [Disease_or_Syndrome], [Body Part, Organ, or Organ Compo-
nent], and [Organization]. 
 
 
Figure 4: The top 30 common lexicosyntactic patterns generated across patterns with different DTS . 
 
8  Discussion 
 
The statistical correlations between SDT and SDef 
may be useful to enhance the performance of a 
definition-question-answering system by at least 
two means. First, the semantic types may be useful 
for word sense disambiguation. A simple applica-
tion is to rank definitional sentences based on the 
distributions of the semantic types of terms in the 
definitions to capture the definition of a specific 
sense. For example, a biomedical definitional ques-
tion answering system may exclude the definition 
of other senses (e.g., ?feeling? as shown in the sen-
tence ?The locus of feelings and intuitions; ?in 
your heart you know it is true?; ?her story would 
melt your heart.??) if the semantic types that define 
?heart? do not include [Body Part, Organ, or Organ 
Component] of terms other than ?heart?. 
 
Secondly, the semantic-type correlations may be 
used as features to exclude non-definitional sen-
tences. For example, a biomedical definitional 
question answering system may exclude the fol-
lowing non-definitional sentence ?Heart rate was 
6
unaffected by the drug? because the semantic types 
in the sentence do not include [Body Part, Organ, 
or Organ Component] of terms other than ?heart?. 
 
SDT-dependent lexicosyntactic patterns may en-
hance both the recall and precision of a definitional 
question answering system. First, the large sets of 
lexicosyntactic patterns we generated automati-
cally may expand the smaller sets of lexicosyntac-
tic patterns that have been reported by the existing 
question answering systems. Secondly, SDT-
dependent lexicosyntactic patterns may be used to 
capture definitions.  
 
The common lexicosyntactic patterns we identified 
(in Figure 4) may be useful for a generic defini-
tional question answering system. For example, a 
definitional question answering system may im-
plement the most common patterns to detect any 
generic definitions; specific patterns may be im-
plemented to detect definitions with specific SDT.  
 
One limitation of our work is that the lexicosyntac-
tic patterns generated by Autoslog-TS are within 
clauses. This is a disadvantage because 1) lexico-
syntactic patterns can extend beyond clauses (Cui 
et al 2005) and 2) frequently a definition has mul-
tiple lexicosyntactic patterns. Many of the patterns 
might not be generalizible. For example, as shown 
in Figure 2, some of the top ranked patterns (e.g., 
?Subj_AuxVp_<dobj>_BE_ARMY>?) identified 
by AutoSlog-TS may be too specific to the text 
collection. The pattern-ranking method introduced 
by AutoSlog-TS takes into consideration the fre-
quency of a pattern and therefore is a better rank-
ing method than the chi-square ranking (shown in 
Figure 3). 
 
9  Related Work 
 
Systems have used named entities (e.g., 
?PEOPLE? and ?LOCATION?) to assist in infor-
mation extraction (Agichtein and Gravano 2000) 
and question answering (Moldovan et al 2002; 
Filatova and Prager 2005). Semantic constraints 
were first explored by (Bodenreider and Burgun 
2002; Rindflesch and Fiszman 2003) who observed 
that the principle nouns in definientia are fre-
quently semantically related (e.g., hyponyms, hy-
pernyms, siblings, and synonyms) to definiena. 
Semantic constraints have been introduced to defi-
nitional question answering (Prager et al 2000; 
Liang et al 2001). For example, an artist?s work 
must be completed between his birth and death 
(Prager et al 2000); and the hyponyms of defined 
terms might be incorporated in the definitions 
(Liang et al 2001). Semantic correlations have 
been explored in other areas of NLP. For example, 
researchers (Turney 2002; Yu and Hatzivassi-
loglou 2003) have identified semantic correlation 
between words and views: positive words tend to 
appear more frequently in positive movie and 
product reviews and newswire article sentences 
that have a positive semantic orientation and vice 
versa for negative reviews or sentences with a 
negative semantic orientation. 
10 Conclusions and Future Work 
This is the first study in definitional question an-
swering that concludes that the semantics of a de-
finiendum constrain both the lexical semantics and 
the lexicosyntactic patterns in the definition. Our 
discoveries may be useful for the building of a 
biomedical definitional question answering system.  
 
Although our discoveries (i.e., that the semantic 
types of the definitional terms determine both the 
lexicosyntactic patterns and the semantic types in 
the definitions) were evaluated with the knowledge 
framework from the biomedical, domain-specific 
knowledge resource the UMLS, the principles may 
be generalizable to any type of semantic classifica-
tion of definitions. The semantic constraints may 
enhance both recall and precision of one-size-fits-
all question answering systems, which may be 
evaluated in future work. 
 
As stated in the Discussion session, one disadvan-
tage of this study is that the lexicosyntactic pat-
terns generated by Autoslog-TS are within clauses. 
Future work needs to develop pattern-recognition 
systems that are capable of detecting patterns 
across clauses.  
 
In addition, future work needs to move beyond 
lexicosyntactic patterns to extract semantic-
lexicosyntactic patterns and to evaluate how the 
semantic-lexicosyntactic   patterns    can    enhance  
definitional question answering. 
7
Acknowledgement: The author thanks Sasha 
Blair-Goldensohn, Vijay Shanker, and especially 
the three anonymous reviewers who provide valu-
able critics and comments. The concepts ?Defini-
endum? and ?Definiens? come from one of the 
reviewers? recommendation. 
References  
 
Agichtein E, Gravano L (2000) Snowball: extracting 
relations from large plain-text collections. . Paper 
presented at Proceedings of the 5th ACM Interna-
tional Conference on Digital Libraries 
Aronson A (2001) Effective Mapping of Biomedical 
Text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: The MetaMap 
Program. Paper presented at American Medical In-
formation Association 
Aronson A, Mork J, Gay G, Humphrey S, Rogers W 
(2004) The NLM Indexing Initiative's Medical Text 
Indexer. Paper presented at MedInfo 2004 
Blair-Goldensohn S, McKeown K, Schlaikjer A (2004) 
Answering Definitional Questions: A Hybrid Ap-
proach. In: Maybury M (ed) New Directions In 
Question Answering. AAAI Press 
Bodenreider O, Burgun A (2002) Characterizing the 
definitions of anatomical concepts in WordNet and 
specialized sources. Paper presented at The First 
Global WordNet Conference 
Cui H, Kan M, Cua T (2005) Generic soft pattern mod-
els for definitional question answering. . Paper pre-
sented at The 28th Annual International ACM 
SIGIR Salvado, Brazil 
Eichmann D, Ruiz M, Srinivasan P (1998) Cross-
language information retrieval with the UMLS 
metathesaurus. Paper presented at SIGIR 
Elhadad N, Kan M, Klavans J, McKeown K (2004) 
Customization in a unified framework for summa-
rizing medical literature. Journal of Artificial Intel-
ligence in Medicine 
Filatova E, Prager J (2005) Tell me what you do and I'll 
tell you what you are: learning occupation-related 
activities for biographies. Paper presented at 
HLT/EMNLP 2005. Vancouver, Canada 
Fiszman M, Rindflesch T, Kilicoglu H (2004) Abstrac-
tion Summarization for Managing the Biomedical 
Research Literature. Paper presented at HLT-
NAACL 2004: Computational Lexical Semantic 
Workshop 
Fleiss J (1981) Statistical methods for rates and propor-
tions. 
Hildebrandt W, Katz B, Lin J (2004) Answering defini-
tion questions with multiple knowledge sources. . 
Paper presented at HLT/NAACL 
Hochberg Y (1988) A sharper Bonferroni procedure for 
multiple tests of significance. Biometrika 75:800-
802 
Humphreys BL, Lindberg DA, Schoolman HM, Barnett 
GO (1998) The Unified Medical Language System: 
an informatics research collaboration. J Am Med 
Inform Assoc 5:1-11. 
Lacson R, Barzilay R (2005) Automatic processing of 
spoken dialogue in the hemodialysis domain. Paper 
presented at Proc AMIA Symp 
Liang L, Liu C, Xu Y-Q, Guo B, Shum H-Y (2001) 
Real-time texture synthesis by patch-based sam-
pling. ACM Trans Graph 20:127--150 
Moldovan D, Harabagiu S, Girju R, Morarescu P, Laca-
tusu F, Novischi A, Badulescu A, Bolohan O 
(2002) LCC tools for question answering. Paper 
presented at The Eleventh Text REtrieval Confer-
ence (TREC 2002) 
Prager J, Brown E, Coden A, Radev D (2000) Quesiton-
answering by predictive annotation. Paper pre-
sented at Proceeding 22nd Annual International 
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Devel-
opment in Information Retrieval 
Riloff E (1996) Automatically generating extraction 
patterns from untagged text. . Paper presented at 
AAAI-96  
Riloff E, Philips W (2004) An introduction to the Sun-
dance and AutoSlog Systems. Technical Report 
#UUCS-04-015. University of Utah School of 
Computing.  
Rindflesch T, Tanabe L, Weinstein J, Hunter L (2000) 
EDGAR: extraction of drugs, genes and relations 
from the biomedical literature. Pac Symp Biocom-
put:517-528. 
Rindflesch TC, Fiszman M (2003) The interaction of 
domain knowledge and linguistic structure in natu-
ral language processing: interpreting hypernymic 
propositions in biomedical text. J Biomed Inform 
36:462-477 
Turney P (2002) Thumbs up or thumbs down? Semantic 
orientation applied to unsupervised classification of 
reviews. Paper presented at ACL 2002 
Yu H, Hatzivassiloglou V (2003) Towards answering 
opinion questions: Separating facts from opinions 
and identifying the polarity of opinion sentences. 
Paper presented at Proceedings of the 2003 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing (EMNLP 2003) 
Yu H, Sable C (2005) Being Erlang Shen: Identifying 
answerable questions. Paper presented at Nine-
teenth International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence on Knowledge and Reasoning for An-
swering Questions  
 
 
8
