Proceedings of the Fifth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing, pages 158?161,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Word Segmentation and Named Entity Recognition for SIGHAN 
Bakeoff3 
 
Zhang Suxiang 
CISTR,  
Beijing University of 
Posts and 
Telecommunications 
zsuxiang@163.com 
Qin Ying  
CISTR,  
Beijing University of 
Posts and 
Telecommunications 
qinyingmail@163.com 
Wen Juan 
CISTR,  
Beijing University of 
Posts and 
Telecommunications 
mystery999@163.com 
Wang Xiaojie 
CISTR,  
Beijing University of 
Posts and 
Telecommunications 
xjwang@bupt.edu.cn
 
 
Abstract 
We have participated in three open tracks 
of Chinese word segmentation and 
named entity recognition tasks of 
SIGHAN Bakeoff3. We take a 
probabilistic feature based Maximum 
Entropy (ME) model as our basic frame 
to combine multiple sources of 
knowledge. Our named entity recognizer 
achieved the highest F measure for 
MSRA, and word segmenter achieved the 
medium F measure for MSRA. We find 
effective combining of the external 
multi-knowledge is crucial to improve 
performance of word segmentation and 
named entity recognition. 
1 Introduction 
Word Segmentation (WS) and Named Entity 
Recognition (NER) are two basic tasks for 
Chinese Processing. The main difficulty is 
ambiguities widely exist in these two tasks. Our 
system is thus pay special attentions on various 
ambiguities resolution. After preprocessing we 
take Maximum Entropy (ME) model as the 
unified frame for WS and NER. ME is a 
effective model which often used to combine 
multiple sources of knowledge into various 
features. For finer-grain utilization of features, 
we use probabilistic features instead of binary 
features normally used. By exploring some often 
used features and some new features, our system 
performs well in this SIGHAN contest.  
In the rest sections of this paper, we give a 
brief introduction to our system sequentially. 
Section 2 describes the preprocessing in the 
system, including rough segmentation and 
factoid identification. Section 3 is on ambiguity 
resolution of WS. NER is introduced in Section 4. 
We give some experimental results in Section 5. 
Finally we draw some conclusions. 
2 Preprocessing 
The first step in preprocessing is to do a rough 
segmentation. By using both Forward Maximum 
Matching (FMM) and Backward Maximum 
Matching (BMM) approaches, we get an initial 
segmentation simultaneously detecting some of 
segmentation ambiguities in text. We use two 
different wordlists in this step. One is a basic 
wordlists with about 60 thousands words. We 
think this wordlist is relatively steady in Chinese. 
Another includes some words from special 
training corpus.  
We then cope with factoid recognition by 
using automata. Four automata are built to 
identify time, date, number and other (like 
telephone number and model of product) 
respectively. For covering some exceptional 
structures, we use some templates to post-
process some outputs from automata. 
Overlapping and combination ambiguities 
detected in preprocessing will be treated in next 
round of our system. It is the topic of next 
section. 
3 Disambiguation 
3.1 Overlapping ambiguity 
We only detect overlapping ambiguity with 
length of chain no more than 3 because these 
kinds of overlapping account for over 98% of all 
occurrences according to (Yan, 2000). The class-
based bigram model trained on tagged corpus of 
People?s Daily 2000 (about 12 million Chinese 
characters) is applied to resolve the ambiguities. 
In class-based bigram, all named entities, all 
punctuation and factoids is one class separately 
and each word is one class. For MSRA test we 
158
evaluate the performance of our overlapping 
disambiguation with precision of 84.1%. 
3.2 Combination ambiguity 
We use some templates to describe the POS 
properties of combination ambiguity and their 
segmentation words. In our system there are 155 
most frequent combination words. Due to the 
fact that instances of combination ambiguity is 
deficient in given training corpus, to enlarge 
training examples we convert the People Daily 
2000 to meet the standard of different guidelines 
then extract examples for training besides the 
given training corpora. For example, ??  is a 
combination ambiguity according to the 
guideline of MSRA whereas it is always one unit 
??in People Daily 2000. Noticing that when  
takes the sense of result, it is always tagged as a 
noun and a verb when it takes the meaning of 
fructification, we can easily enlarge the training 
examples of  ??.  
We then use ME model to combination 
ambiguity resolution. There are six features used 
in the model as below. 
(1) Contextual words; 
(2) Contextual characters; 
(3) Bigram collocations; 
(4) If the transfer probability of adjacent 
words to the target word exists; 
(5) If keywords indicate segmentation exists; 
(6) The most frequent segmentation from prior 
distribution 
 
4 Named entity recognition 
4.1 Personal name recognition 
We propose a probabilistic feature based 
maximum entropy approach to NER. Where, 
probabilistic feature functions are used instead of 
binary feature functions, it is one of the several 
differences between this model and the most of 
the previous ME based model. We also explore 
several new features in our model, which 
includes confidence functions, position of 
features etc. Like those in some previous works, 
we use sub-models to model Chinese Person 
Names, Foreign Names respectively, but we 
bring some new techniques in these sub-models. 
In standard ME, feature function is a binary 
function, for example, if we use CPN denotes the 
Chinese person Name, SN denotes Surname, a 
typical feature is: 
)1(),(
??
? ??=
otherwise
SNxandCPNy
yxfi ?
?????
 
But in Chinese, firstly, most of words used as 
surname are also used as normal words. The 
probabilities are different for them to be used as 
surname. Furthermore, a surname is not always 
followed by a given name, both cases are not 
binary. To model these phenomena, we give 
probability values to features, instead of binary 
values.  
For example, a feature function can be set 
value as follows: 
)2(
0
andCPNyif0.985 
),(
??
? ??=
otherwise
x
yxf
?
 
Or 
)3(
0
xCPNyif0.01805 
),(
??
? ??=
otherwise
and
yxf
?
 
Chinese characters used for translating foreign 
personal name are different from those in 
Chinese personal name. We built the foreign 
name model by collecting suffixes, prefixes, 
frequently-used characters, estimate their 
probabilities used in foreign personal name. 
These probabilities also used in model as 
probability features. 
We also design a confidence function for a 
character sequence nCCCW ...21=  to help model to 
estimate the probability of W as a person name. 
iC  may be a character or a word. Let Ff1 is 
probability of the C1, iMf is the probability of the 
iC , nEf  is the probability of the Cn. So the 
confidence function is 
)4(),(
12
1 nE
ni
iMF fffPERSONwK ++= ?
?<=<=
 
This function is included in ME frame as a 
feature. 
Candidate person name collection is the first 
step of NER. Since the ambiguity of Chinese 
word segmentation always exists. We propose 
some patterns for model different kind of 
segmentation ambiguity. Some labels are used to 
express specific roles of Chinese characters in 
person names. 
We have seven patterns as follows; first two 
patterns are non-ambiguity, while the others 
model some possible ambiguity in Chinese 
person name brought by word segmenter. 
(1) BCD: the Chinese personal name is 
composed of three Hanzi ((Chinese character). 
B: Surname of a Chinese personal name. 
159
C: Head character of 2-Hanzi given names. 
D: Tail character of 2-Hanzi of given names. 
(2) BD: the Chinese personal name is 
composed of two Hanzi (Chinese character). 
(3) BCH:  
H: the last given name and its next context are 
composed of a word. 
(4) UCD: 
U: the surname and its previous context are 
composed of a word.  
(5) BE: 
E: the first given name and the last given name 
are composed of a word.  
(6) UD: 
U: the surname and the first given name are 
composed of a word. 
(7) CD?The Chinese personal name is only 
composed of two given names. 
Based on the People?s Daily corpus and 
maximum entropy, we achieve models of 
Chinese personal name and transliterated 
personal name respectively.  
Here, How can we know whether a person 
name is composed of two or three Hanzi, we 
used another technology to limit boundary. We 
think out the co-appearing about the last given 
name and its next context, now, we have made a 
statistics about personal name and its next 
context to decide the length of the Chinese 
personal name. For example: 
????????????,  
In this sentence, we collect a candidate 
Chinese person name ???? ?, but the last 
given name ??? is a specific character, it has 
different meaning, now, we make a decision 
whether ??? is belong to personal name or not. 
????? 3)()( NRnumberNRnumber <  
So, ??? is not included in the personal name, 
???? is a correct choice. 
Another problem we have met is to recognize 
transliterated personal name, because many 
transliterated personal characters has included 
the Chinese surname, however, the condition that 
we can recognize the Chinese personal name is 
Chinese surname, therefore, a section of the 
transliterated personal name will often be 
recognized a Chinese personal name. 
In our system, we design a dynamitic priority 
method to check ambiguous character, when we 
examine a ambiguous character like ??? or ???, 
we will search different characters which maybe 
belong to Chinese personal name or transliterated 
personal name with forward and backward 
direction. According to the collection result, we 
will decide to use Chinese personal model or 
transliterated personal model to recognize 
personal name. 
For example: 
??/?/???/?/??/??/?/??/?/?/?/
?/?/?/?/?/?/?/?/??/??/??/??/?/
?/??/?/?/?/?/??/???/?? 
The correct candidate personal name is ???
?????? and not ?????. 
4.2 Location recognition 
We collect 196 keywords such like ??,?,?,?,
?,??, when the system search these keywords 
in a string, it will collect some characters or 
words which maybe belong to a location with 
backward direction, and the candidate location 
can be inputted into location model to recognize. 
The approach is similar to the personal name 
recognition, the difference is its contextual, the 
contextual used for location is 
2112 ++?? iiiii wwwww , which always can be 
used as feature during location entity recognition. 
We trained model based on the People?s Daily. 
We design some rules to help rectify wrong 
result, when a transliterated location name is lack 
of keyword like ???, it maybe recognized as a 
transliterated personal name. We collect some 
specific words list such as ???,?,??,??? 
to correct the wrong personal name. If the 
current word is in the list, the following words 
are accepted as candidate location entity. 
4.3 Organization recognition 
Organization name recognition is very different 
from other kinds of entities. An organization is 
often composed of several characters or words, 
and its length is dynamitic. According to 
statistical result about People?s Daily and MSR 
corpus, we decided the maximum length of an 
organization is 7 in a sentence.  
We computed the probability of every word or 
character of an organization, and defined the 
probability threshold. 
According to the different keyword, we 
designed sixteen classifiers; every classifier has 
its knowledge base, the different classifier can 
achieve organization recognition goal. 
We computed the probability threshold (>0.02) 
of a candidate organization.  
Combined the BIO-tagged method and the 
probability threshold, the organization can be 
recognized. 
160
4.4 Combination of Knowledge from 
Various Sources 
Human knowledge is very useful for NER. 
Knowledge from various sources can be 
incorporated into ME model, which are shown as 
follows. 
1. Chinese family name list (including 925 
items) and given names list (including 2453 
items):  
2. Transliterated character list (including 1398 
items). 
3. Location keyword list (including 607 items): 
If the word belongs to the list, 2~6 words before 
the salient word are accepted as candidate 
Location. 
4. Abbreviated location like ??/Beijing?, ??
/Tianjin? name list. Moreover, on Microsoft 
corpus, the word ??? of ?????? is also 
labeled as location ???/China?. 
5. Organization keyword list (including 875 
items): If the current word is in organization 
keyword list, 2~6 words before keywords are 
accepted as the candidate Organization. 
6. A location name dictionary. Some 
frequently used locations are included in the 
dictionary, like ???/United States? and ???
?/Singapore?. 
7. An organization name dictionary. Some 
frequently used organization names are included 
in the dictionary, like ????/State Council? 
and ????/United Nations?. 
8. Person name list: we collect some person 
names which come from the MSR train corpus. 
Moreover, the famous person name are included 
in the list such as ????,????. 
5 Evaluation result 
We evaluated our word segmenter and named 
entity recognizer on the SIGHAN Microsoft 
Research Asia (MSRA) corpus in open track. 
The Table 1 is the official result of word 
segmentation by our system. 
 
Corpus OOV- 
Rate 
OOV- 
Recall 
IV 
Recall-
rate 
F 
measure 
MSR 0.034 0.804 0.976 0.97 
UPUC 0.087 0.593 0.957 0.911 
 
Table 1 Official SIGHAN evaluation result for word 
segmentation in the open track 
 
Table 2 shows the official result of entity 
recognition. 
 
Type R P F 
Person 95.39% 96.71% 96.04% 
Location 87.77% 93.06% 90.34% 
Organization 87.68% 84.20% 85.90% 
 
Table2 Official SIGHAN evaluation result for entity 
recognition in the open track 
 
6 Conclusions 
A probabilistic feature based ME model is used 
to Chinese word segmentation and named entity 
recognition tasks. Our word segmenter achieved 
the medium result in the open word segmentation 
track of MSRA corpus, while entity recognition 
achieved the top one performance. 
Acknowledgement 
The research work is supported by China 
Ministry Of Education funded project (MZ115-
022): ?Tools for Chinese and Minority Language 
Processing? 
References 
A L Berger. 1996.  A Maximum Entropy Approach to 
Natural Language Processing.  Computational Linguistic, 
22 (1): 39- 71. 
Yan Yintang, Zhou XiaoQiang. 2000.12 Study of 
Segmentation Strategy on Ambiguous Phrases of 
Overlapping Type  Journal of The China Society For 
Scientific and Technical Information  Vol. 19 , ?6  
Liang NanYuan. 1987 A Written Chinese Segmentation 
system? CDWS.  Journal of Chinese Information Processing, 
Vol.2: 44-52 
ZHANG Hua-ping and Liu Qun. 2004 Automatic 
Recognition of Chinese Personal Name Based on Role 
Tagging. CHINESE JOURNAL OF COMPUTERS Vol (27) 
pp 85-91. 
Lv YaJuan, ZhaoTie-jun et al 2001. Leveled unknown 
Chinese Words resolution by dynamic programming. 
Journal Information Processing, 15(1): 28-33.  
Borthwick .A 1999.  Maximum Entropy Approach to Named 
Entity Recognition.  hD Dissertation.  
161
