Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 491?498,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Simple Algorithms for Complex Relation Extraction
with Applications to Biomedical IE
Ryan McDonald1 Fernando Pereira1 Seth Kulick2
1CIS and 2IRCS, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
{ryantm,pereira}@cis.upenn.edu, skulick@linc.cis.upenn.edu
Scott Winters Yang Jin Pete White
Division of Oncology, Children?s Hospital of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
{winters,jin,white}@genome.chop.edu
Abstract
A complex relation is any n-ary relation
in which some of the arguments may be
be unspecified. We present here a simple
two-stage method for extracting complex
relations between named entities in text.
The first stage creates a graph from pairs
of entities that are likely to be related, and
the second stage scores maximal cliques
in that graph as potential complex relation
instances. We evaluate the new method
against a standard baseline for extracting
genomic variation relations from biomed-
ical text.
1 Introduction
Most research on text information extraction (IE)
has focused on accurate tagging of named entities.
Successful early named-entity taggers were based
on finite-state generative models (Bikel et al, 1999).
More recently, discriminatively-trained models have
been shown to be more accurate than generative
models (McCallum et al, 2000; Lafferty et al, 2001;
Kudo and Matsumoto, 2001). Both kinds of mod-
els have been developed for tagging entities such
as people, places and organizations in news mate-
rial. However, the rapid development of bioinfor-
matics has recently generated interest on the extrac-
tion of biological entities such as genes (Collier et
al., 2000) and genomic variations (McDonald et al,
2004b) from biomedical literature.
The next logical step for IE is to begin to develop
methods for extracting meaningful relations involv-
ing named entities. Such relations would be ex-
tremely useful in applications like question answer-
ing, automatic database generation, and intelligent
document searching and indexing. Though not as
well studied as entity extraction, relation extraction
has still seen a significant amount of work. We dis-
cuss some previous approaches at greater length in
Section 2.
Most relation extraction systems focus on the spe-
cific problem of extracting binary relations, such
as the employee of relation or protein-protein in-
teraction relation. Very little work has been done
in recognizing and extracting more complex rela-
tions. We define a complex relation as any n-ary
relation among n typed entities. The relation is
defined by the schema (t1, . . . , tn) where ti ? T
are entity types. An instance (or tuple) in the rela-
tion is a list of entities (e1, . . . , en) such that either
type(ei) = ti, or ei =? indicating that the ith ele-
ment of the tuple is missing.
For example, assume that the entity types
are T = {person, job, company} and we are
interested in the ternary relation with schema
(person, job, company) that relates a person
to their job at a particular company. For
the sentence ?John Smith is the CEO at Inc.
Corp.?, the system would ideally extract the tu-
ple (John Smith, CEO, Inc. Corp.). However, for
the sentence ?Everyday John Smith goes to his
office at Inc. Corp.?, the system would extract
(John Smith,?, Inc. Corp.), since there is no men-
tion of a job title. Hence, the goal of complex re-
lation extraction is to identify all instances of the
relation of interest in some piece of text, including
491
incomplete instances.
We present here several simple methods for ex-
tracting complex relations. All the methods start by
recognized pairs of entity mentions, that is, binary
relation instances, that appear to be arguments of the
relation of interest. Those pairs can be seen as the
edges of a graph with entity mentions as nodes. The
algorithms then try to reconstruct complex relations
by making tuples from selected maximal cliques in
the graph. The methods are general and can be ap-
plied to any complex relation fitting the above def-
inition. We also assume throughout the paper that
the entities and their type are known a priori in the
text. This is a fair assumption given the current high
standard of state-of-the-art named-entity extractors.
A primary advantage of factoring complex rela-
tions into binary relations is that it allows the use of
standard classification algorithms to decide whether
particular pairs of entity mentions are related. In ad-
dition, the factoring makes training data less sparse
and reduces the computational cost of extraction.
We will discuss these benefits further in Section 4.
We evaluated the methods on a large set of anno-
tated biomedical documents to extract relations re-
lated to genomic variations, demonstrating a consid-
erable improvement over a reasonable baseline.
2 Previous work
A representative approach to relation extraction is
the system of Zelenko et al (2003), which attempts
to identify binary relations in news text. In that
system, each pair of entity mentions of the correct
types in a sentence is classified as to whether it is
a positive instance of the relation. Consider the bi-
nary relation employee of and the sentence ?John
Smith, not Jane Smith, works at IBM?. The pair
(John Smith, IBM) is a positive instance, while the
pair (Jane Smith, IBM) is a negative instance. In-
stances are represented by a pair of entities and their
position in a shallow parse tree for the containing
sentence. Classification is done by a support-vector
classifier with a specialized kernel for that shallow
parse representation.
This approach ? enumerating all possible en-
tity pairs and classifying each as positive or nega-
tive ? is the standard method in relation extraction.
The main differences among systems are the choice
of trainable classifier and the representation for in-
stances.
For binary relations, this approach is quite
tractable: if the relation schema is (t1, t2), the num-
ber of potential instances is O(|t1| |t2|), where |t| is
the number of entity mentions of type t in the text
under consideration.
One interesting system that does not belong to
the above class is that of Miller et al (2000), who
take the view that relation extraction is just a form
of probabilistic parsing where parse trees are aug-
mented to identify all relations. Once this augmen-
tation is made, any standard parser can be trained
and then run on new sentences to extract new re-
lations. Miller et al show such an approach can
yield good results. However, it can be argued that
this method will encounter problems when consid-
ering anything but binary relations. Complex re-
lations would require a large amount of tree aug-
mentation and most likely result in extremely sparse
probability estimates. Furthermore, by integrating
relation extraction with parsing, the system cannot
consider long-range dependencies due to the local
parsing constraints of current probabilistic parsers.
The higher the arity of a relation, the more likely
it is that entities will be spread out within a piece
of text, making long range dependencies especially
important.
Roth and Yih (2004) present a model in which en-
tity types and relations are classified jointly using a
set of global constraints over locally trained classi-
fiers. This joint classification is shown to improve
accuracy of both the entities and relations returned
by the system. However, the system is based on con-
straints for binary relations only.
Recently, there has also been many results from
the biomedical IE community. Rosario and Hearst
(2004) compare both generative and discriminative
models for extracting seven relationships between
treatments and diseases. Though their models are
very flexible, they assume at most one relation per
sentence, ruling out cases where entities participate
in multiple relations, which is a common occurrence
in our data. McDonald et al (2004a) use a rule-
based parser combined with a rule-based relation
identifier to extract generic binary relations between
biological entities. As in predicate-argument extrac-
tion (Gildea and Jurafsky, 2002), each relation is
492
always associated with a verb in the sentence that
specifies the relation type. Though this system is
very general, it is limited by the fact that the design
ignores relations not expressed by a verb, as the em-
ployee of relation in?John Smith, CEO of Inc. Corp.,
announced he will resign?.
Most relation extraction systems work primarily
on a sentential level and never consider relations that
cross sentences or paragraphs. Since current data
sets typically only annotate intra-sentence relations,
this has not yet proven to be a problem.
3 Definitions
3.1 Complex Relations
Recall that a complex n-ary relation is specified by
a schema (t1, . . . , tn) where ti ? T are entity types.
Instances of the relation are tuples (e1, . . . , en)
where either type(ei) = ti, or ei =? (missing ar-
gument). The only restriction this definition places
on a relation is that the arity must be known. As we
discuss it further in Section 6, this is not required by
our methods but is assumed here for simplicity. We
also assume that the system works on a single rela-
tion type at a time, although the methods described
here are easily generalizable to systems that can ex-
tract many relations at once.
3.2 Graphs and Cliques
An undirected graph G = (V,E) is specified by a
set of vertices V and a set of edges E, with each
edge an unordered pair (u, v) of vertices. G? =
(V ?, E?) is a subgraph of G if V ? ? V and E? =
{(u, v) : u, v ? V ?, (u, v) ? E}. A clique C of G is
a subgraph of G in which there is an edge between
every pair of vertices. A maximal clique of G is a
clique C = (VC , EC) such that there is no other
clique C ? = (VC? , EC?) such that VC ? VC? .
4 Methods
We describe now a simple method for extracting
complex relations. This method works by first fac-
toring all complex relations into a set of binary re-
lations. A classifier is then trained in the standard
manner to recognize all pairs of related entities. Fi-
nally a graph is constructed from the output of this
classifier and the complex relations are determined
from the cliques of this graph.
a. All possible
relation instances
(John, CEO, Inc. Corp.)
(John,?, Inc. Corp.)
(John, CEO, Biz. Corp.)
(John,?, Biz. Corp.)
(John, CEO,?)
(Jane, CEO, Inc. Corp.)
(Jane,?, Inc. Corp.)
(Jane, CEO, Biz. Corp.)
(Jane,?, Biz. Corp.)
(Jane, CEO,?)
(?, CEO, Inc. Corp.)
(?, CEO, Biz. Corp.)
b. All possible
binary relations
(John, CEO)
(John, Inc. Corp.)
(John, Biz. Corp.)
(CEO, Inc. Corp.)
(CEO, Biz. Corp.)
(Jane, CEO)
(Jane, Inc. Corp.)
(Jane, Biz. Corp.)
Figure 1: Relation factorization of the sentence:
John and Jane are CEOs at Inc. Corp. and Biz.
Corp. respectively.
4.1 Classifying Binary Relations
Consider again the motivating example of the
(person, job, company) relation and the sentence
?John and Jane are CEOs at Inc. Corp. and Biz.
Corp. respectively?. This sentence contains two
people, one job title and two companies.
One possible method for extracting the rela-
tion of interest would be to first consider all 12
possible tuples shown in Figure 1a. Using all
these tuples, it should then be possible to train
a classifier to distinguish valid instances such as
(John, CEO, Inc. Corp.) from invalid ones such as
(Jane, CEO, Inc. Corp.). This is analogous to the
approach taken by Zelenko et al (2003) for binary
relations.
There are problems with this approach. Computa-
tionally, for an n-ary relation, the number of possi-
ble instances is O(|t1| |t2| ? ? ? |tn|). Conservatively,
letting m be the smallest |ti|, the run time is O(mn),
exponential in the arity of the relation. The second
problem is how to manage incomplete but correct
instances such as (John,?, Inc. Corp.) when train-
ing the classifier. If this instance is marked as neg-
ative, then the model might incorrectly disfavor fea-
tures that correlate John to Inc. Corp.. However,
if this instance is labeled positive, then the model
may tend to prefer the shorter and more compact in-
complete relations since they will be abundant in the
positive training examples. We could always ignore
instances of this form, but then the data would be
heavily skewed towards negative instances.
493
Instead of trying to classify all possible relation
instances, in this work we first classify pairs of en-
tities as being related or not. Then, as discussed in
Section 4.2, we reconstruct the larger complex rela-
tions from a set of binary relation instances.
Factoring relations into a set of binary decisions
has several advantages. The set of possible pairs is
much smaller then the set of all possible complex
relation instances. This can be seen in Figure 1b,
which only considers pairs that are consistent with
the relation definition. More generally, the num-
ber of pairs to classify is O((?i |ti|)2) , which is
far better than the exponentially many full relation
instances. There is also no ambiguity when label-
ing pairs as positive or negative when constructing
the training data. Finally, we can rely on previous
work on classification for binary relation extraction
to identify pairs of related entities.
To train a classifier to identify pairs of related
entities, we must first create the set of all positive
and negative pairs in the data. The positive in-
stances are all pairs that occur together in a valid
tuple. For the example sentence in Figure 1, these
include the pairs (John, CEO), (John, Inc. Corp.),
(CEO, Inc. Corp.), (CEO, Biz. Corp.), (Jane, CEO)
and (Jane, Biz. Corp.). To gather negative in-
stances, we extract all pairs that never occur to-
gether in a valid relation. From the same exam-
ple these would be the pairs (John, Biz. Corp.) and
(Jane, Inc. Corp.).
This leads to a large set of positive and negative
binary relation instances. At this point we could em-
ploy any binary relation classifier and learn to iden-
tify new instances of related pairs of entities. We
use a standard maximum entropy classifier (Berger
et al, 1996) implemented as part of MALLET (Mc-
Callum, 2002). The model is trained using the fea-
tures listed in Table 1.
This is a very simple binary classification model.
No deep syntactic structure such as parse trees is
used. All features are basically over the words sepa-
rating two entities and their part-of-speech tags. Of
course, it would be possible to use more syntactic
information if available in a manner similar to that
of Zelenko et al (2003). However, the primary pur-
pose of our experiments was not to create a better
binary relation extractor, but to see if complex re-
lations could be extracted through binary factoriza-
Feature Set
entity type of e1 and e2
words in e1 and e2
word bigrams in e1 and e2
POS of e1 and e2
words between e1 and e2
word bigrams between e1 and e2
POS between e1 and e2
distance between e1 and e2
concatenations of above features
Table 1: Feature set for maximum entropy binary
relation classifier. e1 and e2 are entities.
a. Relation graph G
John Jane
CEO
Inc. Corp. Biz. Corp.
b. Tuples from G
(John, CEO,?)
(John,?, Inc. Corp.)
(John,?, Biz. Corp.)
(Jane, CEO,?)
(?, CEO, Inc. Corp.)
(?, CEO, Biz. Corp.)
(John, CEO, Inc. Corp.)
(John, CEO, Biz. Corp.)
Figure 2: Example of a relation graph and tuples
from all the cliques in the graph.
tion followed by reconstruction. In Section 5.2 we
present an empirical evaluation of the binary relation
classifier.
4.2 Reconstructing Complex Relations
4.2.1 Maximal Cliques
Having identified all pairs of related entities in the
text, the next stage is to reconstruct the complex re-
lations from these pairs. Let G = (V,E) be an undi-
rected graph where the vertices V are entity men-
tions in the text and the edges E represent binary
relations between entities. We reconstruct the com-
plex relation instances by finding maximal cliques
in the graphs.
The simplest approach is to create the graph
so that two entities in the graph have an edge
if the binary classifier believes they are related.
For example, consider the binary factoriza-
tion in Figure 1 and imagine the classifier
identified the following pairs as being related:
(John, CEO), (John, Inc. Corp.), (John, Biz. Corp.),
(CEO, Inc. Corp.), (CEO, Biz. Corp.) and
(Jane, CEO). The resulting graph can be seen
in Figure 2a.
Looking at this graph, one solution to construct-
494
ing complex relations would be to consider all the
cliques in the graph that are consistent with the def-
inition of the relation. This is equivalent to having
the system return only relations in which the binary
classifier believes that all of the entities involved are
pairwise related. All the cliques in the example are
shown in Figure 2b. We add ? fields to the tuples to
be consistent with the relation definition.
This could lead to a set of overlapping
cliques, for instance (John, CEO, Inc. Corp.) and
(John, CEO,?). Instead of having the system re-
turn all cliques, our system just returns the maximal
cliques, that is, those cliques that are not subsets of
other cliques. Hence, for the example under con-
sideration in Figure 2, the system would return the
one correct relation, (John, CEO, Inc. Corp.), and
two incorrect relations, (John, CEO, Biz. Corp.) and
(Jane, CEO,?). The second is incorrect since it
does not specify the company slot of the relation
even though that information is present in the text.
It is possible to find degenerate sentences in which
perfect binary classification followed by maximal
clique reconstruction will lead to errors. One such
sentence is, ?John is C.E.O. and C.F.O. of Inc. Corp.
and Biz. Corp. respectively and Jane vice-versa?.
However, we expect such sentences to be rare; in
fact, they never occur in our data.
The real problem with this approach is that an ar-
bitrary graph can have exponentially many cliques,
negating any efficiency advantage over enumerating
all n-tuples of entities. Fortunately, there are algo-
rithms for finding all maximal cliques that are effi-
cient in practice. We use the algorithm of Bron and
Kerbosch (1973). This is a well known branch and
bound algorithm that has been shown to empirically
run linearly in the number of maximal cliques in the
graph. In our experiments, this algorithm found all
maximal cliques in a matter of seconds.
4.2.2 Probabilistic Cliques
The above approach has a major shortcom-
ing in that it assumes the output of the bi-
nary classifier to be absolutely correct. For
instance, the classifier may have thought with
probability 0.49, 0.99 and 0.99 that the fol-
lowing pairs were related: (Jane, Biz. Corp.),
(CEO, Biz. Corp.) and (Jane, CEO) respectively.
The maximal clique method would not produce the
tuple (Jane, CEO, Biz. Corp.) since it never consid-
ers the edge between Jane and Biz. Corp. However,
given the probability of the edges, we would almost
certainly want this tuple returned.
What we would really like to model is a belief
that on average a clique represents a valid relation
instance. To do this we use the complete graph
G = (V,E) with edges between all pairs of entity
mentions. We then assign weight w(e) to edge e
equal to the probability that the two entities in e are
related, according to the classifier. We define the
weight of a clique w(C) as the mean weight of the
edges in the clique. Since edge weights represent
probabilities (or ratios), we use the geometric mean
w(C) =
?
?
?
e?EC
w(e)
?
?
1/|EC |
We decide that a clique C represents a valid tuple if
w(C) ? 0.5. Hence, the system finds all maximal
cliques as before, but considers only those where
w(C) ? 0.5, and it may select a non-maximal clique
if the weight of all larger cliques falls below the
threshold. The cutoff of 0.5 is not arbitrary, since it
ensures that the average probability of a clique rep-
resenting a relation instance is at least as large as
the average probability of it not representing a rela-
tion instance. We ran experiments with varying lev-
els of this threshold and found that, roughly, lower
thresholds result in higher precision at the expense
of recall since the system returns fewer but larger
tuples. Optimum results were obtained for a cutoff
of approximately 0.4, but we report results only for
w(C) ? 0.5.
The major problem with this approach is that
there will always be exponentially many cliques
since the graph is fully connected. However, in our
experiments we pruned all edges that would force
any containing clique C to have w(C) < 0.5. This
typically made the graphs very sparse.
Another problem with this approach is the as-
sumption that the binary relation classifier outputs
probabilities. For maximum entropy and other prob-
abilistic frameworks this is not an issue. However,
many classifiers, such as SVMs, output scores or
distances. It is possible to transform the scores from
those models through a sigmoid to yield probabili-
495
ties, but there is no guarantee that those probability
values will be well calibrated.
5 Experiments
5.1 Problem Description and Data
We test these methods on the task of extracting ge-
nomic variation events from biomedical text (Mc-
Donald et al, 2004b). Briefly, we define a varia-
tion event as an acquired genomic aberration: a spe-
cific, one-time alteration at the genomic level and
described at the nucleic acid level, amino acid level
or both. Each variation event is identified by the re-
lationship between a type of variation, its location,
and the corresponding state change from an initial-
state to an altered-state. This can be formalized as
the following complex schema
(var-type, location, initial-state, altered-state)
A simple example is the sentence
?At codons 12 and 61, the occurrence of
point mutations from G/A to T/G were observed?
which gives rise to the tuples
(point mutation, codon 12, G, T)
(point mutation, codon 61, A, G)
Our data set consists of 447 abstracts selected
from MEDLINE as being relevant to populating a
database with facts of the form: gene X with vari-
ation event Y is associated with malignancy Z. Ab-
stracts were randomly chosen from a larger corpus
identified as containing variation mentions pertain-
ing to cancer.
The current data consists of 4691 sentences that
have been annotated with 4773 entities and 1218 re-
lations. Of the 1218 relations, 760 have two ? ar-
guments, 283 have one ? argument, and 175 have
no ? arguments. Thus, 38% of the relations tagged
in this data cannot be handled using binary relation
classification alone. In addition, 4% of the relations
annotated in this data are non-sentential. Our sys-
tem currently only produces sentential relations and
is therefore bounded by a maximum recall of 96%.
Finally, we use gold standard entities in our exper-
iments. This way we can evaluate the performance
of the relation extraction system isolated from any
kind of pipelined entity extraction errors. Entities in
this domain can be found with fairly high accuracy
(McDonald et al, 2004b).
It is important to note that just the presence of two
entity types does not entail a relation between them.
In fact, 56% of entity pairs are not related, due either
to explicit disqualification in the text (e.g. ?... the
lack of G to T transversion ...?) or ambiguities that
arise from multiple entities of the same type.
5.2 Results
Because the data contains only 1218 examples of re-
lations we performed 10-fold cross-validation tests
for all results. We compared three systems:
? MC: Uses the maximum entropy binary classi-
fier coupled with the maximal clique complex
relation reconstructor.
? PC: Same as above, except it uses the proba-
bilistic clique complex relation reconstructor.
? NE: A maximum entropy classifier that naively
enumerates all possible relation instances as
described in Section 4.1.
In training system NE, all incomplete but correct
instances were marked as positive since we found
this had the best performance. We used the same
pairwise entity features in the binary classifier of
the above two systems. However, we also added
higher order versions of the pairwise features. For
this system we only take maximal relations,that is,
if (John, CEO, Inc. Corp.) and (John,?, Inc. Corp.)
are both labeled positive, the system would only re-
turn the former.
Table 2 contains the results of the maximum en-
tropy binary relation classifier (used in systems MC
and PC). The 1218 annotated complex relations pro-
duced 2577 unique binary pairs of related entities.
We can see that the maximum entropy classifier per-
forms reasonably well, although performance may
be affected by the lack of rich syntactic features,
which have been shown to help performance (Miller
et al, 2000; Zelenko et al, 2003).
Table 3 compares the three systems on the real
problem of extracting complex relations. An ex-
tracted complex relation is considered correct if and
only if all the entities in the relation are correct.
There is no partial credit. All training and clique
finding algorithms took under 5 minutes for the en-
tire data set. Naive enumeration took approximately
26 minutes to train.
496
ACT PRD COR
2577 2722 2101
Prec Rec F-Meas
0.7719 0.8153 0.7930
Table 2: Binary relation classification results for the
maximum entropy classifier. ACT: actual number of
related pairs, PRD: predicted number of related pairs
and COR: correctly identified related pairs.
System Prec Rec F-Meas
NE 0.4588 0.6995 0.5541
MC 0.5812 0.7315 0.6480
PC 0.6303 0.7726 0.6942
Table 3: Full relation classification results. For a
relation to be classified correctly, all the entities in
the relation must be correctly identified.
First we observe that the maximal clique method
combined with maximum entropy (system MC) re-
duces the relative error rate over naively enumer-
ating and classifying all instances (system NE) by
21%. This result is very positive. The system based
on binary factorization not only is more efficient
then naively enumerating all instances, but signifi-
cantly outperforms it as well. The main reason naive
enumeration does so poorly is that all correct but
incomplete instances are marked as positive. Thus,
even slight correlations between partially correct en-
tities would be enough to classify an instance as cor-
rect, which results in relatively good recall but poor
precision. We tried training only with correct and
complete positive instances, but the result was a sys-
tem that only returned few relations since negative
instances overwhelmed the training set. With fur-
ther tuning, it may be possible to improve the per-
formance of this system. However, we use it only as
a baseline and to demonstrate that binary factoriza-
tion is a feasible and accurate method for extracting
complex relations.
Furthermore, we see that using probabilistic
cliques (system PC) provides another large im-
provement, a relative error reduction of 13%
over using maximal cliques and 31% reduction
over enumeration. Table 4 shows the breakdown
of relations returned by type. There are three
types of relations, 2-ary, 3-ary and 4-ary, each
with 2, 1 and 0 ? arguments respectively, e.g.
System 2-ary 3-ary 4-ary
NE 760:1097:600 283:619:192 175:141:60
MC 760:1025:601 283:412:206 175:95:84
PC 760:870:590 283:429:223 175:194:128
Table 4: Breakdown of true positive relations by
type that were returned by each system. Each cell
contains three numbers, Actual:Predicted:Correct,
which represents for each arity the actual, predicted
and correct number of relations for each system.
(point mutation, codon 12,?,?) is a 2-ary relation.
Clearly the probabilistic clique method is much
more likely to find larger non-binary relations, veri-
fying the motivation that there are some low proba-
bility edges that can still contribute to larger cliques.
6 Conclusions and Future Work
We presented a method for complex relation extrac-
tion, the core of which was to factorize complex re-
lations into sets of binary relations, learn to identify
binary relations and then reconstruct the complex re-
lations by finding maximal cliques in graphs that
represent relations between pairs of entities. The
primary advantage of this method is that it allows
for the use of almost any binary relation classifier,
which have been well studied and are often accu-
rate. We showed that such a method can be suc-
cessful with an empirical evaluation on a large set
of biomedical data annotated with genomic varia-
tion relations. In fact, this approach is both signifi-
cantly quicker and more accurate then enumerating
and classifying all possible instances. We believe
this work provides a good starting point for contin-
ued research in this area.
A distinction may be made between the factored
system presented here and one that attempts to clas-
sify complex relations without factorization. This
is related to the distinction between methods that
learn local classifiers that are combined with global
constraints after training and methods that incorpo-
rate the global constraints into the learning process.
McCallum and Wellner (2003) showed that learning
binary co-reference relations globally improves per-
formance over learning relations in isolation. How-
ever, their model relied on the transitive property in-
herent in the co-reference relation. Our system can
be seen as an instance of a local learner. Punyakanok
497
et al (2004) argued that local learning actually out-
performs global learning in cases when local deci-
sions can easily be learnt by the classifier. Hence, it
is reasonable to assume that our binary factorization
method will perform well when binary relations can
be learnt with high accuracy.
As for future work, there are many things that we
plan to look at. The binary relation classifier we em-
ploy is quite simplistic and most likely can be im-
proved by using features over a deeper representa-
tion of the data such as parse trees. Other more pow-
erful binary classifiers should be tried such as those
based on tree kernels (Zelenko et al, 2003). We also
plan on running these algorithms on more data sets
to test if the algorithms empirically generalize to dif-
ferent domains.
Perhaps the most interesting open problem is how
to learn the complex reconstruction phase. One pos-
sibility is recent work on supervised clustering. Let-
ting the edge probabilities in the graphs represent a
distance in some space, it may be possible to learn
how to cluster vertices into relational groups. How-
ever, since a vertex/entity can participate in one or
more relation, any clustering algorithm would be re-
quired to produce non-disjoint clusters.
We mentioned earlier that the only restriction of
our complex relation definition is that the arity of
the relation must be known in advance. It turns out
that the algorithms we described can actually handle
dynamic arity relations. All that is required is to
remove the constraint that maximal cliques must be
consistent with the structure of the relation. This
represents another advantage of binary factorization
over enumeration, since it would be infeasible to
enumerate all possible instances for dynamic arity
relations.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Mark Liberman,
Mark Mandel and Eric Pancoast for useful discus-
sion, suggestions and technical support. This work
was supported in part by NSF grant ITR 0205448.
References
A. L. Berger, S. A. Della Pietra, and V. J. Della Pietra.
1996. A maximum entropy approach to natural lan-
guage processing. Computational Linguistics, 22(1).
D.M. Bikel, R. Schwartz, and R.M. Weischedel. 1999.
An algorithm that learns what?s in a name. Machine
Learning Journal Special Issue on Natural Language
Learning, 34(1/3):221?231.
C. Bron and J. Kerbosch. 1973. Algorithm 457: finding
all cliques of an undirected graph. Communications of
the ACM, 16(9):575?577.
N. Collier, C. Nobata, and J. Tsujii. 2000. Extracting
the names of genes and gene products with a hidden
Markov model. In Proc. COLING.
D. Gildea and D. Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic labeling of
semantic roles. Computational Linguistics.
Taku Kudo and Yuji Matsumoto. 2001. Chunking with
support vector machines. In Proc. NAACL.
J. Lafferty, A. McCallum, and F. Pereira. 2001. Con-
ditional random fields: Probabilistic models for seg-
menting and labeling sequence data. In Proc. ICML.
A. McCallum and B. Wellner. 2003. Toward condi-
tional models of identity uncertainty with application
to proper noun coreference. In IJCAI Workshop on In-
formation Integration on the Web.
A. McCallum, D. Freitag, and F. Pereira. 2000. Maxi-
mum entropy Markov models for information extrac-
tion and segmentation. In Proc. ICML.
A. K. McCallum. 2002. MALLET: A machine learning
for language toolkit.
D.M. McDonald, H. Chen, H. Su, and B.B. Marshall.
2004a. Extracting gene pathway relations using a hy-
brid grammar: the Arizona Relation Parser. Bioinfor-
matics, 20(18):3370?78.
R.T. McDonald, R.S. Winters, M. Mandel, Y. Jin, P.S.
White, and F. Pereira. 2004b. An entity tagger for
recognizing acquired genomic variations in cancer lit-
erature. Bioinformatics, 20(17):3249?3251.
S. Miller, H. Fox, L.A. Ramshaw, and R.M. Weischedel.
2000. A novel use of statistical parsing to extract in-
formation from text. In Proc. NAACL.
V. Punyakanok, D. Roth, W. Yih, and D. Zimak. 2004.
Learning via inference over structurally constrained
output. In Workshop on Learning Structured with Out-
put, NIPS.
Barbara Rosario and Marti A. Hearst. 2004. Classifying
semantic relations in bioscience texts. In ACL.
D. Roth and W. Yih. 2004. A linear programming formu-
lation for global inference in natural language tasks. In
Proc. CoNLL.
D. Zelenko, C. Aone, and A. Richardella. 2003. Kernel
methods for relation extraction. JMLR.
498
Integrated Annotation for Biomedical Information Extraction
Seth Kulick and Ann Bies and Mark Liberman and Mark Mandel
and Ryan McDonald and Martha Palmer and Andrew Schein and Lyle Ungar
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
 
skulick,bies,myl  @linc.cis.upenn.edu,
mamandel@unagi.cis.upenn.edu,
 
ryantm,mpalmer,ais,ungar  @cis.upenn.edu
Scott Winters and Pete White
Division of Oncology,
Children?s Hospital of Philadelphia
Philadelphia, Pa 19104
 
winters,white  @genome.chop.edu
Abstract
We describe an approach to two areas of
biomedical information extraction, drug devel-
opment and cancer genomics. We have devel-
oped a framework which includes corpus anno-
tation integrated at multiple levels: a Treebank
containing syntactic structure, a Propbank con-
taining predicate-argument structure, and an-
notation of entities and relations among the en-
tities. Crucial to this approach is the proper
characterization of entities as relation compo-
nents, which allows the integration of the entity
annotation with the syntactic structure while
retaining the capacity to annotate and extract
more complex events. We are training statis-
tical taggers using this annotation for such ex-
traction as well as using them for improving the
annotation process.
1 Introduction
Work over the last few years in literature data mining
for biology has progressed from linguistically unsophisti-
cated models to the adaptation of Natural Language Pro-
cessing (NLP) techniques that use full parsers (Park et
al., 2001; Yakushiji et al, 2001) and coreference to ex-
tract relations that span multiple sentences (Pustejovsky
et al, 2002; Hahn et al, 2002) (For an overview, see
(Hirschman et al, 2002)). In this work we describe an ap-
proach to two areas of biomedical information extraction,
drug development and cancer genomics, that is based on
developing a corpus that integrates different levels of se-
mantic and syntactic annotation. This corpus will be a
resource for training machine learning algorithms useful
for information extraction and retrieval and other data-
mining applications. We are currently annotating only
abstracts, although in the future we plan to expand this to
full-text articles. We also plan to make publicly available
the corpus and associated statistical taggers.
We are collaborating with researchers in the Division
of Oncology at The Children?s Hospital of Philadelphia,
with the goal of automatically mining the corpus of can-
cer literature for those associations that link specified
variations in individual genes with known malignancies.
In particular we are interested in extracting three entities
(Gene, Variation Event, and Malignancy) in the follow-
ing relationship: Gene X with genomic Variation Event
Y is correlated with Malignancy Z. For example, WT1 is
deleted in Wilms Tumor #5. Such statements found in the
literature represent individual gene-variation-malignancy
observables. A collection of such observables serves
two important functions. First, it summarizes known
relationships between genes, variation events, and ma-
lignancies in the cancer literature. As such, it can be
used to augment information available from curated pub-
lic databases, as well as serve as an independent test for
accuracy and completeness of such repositories. Second,
it allows inferences to be made about gene, variation, and
malignancy associations that may not be explicitly stated
in the literature, both at the fact and entity instance lev-
els. Such inferences provide testable hypotheses and thus
future research targets.
The other major area of focus, in collaboration with
researchers in the Knowledge Integration and Discov-
ery Systems group at GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), is the ex-
traction of information about enzymes, focusing initially
on compounds that affect the activity of the cytochrome
P450 (CYP) family of proteins. For example, the goal is
to see a phrase like
Amiodarone weakly inhibited CYP2C9,
CYP2D6, and CYP3A4-mediated activities
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                   Linking Biological Literature, Ontologies and Databases, pp. 61-68.
                                                HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Biolink 2004,
with Ki values of 45.1?271.6 
and extract the facts
amiodarone inhibits CYP2C9 with
Ki=45.1-271.6
amiodarone inhibits CYP2D6 with
Ki=45.1-271.6
amiodarone inhibits CYP3A4 with
Ki=45.1-271.6
Previous work at GSK has used search algorithms that
are based on pattern matching rules filling template slots.
The rules rely on identifying the relevant passages by first
identifying compound names and then associating them
with a limited number of relational terms such as inhibit
or inactivate. This is similar to other work in biomedical
extraction projects (Hirschman et al, 2002).
Creating good pattern-action rules for an IE problem is
far from simple. There are many complexities in the dif-
ferent ways that a relation can be expressed in language,
such as syntactic alternations and the heavy use of co-
ordination. While sufficiently complex patterns can deal
with these issues, it requires a good amount of time and
effort to build such hand-crafted rules, particularly since
such rules are developed for each specific problem. A
corpus that is annotated with sufficient syntactic and se-
mantic structure offers the promise of training taggers for
quicker and easier information extraction.
The corpus that we are developing for the two differ-
ent application demands consists of three levels of anno-
tation: the entities and relations among the entities for the
oncology or CYP domain, syntactic structure (Treebank),
and predicate-argument structure (Propbank). This is a
novel approach from the point-of-view of NLP since pre-
vious efforts at Treebanking and Propbanking have been
independent of the special status of any entities, and pre-
vious efforts at entity annotation have been independent
of corresponding layers of syntactic and semantic struc-
ture. The decomposition of larger entities into compo-
nents of a relation, worthwhile by itself on conceptual
grounds for entity definition, also allows the component
entities to be mapped to the syntactic structure. These
entities can be viewed as semantic types associated with
syntactic constituents, and so our expectation is that au-
tomated analyses of these related levels will interact in a
mutually reinforcing and beneficial way for development
of statistical taggers. Development of such statistical tag-
gers is proceeding in parallel with the annotation effort,
and these taggers help in the annotation process, as well
as being steps towards automatic extraction.
In this paper we focus on the aspects of this project
that have been developed and are in production, while
also trying to give enough of the overall vision to place
the work that has been done in context. Section 2 dis-
cusses some of the main issues around the development
of the guidelines for entity annotation, for both the on-
cology and inhibition domains. Section 3 first discusses
the overall plan for the different levels of annotation, and
then focuses on the integration of the two levels currently
in production, entity annotation and syntactic structure.
Section 4 describes the flow of the annotation process,
including the development of the statistical taggers men-
tioned above. Section 5 is the conclusion.
2 Guidelines for Entity Annotation
Annotation has been proceeding for both the oncology
and the inhibition domains. Here we give a summary of
the main features of the annotation guidelines that have
been developed. We have been influenced in this by pre-
vious work in annotation for biomedical information ex-
traction (Ohta et al, 2002; Gaizauskas et al, 2003). How-
ever, we differ in the domains we are annotating and the
design philosophy for the entity guidelines. For exam-
ple, we have been concentrating on explicit concepts for
entities like genes rather than developing a wide-range
ontology for the various physical instantiations.
2.1 Oncology Domain
Gene Entity For the sake of this project the defini-
tion for ?Gene Entity? has two significant characteristics.
First, ?Gene? refers to a composite entity as opposed to
the strict biological definition. As has been noted by oth-
ers, there are often ambiguities in the usage of the en-
tity names. For example, it is sometimes unclear as to
whether it is the gene or protein being referenced, or the
same name might refer to the gene or the protein at dif-
ferent locations in the same document. Our approach to
this problem is influenced by the named entity annota-
tion in the Automatic Content Extraction (ACE) project
(Consortium, 2002), in which ?geopolitical? entities can
have different roles, such as ?location? or ?organization?.
Analogously, we consider a ?gene? to be a composite en-
tity that can have different roles throughout a document.
Standardization of ?Gene? references between different
texts and between gene synonyms is handled by exter-
nally referencing each instance to a standard ontology
(Ashburner et al, 2000).
In the context of this project, ?Gene? refers to a con-
ceptual entity as opposed to the specific manifestation of
a gene (i.e. an allele or nucleotide sequence). Therefore,
we consider genes to be abstract concepts identifying ge-
nomic regions often associated with a function, such as
MYC or TrkB; we do not consider actual instances of
such genes within the gene-entity domain. Since we are
interested in the association between Gene-entities and
malignancies, for this project genes are of interest to us
when they have an associated variation event. Therefore,
the combination of Gene entities and Variation events
provides us with an evoked entity representing the spe-
cific instance of a gene.
Variation Events as Relations Variations comprise a
relationship between the following entities: Type (e.g.
point mutation, translocation, or inversion), Location
(e.g. codon 14, 1p36.1, or base pair 278), Original-State
(e.g. Alanine), and Altered-State (e.g. Thymine). These
four components represent the key elements necessary
to describe any genomic variation event. Variations are
often underspecified in the literature, frequently having
only two or three of these specifications. Characterizing
individual variations as a relation among such compo-
nents provides us with a great deal of flexibility: 1) it al-
lows us to capture the complete variation event even when
specific components are broadly spaced in the text, often
spanning multiple sentences or even paragraphs; 2) it pro-
vides us with a convenient means of tracking anaphora
between detailed descriptions (e.g. a point mutation at
codon 14 and summary references (e.g. this variation);
and 3) it provides a single structure capable of capturing
the breadth of variation specifications (e.g. A-  T point
mutation at base pair 47, A48-  G or t(11;14)(q13;32)).
Malignancy The guidelines for malignancy annotation
are under development. We are planning to define it in a
manner analogous to variation, whereby a Malignancy is
composed of various attribute types (such as developmen-
tal stage, behavior, topographic site, and morphology).
2.2 CYP Domain
In the CYP Inhibition annotation task we are tagging
three types of entities:
1. CYP450 enzymes (cyp)
2. other substances (subst)
3. quantitative measurements (quant)
Each category has its own questions and uncertain-
ties. Names like CYP2C19 and cytochrome P450 en-
zymes proclaim their membership, but there are many
aliases and synonyms that do not proclaim themselves,
such as 17,20-lyase. We are compiling a list of such
names.
Other substances is a potentially huge and vaguely-
delimited set, which in the current corpus includes grape-
fruit juice and red wine as well as more obviously bio-
chemical entities like polyunsaturated fatty acids and ery-
thromycin. The quantitative measurements we are di-
rectly interested in are those directly related to inhibition,
such as IC50 and K(i). We tag the name of the measure-
ment, the numerical value, and the unit. For example, in
the phrase ...was inhibited by troleandomycin (ED50 = 1
microM), ED50 is the name, 1 the value, and microM the
unit. We are also tagging other measurements, since it
is easy to do and may provide valuable information for
future IE work.
3 Integrated Annotation
As has been noted in the literature on biomedical IE (e.g.,
(Pustejovsky et al, 2002; Yakushiji et al, 2001)), the
same relation can take a number of syntactic forms. For
example, the family of words based on inhibit occurs
commonly in MEDLINE abstracts about CYP enzymes
(as in the example in the introduction) in patterns like A
inhibited B, A inhibited the catalytic activity of B, inhibi-
tion of B by A, etc.
Such alternations have led to the use of pattern-
matching rules (often hand-written) to match all the rele-
vant configurations and fill in template slots based on the
resulting pattern matches. As discussed in the introduc-
tion, dealing with such complications in patterns can take
much time and effort.
Our approach instead is to build an annotated corpus
in which the predicate-argument information is annotated
on top of the parsing annotations in the Treebank, the re-
sulting corpus being called a ?proposition bank? or Prop-
bank. This newly annotated corpus is then used for train-
ing processors that will automatically extract such struc-
tures from new examples.
In a Propbank for biomedical text, the types of in-
hibit examples listed above would consistently have their
compounds labeled as Arg0 and their enzymes labeled as
Arg1, for nominalized forms such as A is an inhibitor of
B, A caused inhibition of B, inhibition of B by A, as well
the standard A inhibits B. We would also be able to la-
bel adjuncts consistently, such as the with prepositional
phrase in CYP3A4 activity was decreased by L, S and F
with IC(50) values of about 200 mM. In accordance with
other Calibratable verbs such as rise, fall, decline, etc.,
this phrase would be labeled as an Arg2-EXTENT, re-
gardless of its syntactic role.
A Propbank has been built on top of the Penn Tree-
bank, and has been used to train ?semantic taggers?, for
extracting argument roles for the predicates of interest,
regardless of the particular syntactic context.1
Such semantic taggers have been developed by using
machine learning techniques trained on the Penn Prop-
bank (Surdeanu et al, 2003; Gildea and Palmer, 2002;
Kingsbury and Palmer, 2002). However, the Penn Tree-
bank and Propbank involve the annotation of Wall Street
Journal text. This text, being a financial domain, differs
in significant ways from the biomedical text, and so it is
1The Penn Propbank is complemented by NYU?s Nom-
bank project (Meyers, October 2003), which includes tagging
of nominal predicate structure. This is particular relevant for
the biomedical domain, given the heavy use of nominals such
mutation and inhibition.
necessary for this approach to have a corpus of biomed-
ical texts such as MEDLINE articles annotated for both
syntactic structure (Treebanking) and shallow semantic
structure (Propbanking).
In this project, the syntactic and semantic annotation is
being done on a corpus which is also being annotated for
entities, as described in Section 2. Since semantic tag-
gers of the sort described above result in semantic roles
assigned to syntactic tree constituents, it is desirable to
have the entities correspond to syntactic constituents so
that the semantic roles are assigned to entities. The en-
tity information can function as type information and be
taken advantage of by learning algorithms to help charac-
terize the properties of the terms filling specified roles in
a given predicate.
This integration of these three different annotation lev-
els, including the entities, is being done for the first time2,
and we discuss here three main challenges to this corre-
spondence between entities and constituents: (1) entities
that are large enough to cut across multiple constituents,
(2) entities within prenominal modifiers, and (3) coordi-
nation.3
Relations and Large Entities One major area of con-
cern is the possibility of entities that contain more than
one syntactic constituent and do not match any node in
the syntax tree. For example, as discussed in Section 2, a
variation event includes material on a variation?s type, lo-
cation, and state, and can cut not only across constituents,
but even sentences and paragraphs. A simple example is
point mutations at codon 12, containing both the nominal
(the type of mutation) and following NP (the location).
Note that while in isolation this could also be considered
one syntactic constituent, the NP and PP together, the ac-
tual context is ...point mutations at codon 12 in duode-
nal lavage fluid.... Since all PPs are attached at the same
level, at codon 12 and in duodenal lavage fluid are sis-
ters, and so there is no constituent consisting of just point
mutations at codon 12.
Casting the variation event as a relation between dif-
ferent component entities allows the component entities
to correspond to tree constituents, while retaining the ca-
pacity to annotate and search for more complex events.
In this case, one component entity point mutations cor-
2An influential precursor to this integration is the system de-
scribed in (Miller et al, 1996). Our work is in much the same
spirit, although the representation of the predicate-argument
structure via Propbank and the linkage to the entities is quite
different, as well as of course the domain of annotation.
3There are cases where the entities are so minimal that they
are contained within a NP, not including the determiner, such as
CpG site in the NP a CpG site. entities. We are not as concerned
about these cases since we expect that such entity information
properly contained within a base NP can be associated with the
full base NP.
responds to a (base) NP node, and at codon 12 is corre-
sponds to the PP node that is the NP?s sister. At the same
time, the relation annotation contains the information re-
lating these two constituents.
Similarly, while the malignancy entity definition is cur-
rently under development, as mentioned in Section 2.1, a
guiding principle is that it will also be treated as a relation
and broken down into component entities. While this also
has conceptual benefits for the annotation guidelines, it
has the fortunate effect of making such otherwise syntax-
unfriendly malignancies as colorectal adenomas contain-
ing early cancer and acute myelomonocytic leukemia in
remission amenable for mapping the component parts to
syntactic nodes.
Entities within Prenominal Modifiers While we are
for the most part following the Penn Treebank guide-
lines (Bies et al, 1995), we are modifying them in two
important aspects. One concerns the prenominal mod-
ifiers, which in the Penn Treebank were left flat, with
no structure, but in this biomedical domain contain much
of the information - e.g., cancer-associated autoimmune
antigen. Not only would this have had no annotation
for structure, but even more bizarrely, cancer-associated
would have been a single token in the Penn Treebank,
thus making it impossible to capture the information as
to what is associated with what. We have developed new
guidelines to assign structure to prenominal entities such
as breast cancer, as well as changed the tokenization
guidelines to break up tokens such as cancer-associated.
Coordination We have also modified the treebank an-
notation to account for the well-known problem of enti-
ties that are discontinuous within a coordination structure
- e.g., K- and H-ras, where the entities are K-ras and H-
ras. Our annotation tool allows for discontinuous entities,
so that both K-ras and H-ras are annotated as genes.
Under standard Penn Treebank guidelines for tokeniza-
tion and syntactic structure, this would receive the flat
structure
NP
K- and H-ras
in which there is no way to directly associate the entity
K-ras with a constituent node.
We have modified the treebank guidelines so that K-ras
and H-ras are both constituents, with the ras part of K-ras
represented with an empty category co-indexed with ras
in H-ras:4.
4This is related to the approach to coordination in the GE-
NIA project.
NP
NP
K - NX-1
*P*
and NP
H - NX-1
ras
4 Annotation Process
We are currently annotating MEDLINE abstracts for both
the oncology and CYP domains. The flowchart for the
annotation process is shown in Figure 1. Tokenization,
POS-tagging, entity annotation (both domains), and tree-
banking are in full production. Propbank annotation and
the merging of the entities and treebanking remain to be
integrated into the current workflow. The table in Fig-
ure 2 shows the number of abstracts completed for each
annotation area.
The annotation sequence begins with tokenization and
part-of-speech annotating. While both aspects are simi-
lar to those used for the Penn Treebank, there are some
differences, partly alluded to in Section 3. Tokens are
somewhat more fine-grained than in the Penn Treebank,
so that H-ras, e.g., would consist of three tokens: H, -,
and ras.
Tokenized and part-of-speech annotated files are then
sent to the entity annotators, either for oncology or CYP,
depending on which domain the abstract has been chosen
for. The entities described in Section 2 are annotated at
this step. We are using WordFreak, a Java-based linguis-
tic annotation tool5, for annotation of tokenization, POS,
and entities. Figure 3 is a screen shot of the oncology do-
main annotation, here showing a variation relation being
created out of component entities for type and location.
In parallel with the entity annotation, a file is tree-
banked - i.e., annotated for its syntactic structure. Note
that this is done independently of the entity annotation.
This is because the treebanking guidelines are relatively
stable (once they were adjusted for the biomedical do-
main as described in Section 3), while the entity defini-
tions can require a significant period of study before sta-
bilizing, and with the parallel treatment the treebanking
can proceed without waiting for the entity annotation.
However, this does mean that to produce the desired
integrated annotation, the entity and treebanking annota-
tions need to be merged into one representation. The con-
sideration of the issues described in Section 3 has been
carried out for the purpose of allowing this integration
of the treebanking and entity annotation. This has been
completed for some pilot documents, but the full merging
remains to be integrated into the workflow system.
5http://www.sf.net/projects/wordfreak
As mentioned in the introduction, statistical taggers
are being developed in parallel with the annotation effort.
While such taggers are part of the final goal of the project,
providing the building blocks for extracting entities and
relations, they are also useful in the annotation process
itself, so that the annotators only need to perform correc-
tion of automatically tagged data, instead of starting from
scratch.
Until recently (Feb. 10), the part-of-speech annotation
was done by hand-correcting the results of tagging the
data with a part-of-speech tagger trained on a modified
form of the Penn Treebank.6 The tagger is a maximum-
entropy model utilizing the opennlp package available
at http://www.sf.net/projects/opennlp . It
has now been retrained using 315 files (122 from the
oncology domain, 193 from the cyp domain). Figure 4
shows the improvement of the new vs. the old POS tag-
ger on the same 294 files that have been hand-corrected.
These results are based on testing files that have already
been tokenized, and thus are an evaluation only of the
POS tagger and not the tokenizer. While not directly
comparable to results such as (Tateisi and Tsujii, 2004),
due to the different tag sets and tokenization, they are in
the same general range.7
The oncology and cyp entity annotation, as well as the
treebanking are still being done fully manually, although
that will change in the near future. Initial results for a tag-
ger to identify the various components of a variation re-
lation are promising, although not yet integrated into an-
notation process. The tagger is based on the implementa-
tion of Conditional Random Fields (Lafferty et al, 2001)
in the Mallet toolkit (McCallum, 2002). Briefly, Condi-
tional Random Fields are log-linear models that rely on
weighted features to make predictions on the input. Fea-
tures used by our system include standard pattern match-
ing and word features as well as some expert-created reg-
ular expression features8. Using 10-fold cross-validation
on 264 labelled abstracts containing 551 types, 1064 lo-
6Roughly, Penn Treebank tokens were split at hyphens, with
the individual components then sent through a Penn Treebank-
trained POS tagger, to create training data for another POS tag-
ger. For example (JJ York-based) is treated as (NNP
York) (HYPH -) (JJ based). While this works rea-
sonably well for tokenization, the POS tagger suffered severely
from being trained on a corpus with such different properties.
7The tokenizer has also been retrained and the new tokenizer
is being used for annotation, although although we do not have
the evaluation results here.
8e.g., chr|chromosome [1-9]|1[0-9]|2[0-
2]|X|Y p|q
Merged Entity/
Treebank Annotation
Tokenization
Entity Annotation
POS Annotation
Treebank/Propbank
Annotation
Figure 1: Annotation Flow
Annotation Task Start Date Annotated Documents
Part-of-Speech Tagging 8/22/03 422
Entity Tagging 9/12/03 414
Treebanking 1/8/04 127
Figure 2: Current Annotation Production Results
Figure 3: Relation Annotation in WordFreak
Tagger Training Material Token Instances
Old Sections 00-15 Penn Treebank 773832
New 315 abstracts 103159
Tagger Overall Accuracy Number Token Instances Accuracy on Accuracy on
Unseen in Training Data Unseen Seen
Old 88.53% 14542 58.80% 95.53%
New 97.33% 4096 85.05% 98.02%
(Testing Material: 294 abstracts from the oncology domain, with 76324 token instances.)
Figure 4: Evaluation of Part-of-Speech Taggers
cations and 557 states, we obtained the following results:
Entity Precision Recall F-measure
Type 0.80 0.72 0.76
Location 0.85 0.73 0.79
State 0.90 0.80 0.85
Overall 0.86 0.75 0.80
An entity is considered correctly identified if and only
if it matches the human labeling by both category (type,
location or state) and span (from position a to position b).
At this stage we have not distinguished between initial
and final states.
While it is difficult to compare taggers that tag
different types of entities (e.g., (Friedman et al, 2001;
Gaizauskas et al, 2003)), CRFs have been utilized for
state-of-the-art results in NP-chunking and gene and
protein tagging (Sha and Pereira, 2003; McDonald
and Pereira, 2004) Currently, we are beginning to
investigate methods to identify relations over the varia-
tion components that are extracted using the entity tagger.
5 Conclusion
We have described here an integrated annotation ap-
proach for two areas of biomedical information extrac-
tion. We discussed several issues that have arisen for this
integration of annotation layers. Much effort has been
spent on the entity definitions and how they relate to the
higher-level concepts which are desired for extraction.
There are promising initial results for training taggers to
extract these entities.
Next steps in the project include: (1) continued anno-
tation of the layers we are currently doing, (2) integra-
tion of the level of predicate-argument annotation, and
(3) further development of the statistical taggers, includ-
ing taggers for identifying relations over their component
entities.
Acknowledgements
The project described in this paper is based at the In-
stitute for Research in Cognitive Science at the Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania and is supported by grant EIA-
0205448 from the National Science Foundation?s Infor-
mation Technology Research (ITR) program.
We would like to thank Aravind Joshi, Jeremy
Lacivita, Paula Matuszek, Tom Morton, and Fernando
Pereira for their comments.
References
M. Ashburner, C.A. Ball, J.A. Blake, D. Botstein, H. But-
ler, J.M. Cherry, A.P. Davis, K. Dolinski, S.S. Dwight,
J.T. Eppig, M.A. Harris, D.P. Hill, L. Issel-Tarver,
A. Kasarskis, S. Lewis, J.C. Matese, J.E. Richardson,
M. Ringwald, G.M. Rubin, and G. Sherlock. 2000.
Gene ontology: Tool for the unification of biology.
Nature Genetics, 25(1):25?29.
Ann Bies, Mark Ferguson, Karen Katz, and Robert Mac-
Intyre. 1995. Bracketing guidelines for Treebank II
Style, Penn Treebank Project. Tech report MS-CIS-
95-06, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
Linguistic Data Consortium. 2002. Entity de-
tection and tracking - phase 1 - EDT and
metonymy annotation guidelines version 2.5
20021205. http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Projects/ACE
/PHASE2/Annotation/.
Carol Friedman, Pauline Kra, Hong Yu, Michael
Krauthammer, and Andrey Rzhetsky. 2001. Genies: a
natural-language processing system for the extraction
of molecular pathways from journal articles. ISMB
(Supplement of Bioinformatics), pages 74?82.
R. Gaizauskas, G. Demetriou, P. Artymiuk, and P. Wil-
lett. 2003. Bioinformatics applications of information
extraction from journal articles. Journal of Bioinfor-
matics, 19(1):135?143.
Daniel Gildea and Martha Palmer. 2002. The Necessity
of Syntactic Parsing for Predicate Argument Recogni-
tion. In Proc. of ACL-2002.
U. Hahn, M. Romacker, and S. Schulz. 2002. Creating
knowledge repositories from biomedical reports: The
MEDSYNDIKATE text mining system. In Proceed-
ings of the Pacific Rim Symposium on Biocomputing,
pages 338?349.
Lynette Hirschman, Jong C. Park, Junichi Tsuji, Limsoon
Wong, and Cathy H. Wu. 2002. Accomplishments and
challenges in literature data mining for biology. Bioin-
formatics Review, 18(12):1553?1561.
Paul Kingsbury and Martha Palmer. 2002. From Tree-
bank to Propbank. In Proceedings of the 3rd Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Evalu-
ation (LREC2002), Las Palmas, Spain.
John Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando Pereira.
2001. Conditional random fields: Probabilistic models
for segmenting and labeling sequence data. In Proc.
18th International Conf. on Machine Learning, pages
282?289. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA.
Andrew Kachites McCallum. 2002. Mal-
let: A machine learning for language toolkit.
http://mallet.cs.umass.edu.
Ryan McDonald and Fernando Pereira. 2004. Identify-
ing gene and protein mentions in text using conditional
random fields. In A Critical Assessment of Text Min-
ing Methods in Molecular Biology workshop. To be
presented.
Adam Meyers. October, 2003. Nombank. Talk at Auto-
matic Content Extraction (ACE) PI Meeting, Alexan-
dria, VA.
Scott Miller, David Stallard, Robert Bobrow, and Richard
Schwartz. 1996. A fully statistical approach to
natural language interfaces. In Aravind Joshi and
Martha Palmer, editors, Proceedings of the Thirty-
Fourth Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 55?61, San Francisco. Mor-
gan Kaufmann Publishers.
Tomoko Ohta, Yuka Tateisi, Jin-Dong Kim, and Jun?ici
Tsuji. 2002. The GENIA corpus: An annotated corpus
in molecular biology domain. In Proceedings of the
10th International Conference on Intelligent Systems
for Molecular Biology.
J. Park, H. Kim, and J. Kim. 2001. Bidirectional in-
cremental parsing for automatic pathway identification
with combinatory categorial grammar. In Proceedings
of the Pacific Rim Symposium on Biocomputing, pages
396?407.
J. Pustejovsky, J. Castano, and J. Zhang. 2002. Robust
relational parsing over biomedical literature: Extract-
ing inhibit relations. In Proceedings of the Pacific Rim
Symposium on Biocomputing, pages 362?373.
Fei Sha and Fernando Pereira. 2003. Shallow parsing
with conditional random fields. In Proceeds of Human
Language Technology-NAACL 2003.
Mihai Surdeanu, Sanda Harabagiu, John Williams, and
Paul Aarseth. 2003. Using predicate-argument struc-
tures for information extraction. In Proceedings of
ACL 2003, Sapporo, Japan.
Yuka Tateisi and Jun-ichi Tsujii. 2004. Part-of-speech
annotation of biology research abstracts. In Proceed-
ings of LREC04. To be presented.
A. Yakushiji, Y. Tateisi, Y. Miyao, and J. Tsujii. 2001.
Event extraction from biomedical papers using a full
parser. In Proceedings of the Pacific Rim Symposium
on Biocomputing, pages 408?419.
Proceedings of the BioNLP Workshop on Linking Natural Language Processing and Biology at HLT-NAACL 06, pages 41?48,
New York City, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Human Gene Name Normalization using Text Matching with Automatically
Extracted Synonym Dictionaries
Haw-ren Fang
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742, USA
hrfang@cs.umd.edu
Kevin Murphy and Yang Jin and Jessica S. Kim and Peter S. White?
Division of Oncology, Children?s Hospital of Philadelphia
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
{murphy,jin,kim,white}@genome.chop.edu
Abstract
The identification of genes in biomedi-
cal text typically consists of two stages:
identifying gene mentions and normaliza-
tion of gene names. We have created an
automated process that takes the output
of named entity recognition (NER) sys-
tems designed to identify genes and nor-
malizes them to standard referents. The
system identifies human gene synonyms
from online databases to generate an ex-
tensive synonym lexicon. The lexicon is
then compared to a list of candidate gene
mentions using various string transforma-
tions that can be applied and chained in
a flexible order, followed by exact string
matching or approximate string matching.
Using a gold standard of MEDLINE ab-
stracts manually tagged and normalized
for mentions of human genes, a com-
bined tagging and normalization system
achieved 0.669 F-measure (0.718 preci-
sion and 0.626 recall) at the mention level,
and 0.901 F-measure (0.957 precision and
0.857 recall) at the document level for
documents used for tagger training.
1 Introduction
Gene and protein name identification and recogni-
tion in biomedical text are challenging problems.
A recent competition, BioCreAtIvE, highlighted the
? To whom correspondence should be addressed.
two tasks inherent in gene recognition: identifying
gene mentions in text (task 1A) (Yeh et al, 2005)
and normalizing an identified gene list (task 1B)
(Hirschman et al, 2005). This competition resulted
in many novel and useful approaches, but the results
clearly identified that more important work is neces-
sary, especially for normalization, the subject of the
current work.
Compared with gene NER, gene normalization
is syntactically easier because identification of the
textual boundaries of each mention is not required.
However, gene normalization poses significant se-
mantic challenges, as it requires detection of the ac-
tual gene intended, along with reporting of the gene
in a standardized form (Crim et al, 2005). Several
approaches have been proposed for gene normal-
ization, including classification techniques (Crim et
al., 2005; McDonald et al, 2004), rule-based sys-
tems (Hanisch et al, 2005), text matching with dic-
tionaries (Cohen, 2005), and combinations of these
approaches. Integrated systems for gene identifica-
tion typically have three stages: identifying candi-
date mentions in text, identifying the semantic in-
tent of each mention, and normalizing mentions by
associating each mention with a unique gene identi-
fier (Morgan et al, 2004). In our current work, we
focus upon normalization, which is currently under-
explored for human gene names. Our objective is
to create systems for automatically identifying hu-
man gene mentions with high accuracy that can be
used for practical tasks in biomedical literature re-
trieval and extraction. Our current approach relies
on a manually created and tuned set of rules.
41
2 Automatically Extracted Synonym
Dictionaries
Even when restricted to human genes, biomedical
researchers mention genes in a highly variable man-
ner, with a minimum of adherence to the gene nam-
ing standard provided by the Human Gene Nomen-
clature Committee (HGNC). In addition, frequent
variations in spelling and punctuation generate ad-
ditional non-standard forms. Extracting gene syn-
onyms automatically from online databases has sev-
eral benefits (Cohen, 2005). First, online databases
contain highly accurate annotations from expert
curators, and thus serve as excellent information
sources. Second, refreshing of specialized lexicons
from online sources provides a means to obtain new
information automatically and with no human in-
tervention. We thus sought a way to rapidly col-
lect as many human gene identifiers as possible.
All the statistics used in this section are from on-
line database holdings last extracted on February 20,
2006.
2.1 Building the Initial Dictionaries
Nineteen online websites and databases were ini-
tially surveyed to identify a set of resources that col-
lectively contain a large proportion of all known hu-
man gene identifiers. After examination of the 19 re-
sources with a limited but representative set of gene
names, we determined that only four databases to-
gether contained all identifiers (excluding resource-
specific identifiers used for internal tracking pur-
poses) used by the 19 resources. We then built an
automated retrieval agent to extract gene synonyms
from these four online databases: The HGNC Ge-
new database, Entrez Gene, Swiss-Prot, and Stan-
ford SOURCE. The results were collected into a sin-
gle dictionary. Each entry in the dictionary con-
sists of a gene identifier and a corresponding offi-
cial HGNC symbol. For data from HGNC, with-
drawn entries were excluded. Retrieving gene syn-
onyms from SOURCE required a list of gene identi-
fiers to query SOURCE, which was compiled by the
retrieval agent from the other sources (i.e., HGNC,
Entrez Gene and Swiss-Prot). In total, there were
333,297 entries in the combined dictionary.
2.2 Rule-Based Filter for Purification
Examination of the initial dictionary showed that
some entries did not fit our definition of a gene iden-
tifier, usually because they were peripheral (e.g., a
GenBank sequence identifier) or were describing a
gene class (e.g., an Enzyme Commission identifier
or a term such as ?tyrosine kinase?). A rule-based
filter was imposed to prune these uninformative syn-
onyms. The rules include removing identifiers under
these conditions:
1. Follows the form of a GenBank or EC acces-
sion ID (e.g., 1-2 letters followed by 5-6 dig-
its).
2. Contains at most 2 characters and 1 letter but
not an official HGNC symbol (e.g., P1).
3. Matches a description in the OMIM morbid
list1 (e.g., Tangier disease).
4. Is a gene EC number.2
5. Ends with ?, family ??, where ? is a capital letter
or a digit.
6. Follows the form of a DNA clone (e.g., 1-4 dig-
its followed by a single letter, followed by 1-2
digits).
7. Starts with ?similar to? (e.g., similar to zinc fin-
ger protein 533).
Our filter pruned 9,384 entries (2.82%).
2.3 Internal Update Across the Dictionaries
We used HGNC-designated human gene symbols as
the unique identifiers. However, we found that cer-
tain gene symbols listed as ?official? in the non-
HGNC sources were not always current, and that
other assigned symbols were not officially desig-
nated as such by HGNC. To remedy these issues, we
treated HGNC as the most reliable source and Entrez
Gene as the next most reliable, and then updated our
dictionary as follows:
1ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/repository/OMIM/morbidmap
2EC numbers are removed because they often represent gene
classes rather than specific instances.
42
? In the initial dictionary, some synonyms are
associated with symbols that were later with-
drawn by HGNC. Our retrieval agent extracted
a list of 5,048 withdrawn symbols from HGNC,
and then replaced any outdated symbols in the
dictionary with the official ones. Sixty with-
drawn symbols were found to be ambiguous,
but we found none of them appearing as sym-
bols in our dictionary.
? If a symbol used by Swiss-Prot or SOURCE
was not found as a symbol in HGNC or En-
trez Gene, but was a non-ambiguous synonym
in HGNC or Entrez Gene, then we replaced
it by the corresponding symbol of the non-
ambiguous synonym.
Among the 323,913 remaining entries, 801 entries
(0.25%) had symbols updated. After removing du-
plicate entries (42.19%), 187,267 distinct symbol-
synonym pairs representing 33,463 unique genes
were present. All tasks addressed in this section
were performed automatically by the retrieval agent.
3 Exact String Matching
We initially invoked several string transformations
for gene normalization, including:
1. Normalization of case.
2. Replacement of hyphens with spaces.
3. Removal of punctuation.
4. Removal of parenthesized materials.
5. Removal of stop words3.
6. Stemming, where the Porter stemmer was em-
ployed (Porter, 1980).
7. Removal of all spaces.
The first four transformations are derived from
(Cohen et al, 2002). Not all the rules we ex-
perimented with demonstrated good results for hu-
man gene name normalization. For example, we
found that stemming is inappropriate for this task.
To amend potential boundary errors of tagged men-
tions, or to match the variants of the synonyms, four
3ftp://ftp.cs.cornell.edu/pub/smart/English.stop
mention reductions (Cohen et al, 2002) were also
applied to the mentions or synonyms:
1. Removal of the first character.
2. Removal of the first word.
3. Removal of the last character.
4. Removal of the last word.
To provide utility, a system was built to allow
for transformations and reductions to be invoked
flexibly, including chaining of rules in various se-
quences, grouping of rules for simultaneous invo-
cation, and application of transformations to ei-
ther or both the candidate mention input and the
dictionary. For example, the mention ?alpha2C-
adrenergic receptor? in PMID 8967963 matches
synonym ?Alpha-2C adrenergic receptor? of gene
ADRA2C after normalizing case, replacing hyphens
by spaces, and removing spaces. Each rule can be
built into an invoked sequence deemed by evaluation
to be optimal for a given application domain.
A normalization step is defined here as the pro-
cess of finding string matches after a sequence of
chained transformations, with optional reductions
of the mentions or synonyms. We call a normal-
ization step safe if it generally makes only minor
changes to mentions. On the contrary, a normaliza-
tion step is called aggressive if it often makes sub-
stantial changes. However, a normalization step safe
for long mentions may not be safe for short ones.
Hence, our system was designed to allow a user to
set optional parameters factoring the minimal men-
tion length and/or the minimal normalized mention
length required to invoke a match.
A normalization system consists of multiple nor-
malization steps in sequence. Transformations are
applied sequentially and a match searched for; if
no match is identified for a particular step, the al-
gorithm proceeds to the next transformation. The
normalization steps and the optional conditions are
well-encoded in our program, which allows for a
flexible system specified by the sequences of the step
codes. Our general principle is to design a normal-
ization system that invokes safe normalization steps
first, and then gradually moves to more aggressive
43
ones. As the process lengthens, the precision de-
creases while the recall increases. The balance be-
tween precision and recall desired for a particular
application can be defined by the user.
Specifically, given string s, we use T (s) to de-
note the transformed string. All the 7 transformation
rules listed at the beginning of this subsection are
idempotent, since T (T (s)) = T (s). Two transfor-
mations, denoted by T1 and T2, are called commuta-
tive, if T1(T2(s)) = T2(T1(s)). The first four trans-
formations listed form a set of commutative rules.
Knowledge of these properties helps design a nor-
malization system.
Recall that NER systems, such as those required
for BioCreAtIvE task 1B, consist of two stages. For
our applications of interest, the normalization in-
put is generated by a gene tagger (McDonald and
Pereira, 2005), followed by the normalization sys-
tem described here as the second stage. In the sec-
ond stage, more synonyms do not necessarily imply
better performance, because less frequently used or
less informative synonyms may result in ambigu-
ous matches, where a match is called ambiguous
if it associates a mention with multiple gene iden-
tifiers. For example, from the Swiss-Prot dictio-
nary we know the gene mention ?MDR1? in PMID
8880878 is a synonym uniquely representing the
ABCB1 gene. However, if we include synonyms
from HGNC, it results in an ambiguous match be-
cause the TBC1D9 gene also uses the synonym
?MDR1?.
We investigated the rules separately, designed the
initial normalization procedure, and tuned our sys-
tem at the end. To evaluate the efficacy of our com-
piled dictionary and its sources, we determined the
accuracy of our system with all transformations and
reductions invoked sequentially, and without any ef-
forts to optimize the sequence (see section 6 for eval-
uation details). The goal in this experiment was to
evaluate the effectiveness of each vocabulary source
alone and in combination. Our experimental re-
sults at the mention level are summarized in Ta-
ble 1. The best two-staged system achieved a preci-
sion of 0.725 and recall of 0.704 with an F-measure
of 0.714, by using only HGNC and Swiss-Prot en-
tries.
As errors can be derived from the tagger or the
normalization alone or in combination, we also as-
Table 1: Results of Gene Normalization Using Exact
String Matching
Steps Recall Precision F-measure
(1) HGNC 0.762 0.511 0.611
(2) Entrez Gene 0.686 0.559 0.616
(3) Swiss-Prot 0.722 0.622 0.669
(4) SOURCE 0.743 0.431 0.545
(1)+(2) 0.684 0.564 0.618
(1)+(3) 0.725 0.704 0.714
(2)+(3) 0.665 0.697 0.681
(1)+(2)+(3) 0.667 0.702 0.684
(1)+(2)+(3)+(4) 0.646 0.707 0.675
sessed the performance of our normalization pro-
gram alone by directly normalizing the mentions in
the gold standard file used for evaluation (i.e., as-
suming the tagger is perfect). Our normalization
system achieved 0.824 F-measure (0.958 precision
and 0.723 recall) in this evaluation.
4 Approximate String Matching
Approximate string matching techniques have been
well-developed for entity identification. Given two
strings, a distance metric generates a score that re-
flects their similarity. Various string distance met-
rics have been developed based upon edit-distance,
string tokenization, or a hybrid of the two ap-
proaches (Cohen et al, 2003). Given a gene men-
tion, we consider the synonym(s) with the high-
est score to be a match if the score is higher than
a defined threshold. Our program also allows op-
tional string transformations and provides a user-
defined parameter for determining the minimal men-
tion length for approximate string matching. The
decision on the method chosen may be affected by
several factors, such as the application domain, fea-
tures of the strings representing the entity class, and
the particular data sets used. For gene NER, vari-
ous scoring methods have been favored (Crim et al,
2005; Cohen et al, 2003; Wellner et al, 2005).
Approximate string matching is usually consid-
ered more aggressive than exact string matching
with transformations; hence, we applied it as the last
step of our normalization sequence. To assess the
usefulness of approximate string matching, we be-
gan with our best dictionary subset in Subsection 3
44
(i.e., using HGNC and SwissProt), and applied ap-
proximate string matching as an additional normal-
ization step.
 0.35
 0.4
 0.45
 0.5
 0.55
 0.6
 0.65
 0.7
 0.75
 0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1
Pr
ec
is
io
n
q-gram Match Ratio
 0.7
 0.71
 0.72
 0.73
 0.74
 0.75
 0.76
 0.77
 0.78
 0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1
R
ec
al
l
q-gram Match Ratio
Jaro
JaroWinkler
SmithWaterman
TFIDF
UnsmoothedJS
Jaccard
Figure 1: Performance of Approximate String
Matching for Gene Normalization.
We selected six existing distance metrics that ap-
peared to be useful for human gene normalization:
Jaro, JaroWinkler, SmithWaterman, TFIDF, Un-
smoothedJS, and Jaccard. Our experiment showed
that TFIDF, UnsmoothedJS and Jaccard outper-
formed the others for human gene normalization in
our system, as shown in Figure 1. By incorpo-
rating approximate string matching using either of
these metrics into our system, overall performance
was slightly improved to 0.718 F-measure (0.724
precision and 0.713 recall) when employing a high
threshold (0.95). However, in most scenarios, ap-
proximate matching did not considerably improve
recall and had a non-trivial detrimental effect upon
precision.
5 Ambiguation Analysis
Gene identifier ambiguity is inherent in synonym
dictionaries as well as being generated during nor-
malization steps that transform mention strings.
5.1 Ambiguity in Synonym Dictionaries
If multiple gene identifiers share the same synonym,
it results in ambiguity. Table 2 shows the level of
ambiguity between and among the four sources of
gene identifiers used by our dictionary. The rate
of ambiguity ranges from 0.89% to 2.83%, which
is a rate comparable with that of mouse (1.5%)
and Drosophila (3.6%) identifiers (Hirschman et al,
2005).
 1
 10
 100
 1000
 10000
 100000
 1e+06
 1  10
# 
Sy
no
ny
m
s
Degree of Ambiguity
HGNC
Entrez Gene
Swiss-Prot
SOURCE
Total
Figure 2: Distribution of ambiguous synonyms in
the human gene dictionary.
Figure 2 is a log-log plot showing the distribu-
tion of ambiguous synonyms, where the degree is
the number of gene identifiers that a synonym is as-
sociated with. Comparing Figure 2 with (Hirschman
et al, 2005, Figure 3), we noted that on average, hu-
man gene synonyms are less ambiguous than those
of the three model organisms.
Another type of ambiguity is caused by gene sym-
bols or synonyms being common English words or
other biological terms. Our dictionary contains 11
gene symbols identical to common stop words4: T,
AS, DO, ET, IF, RD, TH, ASK, ITS, SHE and
WAS.
5.2 Ambiguous Matches in Gene
Normalization
We call a match ambiguous if it associates a men-
tion with multiple gene identifiers. Although the
4ftp://ftp.cs.cornell.edu/pub/smart/English.stop
45
Table 2: Statistics for Dictionary Sources
Dictionary # Symbols # Synonyms Ratio Max. # of Synonyms # with One Ambiguity
per Gene Definition Rate
HGNC 22,838 78,706 3.446 10 77,389 1.67%
Entrez Gene 33,007 109,127 3.306 22 106,034 2.83%
Swiss-Prot 12,470 61,743 4.951 17 60,536 1.95%
SOURCE 17,130 66,682 3.893 13 66,086 0.89%
Total 33,469 181,061 5.410 22 176,157 2.71%
normalization procedure may create ambiguity, if a
mention matches multiple synonyms, it may not be
strictly ambiguous. For example, the gene mention
?M creatine kinase? in PMID 1690725 matches the
synonyms ?Creatine kinase M-type? and ?Creatine
kinase, M chain? in our dictionary using the TFIDF
scoring method (with score 0.866). In this case, both
synonyms are associated with the CKM gene, so the
match is not ambiguous. However, even if a mention
matches only one synonym, it can be ambiguous, be-
cause the synonym is possibly ambiguous.
Figure 3 shows the result of an experiment con-
ducted upon 200,000 MEDLINE abstracts, where
the degree of ambiguity is the number of gene iden-
tifiers that a mention is associated with. The maxi-
mum, average, and standard deviation of the ambi-
guity degrees are 20, 1.129 and 0.550, respectively.
The overall ambiguity rate of all matched mentions
was 8.16%, and the rate of ambiguity is less than
10% at each step. Successful disambiguation can
increase the true positive match rate and therefore
improve performance but is beyond the scope of the
current investigation.
 1
 10
 100
 1000
 10000
 100000
 1e+06
 2  4  6  8  10  12  14  16  18  20
# 
M
en
tio
ns
# Matched Genes
Figure 3: Distribution of Ambiguous Genes in
200,000 MEDLINE Abstracts.
6 Application and Evaluation of an
Optimized Normalizer
Finally, we were interested in determining the effec-
tiveness of an optimized system based upon the gene
normalization system described above, and also cou-
pled with a state-of-the-art gene tagger. To de-
termine the optimal results of such a system, we
created a corpus of 100 MEDLINE abstracts that
together contained 1,094 gene mentions for 170
unique genes (also used in the evaluations above).
These documents were a subset of those used to train
the tagger, and thus measure optimal, rather than
typical MEDLINE, performance (data for a gener-
alized evaluation is forthcoming). This corpus was
manually annotated to identify human genes, ac-
cording to a precise definition of gene mentions that
an NER gene system would be reasonably expected
to tag and normalize correctly. Briefly, the definition
included only human genes, excluded multi-protein
complexes and antibodies, excluded chained men-
tions of genes (e.g., ?HDAC1- and -2 genes?), and
excluded gene classes that were not normalizable
to a specific symbol (e.g., tyrosine kinase). Docu-
ments were dual-pass annotated in full and then ad-
judicated by a 3rd expert. Adjudication revealed a
very high level of agreement between annotators.
To optimize the rule set for human gene normal-
ization, we evaluated up to 200 cases randomly cho-
sen from all MEDLINE files for each rule, where
invocation of that specific rule alone resulted in a
match. Most of the transformations worked per-
fectly or very well. Stemming and removal of the
first or last word or character each demonstrated
poor performance, as genes and gene classes were
often incorrectly converted to other gene instances
(e.g., ?CAP? and ?CAPS? are distinct genes). Re-
46
moval of stop words generated a high rate of false
positives. Rules were ranked according to their pre-
cision when invoked separately. A high-performing
sequence was ?0 01 02 03 06 016 026 036?, with 0
referring to case-insensitivity, 1 being replacement
of hyphens with spaces, 2 being removal of punc-
tuation, 3 being removal of parenthesized materials,
and 6 being removal of spaces; grouped digits indi-
cate simultaneous invocation of each specified rule
in the group. Table 3 indicates the cumulative accu-
racy achieved at each step5. A formalized determi-
nation of an optimal sequence is in progress. Ap-
proximate matching did not considerably improve
recall and had a non-trivial detrimental effect upon
precision.
Table 3: Results of Gene Normalization after Each
Step of Exact String Matching
Steps Recall Precision F-measure
0 0.628 0.698 0.661
01 0.649 0.701 0.674
02 0.654 0.699 0.676
03 0.665 0.702 0.683
06 0.665 0.702 0.683
016 0.718 0.685 0.701
026 0.718 0.685 0.701
036 0.718 0.685 0.701
The normalization sequence ?0 01 02 03 06 016
026 036? was then utilized for two separate evalua-
tions. First, we used the actual textual mentions of
each gene from the gold standard files as input into
our optimized normalization sequence, in order to
determine the accuracy of the normalization process
alone. We also used a previously developed CRF
gene tagger (McDonald and Pereira, 2005) to tag the
gold standard files, and then used the tagger?s output
as input for our normalization sequence. This sec-
ond evaluation determined the accuracy of a com-
bined NER system for human gene identification.
Depending upon the application, evaluation can
be determined more significant at either at the men-
tion level (redundantly), where each individual men-
tion is evaluated independently for accuracy, or as in
5The last two steps did not generate new matches using our
gold standard file and therefore the scores were unchanged.
These rule sets may improve performance in other cases.
the case of BioCreAtIvE task 1B, at the document
level (non-redundantly), where all mentions within a
document are considered to be equivalent. For pure
information extraction tasks, mention level accuracy
is a relevant performance indicator. However, for ap-
plications such as information extraction-based in-
formation retrieval (e.g., the identification of docu-
ments mentioning a specific gene), document-level
accuracy is a relevant gauge of system performance.
For normalization alone, at the mention level
our optimized normalization system achieved 0.882
precision, 0.704 recall, and 0.783 F-measure. At
the document level, the normalization results were
1.000 precision, 0.994 recall, and 0.997 F-measure.
For the combined NER system, the performance
was 0.718 precision, 0.626 recall, and 0.669 F-
measure at the mention level. At the document level,
the NER system results were 0.957 precision, 0.857
recall, and 0.901 F-measure. The lower accuracy of
the combined system was due to the fact that both
the tagger and the normalizer introduce error rates
that are multiplicative in combination.
7 Conclusions and Future Work
In this article we present a gene normalization sys-
tem that is intended for use in human gene NER, but
that can also be readily adapted to other biomedi-
cal normalization tasks. When optimized for human
gene normalization, our system achieved 0.783 F-
measure at the mention level.
Choosing the proper normalization steps depends
on several factors, such as (for genes) the organism
of interest, the entity class, the accuracy of identify-
ing gene mentions, and the reliability of the under-
lying dictionary. While the results of our normalizer
compare favorably with previous efforts, much fu-
ture work can be done to further improve the perfor-
mance of our system, including:
1. Performance of identifying gene mentions.
Only approximately 50 percent of gene men-
tions identified by our tagger were normaliz-
able. While this is mostly due to the fact that
the tagger identifies gene classes that cannot
be normalized to a gene instance, a significant
subset of gene instance mentions are not being
normalized.
2. Reliability of the dictionary. Though we have
47
investigated a sizable number of gene identifier
sources, the four representative sources used
for compiling our gene dictionary are incom-
plete and often not precise for individual terms.
Some text mentions were not normalizable due
the the incompleteness of our dictionary, which
limited the recall.
3. Disambiguation. A small portion (typi-
cally 7%-10%) of the matches were ambigu-
ous. Successful development of disambigua-
tion tools can improve the performance.
4. Machine-learning. It is likely possible that op-
timized rules can be used as probabilistic fea-
tures for a machine-learning-based version of
our normalizer.
Gene normalization has several potential applica-
tions, such as for biomedical information extraction,
database curation, and as a prerequisite for relation
extraction. Providing a proper synonym dictionary,
our normalization program is amenable to generaliz-
ing to other organisms, and has already proven suc-
cessful in our group for other entity normalization
tasks. An interesting future study would be to deter-
mine accuracy for BioCreAtIvE data once mouse,
Drosophila, and yeast vocabularies are incorporated
into our system.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported in part by NSF grant
EIA-0205448, funds from the David Lawrence
Altschuler Chair in Genomics and Computational
Biology, and the Penn Genomics Institute. The au-
thors acknowledge Shannon Davis and Jeremy Laut-
man for gene dictionary assessment, Steven Carroll
for gene tagger implementation and results, Penn
BioIE annotators for annotation of the gold standard,
and Monica D?arcy and members of the Penn BioIE
team for helpful comments.
References
K. B. Cohen, A. E. Dolbey, G. K. Acquaah-Mensah, and
L. Hunter. 2002. Contrast and variability in gene
names. In ACL Workshop on Natural Language Pro-
cessing in the Biomedical Domain, pages 14?20.
W. W. Cohen, P. Ravikumar, and S. E. Fienberg. 2003.
A comparison of string distance metrices for name-
matching tasks. In Proceedings of IIWeb Workshop.
A. M. Cohen. 2005. Unsupervised gene/protein entity
normalization using automatically extracted dictionar-
ies. In Linking Biological Literature, Ontologies and
Databases: Mining Biological Semantics, Proceed-
ings of the BioLINK2005 Workshop, pages 17?24. MI:
Association for Computational Linguistics, Detroit.
J. Crim, R. McDonald, and F. Pereira. 2005. Automati-
cally annotating documents with normalized gene lists.
BMC Bioinformatics, 6(Suppl 1)(S13).
D. Hanisch, K. Fundel, H.-T. Mevissen, R. Zimmer, and
J. Fluck. 2005. Prominer: Rule-based protein and
gene entity recognition. BMC Bioinformatics, 6(Suppl
1)(S14).
L. Hirschman, M. Colosimo, A. Morgan, and A. Yeh.
2005. Overview of biocreative task 1b: Normalized
gene lists. BMC Bioinformatics, 6(Suppl 1)(S11).
R. McDonald and F. Pereira. 2005. Identifying gene
and protein mentions in text using conditional random
fields. BMC Bioinformatics, 6(Suppl 1)(S6).
R. McDonald, R. S. Winters, M. Mandel, Y. Jin, P. S.
White, and F. Pereira. 2004. An entity tagger for rec-
ognizing acquired genomic variations in cancer litera-
ture. Journal of Bioinformatics, 20(17):3249?3251.
A. A. Morgan, L. Hirschman, M. Colosimo, A. S. Yeh,
and J. B. Colombe. 2004. Gene name identification
and normalization using a model organism database.
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 37(6):396?410.
M. F. Porter. 1980. An algorithm for suffix stripping.
Program, 14(3).
B Wellner, J. Castan?o, and J. Pustejovsky. 2005. Adap-
tive string similarity metrics for biomedical reference
resolution. In Proceedings of the ACL-ISMB Work-
shop on Linking Biological Literature, Ontologies and
Databases: Mining Biological Semantics, pages 9?16,
Detroit. Association for Computational Linguistics.
A. Yeh, A. Morgan, M. Colosimo, and L. Hirschman.
2005. Biocreative task 1a: Gene mention finding eval-
uation. BMC Bioinformatics, 6(Suppl 1)(S2).
48
Proceedings of the Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 53?56,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Semi-Automated Named Entity Annotation
Kuzman Ganchev and Fernando Pereira
Computer and Information Science,
University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia PA
{ kuzman and pereira } @cis.upenn.edu
Mark Mandel
Linguistic Data Consortium,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia PA
mamandel@ldc.upenn.edu
Steven Carroll and Peter White
Division of Oncology, Children?s Hospital of Philadelphia Philadelphia PA
{ carroll and white }@genome.chop.edu
Abstract
We investigate a way to partially automate
corpus annotation for named entity recogni-
tion, by requiring only binary decisions from
an annotator. Our approach is based on a lin-
ear sequence model trained using a k-best
MIRA learning algorithm. We ask an an-
notator to decide whether each mention pro-
duced by a high recall tagger is a true men-
tion or a false positive. We conclude that our
approach can reduce the effort of extending
a seed training corpus by up to 58%.
1 Introduction
Semi-automated text annotation has been the subject
of several previous studies. Typically, a human an-
notator corrects the output of an automatic system.
The idea behind our approach is to start annota-
tion manually and to partially automate the process
in the later stages. We assume that some data has
already been manually tagged and use it to train a
tagger specifically for high recall. We then run this
tagger on the rest of our corpus and ask an annotator
to filter the list of suggested gene names.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 describes the model and learning algorithm.
Section 3 relates our approach to previous work.
Section 4 describes our experiments and Section 5
concludes the paper.
2 Methods
Throughout this work, we use a linear sequence
model. This class of models includes popular tag-
ging models for named entities such as conditional
random fields, maximum entropy Markov models
and max-margin Markov networks. Linear sequence
models score possible tag sequences for a given in-
put as the dot product between a learned weight vec-
tor and a feature vector derived from the input and
proposed tas sequence. Linear sequence models dif-
fer principally on how the weight vector is learned.
Our experiments use the MIRA algorithm (Cram-
mer et al, 2006; McDonald et al, 2005) to learn
the weight vector.
2.1 Notation
In what follows, x denotes the generic input sen-
tence, Y (x) the set of possible labelings of x, and
Y +(x) the set of correct labelings of x. There is
also a distinguished ?gold? labeling y(x) ? Y +(x).
For each pair of a sentence x and labeling y ?
Y (x), we compute a vector-valued feature represen-
tation f(x, y). Given a weight vector w, the score
w ? f(x, y) ranks possible labelings of x, and we de-
note by Yk,w(x) the set of k top scoring labelings for
x.
We use the standard B,I,O encoding for named
entities (Ramshaw and Marcus, 1995). Thus Y (x)
for x of length n is the set of all sequences of length
n matching the regular expression (O|(BI?))?. In a
linear sequence model, for suitable feature functions
f , Yk,w(x) can be computed efficiently with Viterbi
decoding.
2.2 k-best MIRA and Loss Functions
The learning portion of our method finds a weight
vector w that scores the correct labelings of the test
data higher than incorrect labelings. We used a k-
53
best version of the MIRA algorithm (Crammer et
al., 2006; McDonald et al, 2005). This is an online
learning algorithm that starts with a zero weight vec-
tor and for each training sentence makes the small-
est possible update that would score the correct la-
bel higher than the old top k labels. That is, for each
training sentence x we update the weight vector w
according to the rule:
wnew = argminw ?w ? wold?
s. t. w ? f(x, y(x)) ? w ? f(x, y) ? L(Y +(x), y)
?y ? Yk,wold(x)
where L(Y +(x), y) is the loss, which measures the
errors in labeling y relative to the set of correct la-
belings Y +(x).
An advantage of the MIRA algorithm (over many
other learning algorithms such as conditional ran-
dom fields) is that it allows the use of arbitrary loss
functions. For our experiments, the loss of a label-
ing is a weighted combination of the number of false
positive mentions and the number of false negative
mentions in that labeling.
2.3 Semi-Automated Tagging
For our semi-automated annotation experiments, we
imagine the following scenario: We have already an-
notated half of our training corpus and want to anno-
tate the remaining half. The goal is to save annotator
effort by using a semi-automated approach instead
of annotating the rest entirely manually.
In particular we investigate the following method:
train a high-recall named entity tagger on the anno-
tated data and use that to tag the remaining corpus.
Now ask a human annotator to filter the resulting
mentions. The mentions rejected by the annotator
are simply dropped from the annotation, leaving the
remaining mentions.
3 Relation to Previous Work
This section relates our approach to previous work
on semi-automated approaches. First we discuss
how semi-automated annotation is different from ac-
tive learning and then discuss some previous semi-
automated annotation work.
3.1 Semi-Automated versus Active Learning
It is important not to confuse semi-automated anno-
tation with active learning. While they both attempt
to alleviate the burden of creating an annotated cor-
pus, they do so in a completely orthogonal manner.
Active learning tries to select which instances should
be labeled in order to make the most impact on learn-
ing. Semi-automated annotation tries to make the
annotation of each instance faster or easier. In par-
ticular, it is possible to combine active learning and
semi-automated annotation by using an active learn-
ing method to select which sentences to label and
then using a semi-automated labeling method.
3.2 Previous work on semi-automated
annotation
The most common approach to semi-automatic an-
notation is to automatically tag an instance and then
ask an annotator to correct the results. We restrict
our discussion to this paradigm due to space con-
straints. Marcus et al (1994), Chiou et al (2001)
and Xue et al (2002) apply this approach with some
minor modifications to part of speech tagging and
phrase structure parsing. The automatic system of
Marcus et al only produces partial parses that are
then assembled by the annotators, while Chiou et al
modified their automatic parser specifically for use
in annotation. Chou et al (2006) use this tag and
correct approach to create a corpus of predicate ar-
gument structures in the biomedical domain. Culota
et al (2006) use a refinement of the tag and correct
approach to extract addressbook information from e-
mail messages. They modify the system?s best guess
as the user makes corrections, resulting in less anno-
tation actions.
4 Experiments
We now evaluate to what extent our semi-automated
annotation framework can be useful, and how much
effort it requires. For both questions we compare
semi-automatic to fully manual annotation. In our
first set of experiments, we measured the usefulness
of semi-automatically annotated corpora for training
a gene mention tagger. In the second set of exper-
iments, we measured the annotation effort for gene
mentions with the standard fully manual method and
with the semi-automated methods.
4.1 Measuring Effectiveness
The experiments in this section use the training data
from the the Biocreative II competition (Tanabe et
54
Sentence Expression of SREBP-1a stimulated StAR promoter activity in the context of COS-1 cells
gold label Expression of SREBP-1a stimulated StAR promoter activity in . . .
alternative Expression of SREBP-1a stimulated StAR promoter activity in . . .
alternative Expression of SREBP-1a stimulated StAR promoter activity in . . .
Figure 1: An example sentence and its annotation in Biocreative II. The evaluation metric would give full
credit for guessing one of the alternative labels rather than the ?gold? label.
al., 2005). The data is supplied as a set of sentences
chosen randomly fromMEDLINE and annotated for
gene mentions.
Each sentence in the corpus is provided as a list of
?gold? gene mentions as well as a set of alternatives
for each mention. The alternatives are generated by
the annotators and count as true positives. Figure 1
shows an example sentence with its gold and alter-
native mentions. The evaluation metric for these ex-
periments is F-score augmented with the possibility
of alternatives (Yeh et al, 2005).
We used 5992 sentences as the data that has al-
ready been annotated manually (set Data-1), and
simulated different ways of annotating the remain-
ing 5982 sentences (set Data-2). We compare the
quality of annotation by testing taggers trained us-
ing these corpora on a 1493 sentence test set.
We trained a high-recall tagger (recall of 89.6%)
on Data-1, and ran it on Data-2. Since we have
labels available for Data-2, we simulated an anno-
tator filtering these proposed mentions by accepting
them only if they exactly match a ?gold? or alterna-
tive mention. This gave us an F-score of 94.7% on
Data-2 and required 9981 binary decisions.
Figure 2 shows F1 score as a function of the num-
ber of extra sentences annotated. Without any ad-
ditional data, the F-measure of the tagger is 81.0%.
The two curves correspond to annotation with and
without alternatives. The horizontal line at 82.8%
shows the level achieved by the semi-automatic
method (when using all of Data-2).
From the figure, we can see that to get compa-
rable performance to the semi-automatic approach,
we need to fully manually annotate roughly a third
as much data with alternatives, or about two thirds as
much data without alternatives. The following sec-
tion examines what this means in terms of annotator
time by providing timing results for semi-automatic
and fully-manual annotation without alternatives.
 81 81.5 82 82.5 83 83.5 84 84.5 85
 0
 1000
 2000
 3000
 4000
 5000
 6000
Extra
 Anno
tated 
Sente
nces (
from 
Data-
2)
Manu
al Wi
th Alt
ernati
ves
Manu
al w/o
 Alter
native
s
Semi-
Autom
atic (o
n all o
f Data
-2)
Figure 2: Effect of the number of annotated in-
stances on F1 score. In all cases the original 5992
instances were used; the curves show manual an-
notation while the level line is the semi-automatic
method. The curves are averages over 3 trials.
4.2 Measuring Effort
The second set of experiments compares annotator
effort between fully manual and semi-automatic an-
notation. Because we did not have access to an expe-
rienced annotator from the Biocreative project, and
gene mention annotations vary subtly among anno-
tation efforts, we evaluated annotator effort on on the
PennBioIE named entity corpus.1 Furthermore, we
have not yet annotated enough data locally to per-
form both effectiveness and effort experiments on
the local corpus alone. However, both corpora an-
notate gene mentions in MEDLINE abstracts, so we
expect that the timing results will not be significantly
different.
We asked an experienced annotator to tag 194
MEDLINE abstracts: 96 manually and 98 using the
semi-automated method. Manual annotation was
done using annotation software familiar to the an-
notator. Semi-automatic annotation was done with a
1Available from http://bioie.ldc.upenn.edu/
55
Web-based tool developed for the task. The new tool
highlights potential gene mentions in the text and al-
lows the annotator to filter them with a mouse click.
The annotator had been involved in the creation of
the local manually annotated corpus, and had a lot of
experience annotating named entities. The abstracts
for annotation were selected randomly so that they
did not contain any abstracts tagged earlier. There-
fore, we did not expect the annotator to have seen
any of them before the experiment.
To generate potential gene mentions for the semi-
automated annotation, we ran two taggers on the
data: a high recall tagger trained on the local corpus
and a high recall tagger trained on the Biocreative
corpus. At decode time, we took the gene mentions
from the top two predictions of each of these taggers
whenever there were any gene mentions predicted.
As a result, the annotator had to make more binary
decisions per sentence than they would have for ei-
ther training corpus alone. For the semi-automated
annotation, the annotator had to examine 682 sen-
tences and took on average 10 seconds per sentence.
For the fully-manual annotation, they examined 667
sentences and took 40 seconds per sentence on av-
erage. We did not ask the annotator to tag alterna-
tives because they did not have any experience with
tagging alternatives and we do not have a tool that
makes the annotation of alternatives easy. Conse-
quently, effort totals for annotation with alternatives
would have been skewed in our favor. The four-fold
speedup should be compared to the lower curve in
Figure 2.
5 Discussion and Further Work
We can use the effort results to estimate the relative
effort of annotating without alternatives and of semi-
automated annotation. To obtain the same improve-
ment in F-score, we need to semi-automatically an-
notate roughly a factor of 1.67 more data than using
the fully manual approach. Multiplying that by the
0.25 factor reduction in annotation time, we get that
the time required for a comparable improvement in
F-score is 0.42 times as long ? a 58% reduction in
annotator time.
We do not have any experiments on annotating
alternatives, but the main difference between semi-
automated and fully-manual annotation is that the
former does not require the annotator to decide on
boundaries. Consequently, we expect that annota-
tion with alternatives will be considerably more ex-
pensive than without alternatives, since more bound-
aries have to be outlined.
In future work, it would be interesting to compare
this approach to the traditional approach of manually
correcting output of a system. Due to constraints
on annotator time, it was not possible to do these
experiments as part of the current work.
References
Fu-Dong Chiou, David Chiang, and Martha Palmer.
2001. Facilitating treebank annotation using a statisti-
cal parser. In HLT ?01. ACL.
Wen-Chi Chou, Richard Tzong-Han Tsai, Ying-Shan Su,
Wei Ku, Ting-Yi Sung, and Wen-Lian Hsu. 2006.
A semi-automatic method for annotating a biomedical
proposition bank. In FLAC?06. ACL.
Koby Crammer, Ofer Dekel, Joseph Keshet, Shai Shalev-
Shwartz, and Yoram Singer. 2006. Online passive-
aggressive algorithms. JMLR, 7.
Aron Culota, Trausti Kristjansson, Andrew McCallum,
and Paul Viola. 2006. Corrective feedback and per-
sistent learning for information extraction. Artificial
Intelligence, 170:1101?1122.
Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1994. Building a large annotated cor-
pus of english: The penn treebank. Computational
Linguistics, 19(2):313?330.
Ryan McDonald, Koby Crammer, and Fernando Pereira.
2005. Online large-margin training of dependency
parsers. In ACL?05. ACL.
Lance Ramshaw and Mitch Marcus. 1995. Text chunk-
ing using transformation-based learning. In David
Yarovsky and Kenneth Church, editors, Proceedings
of the Third Workshop on Very Large Corpora. ACL.
Lorraine Tanabe, Natalie Xie, Lynne H. Thom, Wayne
Matten, and W. John Wilbur. 2005. GENETAG: a
tagged corpus for gene/protein named entity recogni-
tion. BMC Bioinformatics, 6(Suppl. 1).
Nianwen Xue, Fu-Dong Chiou, and Martha Palmer.
2002. Building a large-scale annotated chinese corpus.
In Proceedings of the 19th international conference on
Computational linguistics. ACL.
Alexander Yeh, Alexander Morgan, Marc Colosimo, and
Lynette Hirschman. 2005. BioCreAtIvE Task 1A:
gene mention finding evaluation . BMC Bioinformat-
ics, 6(Suppl. 1).
56
