Words and Pictures in the News
Jaety Edwards
UC Berkeley
jaety@cs.berkeley.edu
Ryan White
UC Berkeley
ryanw@cs.berkeley.edu
David Forsyth
UC Berkeley
daf@cs.berkeley.edu
Abstract
We discuss the properties of a collection of
news photos and captions, collected from the
Associated Press and Reuters. Captions have
a vocabulary dominated by proper names. We
have implemented various text clustering algo-
rithms to organize these items by topic, as well
as an iconic matcher that identifies articles that
share a picture. We have found that the spe-
cial structure of captions allows us to extract
some names of people actually portrayed in the
image quite reliably, using a simple syntactic
analysis. We have been able to build a directory
of face images of individuals from this collec-
tion.
1 Introduction
For the past year we have been building a collection of
captioned news photos and illustrated news articles. We
believe that, for many applications, words and pictures
together provide very rich information on document con-
tent. Photographs can link articles in ways that pure tex-
tual analysis may overlook or underestimate, and text
provides high level descriptions of image contents that
current vision techniques cannot obtain.
Our analysis of image captions has revealed various
journalistic conventions that we believe make this dataset
particularly appealing for a number of applications. Cap-
tions act as concise summaries of events, and we believe
we can use them to isolate the most pertinent words for
different topics. We have implemented various clustering
methods to explore this idea.
Captions are also tightly tied to the actual content of
the image. The difficulty here on the text side, is in identi-
fying those portions of a caption that refer to tangible ob-
jects, physically present in the image. On the image side,
we need to isolate objects of interest and solve the corre-
spondence problem between caption extracts and image
regions. We are exploring these issues in the context of
trying to build an automated celebrity directory and face
classifier.
2 The Collection
We have been collecting news photos with associated
captions since Feb. 2002. These photographs come from
Reuters and the AP, and we collect between 800 and 1500
per day. To date, we have collected more than 410,000
unique images. The vast majority of these photos are of
people, and the majority of that subset focus on one or
two individuals. Since November, we have also collected
more than 75,000 illustrated news articles from the BBC
and CNN. Both CNN and the BBC, along with the ma-
jority of all news outlets, make heavy use of news pho-
tographs from the AP and Reuters. In fact, the field is
dominated by just three agencies, Reuters, the Associated
Press and AFP.
Journalistic writing guidelines emphasize clarity. This
is certainly necessary in caption writing, where an author
has an average of 55 words to convey all salient details
about an image. A caption writer?s first responsibility is
to identify those portrayed. A caption will contain the
full names of those represented if they are known. Sec-
ond, the writer must describe the activity portrayed in the
photo. Finally, with whatever space is left, the author
may provide some broader context.
Our collection?s vocabulary reflects this ordering of
priorities. First, there is a heavy bias towards proper
names, and thus the number of unique terms in this set is
very large (See figure 1). The vocabulary of other word
classes, however, reflect the journalistic emphasis on sim-
plicity. People hug rather than embrace, talk rather than
converse.
Captions are also easy for humans to parse because
writers make use of stylized sentence structures. Just
Figure 1: Caption vocabularies exhibit statistical properties that distinguish them from other collections. A heavy
preponderance of proper names creates a very large vocabulary of capitalized words whose frequency distribution
has heavy tails. On the other hand, other word classes are somewhat restricted. In a six month period from July to
December, 2002, the corpus had 93,457 distinct terms. Of these, 60,182 were capitalized and 32,059 uncapitalized
(with 1216 numerical entries). About 1000 terms occur in both forms. Almost a third of all vocabulary terms occur
only once. On the left we plot term occurrence ordered by frequency for the 1000 most frequent capitalized (solid)
and uncapitalized ( dotted) terms. On the right we analyze the heavy tail, flipping the axes to show the number of
words that occur between one and twenty times. Here, capitalized (solid line) words outnumber uncapitalized (dotted
line) ones 2-1. We have used capitalization as a proxy for proper names. This obviously misrepresents initial words
of sentences, but these only represent on average 2 words out of every 50-60 word caption. The richness of our
vocabulary is thus largely due to proper names.
over 50% of the captions in our collection, for instance,
begin with a starting noun phrase that describes the cen-
tral figure of the photograph followed by a present tense
verb that describes the action they are performing (or if
in the passive voice, having performed upon them). Tex-
tual cues such as ?left?,?right? or a jersey number help to
clarify any potential correspondence problems between
multiple names in the caption and people in the image.
The news photos themselves, like their captions, are
also quite stylized with respect to choice of subject,
placement within the image, and photographic tech-
niques. A single individual will generally be centered in
the photo. Two people will be equally offset to the left
and right of center. A basketball player will most likely
have the ball in his hands. Each of these photographs will
employ a narrow depth of field to blur the background
and emphasize their subjects. Like the caption writer, the
photo journalist must convey a great deal of information
in a small amount of space. These conventions amount
to a shared language between photographer and reader
that places this single image in a far richer context. We
present example captions and their associated images in
figure 2.
The textual and photographic conventions we have il-
lustrated are simply trends we have noticed in our dataset,
ones that many individual captions and images in our col-
lection break. One of the benefits of scale, however, is
that we can throw away a great deal of data and still have
meaningful sets with which to work. These simpler sets
in turn may act as foundations from which to attack the
exceptions.
3 Linking Articles
We have linked and clustered articles in a variety of ways.
We have looked at how the specialized vocabulary and
statistics of our dataset affect the performance of two dif-
ferent textual clustering methods. We have also examined
how images might help to link together articles whose re-
lationships purely text based clustering overlooks or un-
dervalues. We have also used the clusterings built from
our captions to provide a topic structure for navigating
the news in general, and investigated various interfaces
to make this navigation more natural.
3.1 Iconic Matching
Sometimes the same photograph is used to illustrate dif-
ferent articles. This establishes links between articles that
might be difficult to discern solely from the text. To es-
tablish these links, we built an iconic matcher to find
copies of the same image in a database, even if that image
has been moderately cropped or given a border.
Images can change in many subtle ways between their
distribution and their actual publication. They may be
cropped, watermarked, and acquire compression arti-
facts. The news agency may overlay text or add borders.
An iconic matcher needs to be robust to these changes.
In addition, given a collection of this size, only minimal
image processing is practical.
The iconic matcher we have designed first resizes im-
ages to 128x128 pixels in order to accommodate different
aspect ratios. It then applies a Haar wavelet transforma-
tion separately to each color channel of the image. (Ja-
U.S. President George W. Bush (news - web sites) ponders a question at a news confer-
ence following his meeting with Czech President Vaclav Havel at Prague Castle, Wednes-
day, Nov. 20, 2002. Bush urged the NATO (news - web sites) allies to join a U.S.-led
?coalition of the willing? to ensure Iraq disarms. (AP Photo/CTK/ Michal Dolezal) Nov 20
5:52 AM
Sacramento Monarchs? Ruthie Bolton, center, grabs a loose ball from Charlotte Sting?s
Erin Buescher, bottom, as Monarchs? Andrea Nagy moves in during the first half Friday,
July 19, 2002, in Charlotte, N.C. (AP Photo/Rick Havner) Jul 19 8:24 PM
Figure 2: News captions follow many conventions. Individuals are identified with their full names whenever possible.
The first sentence describes the actors, and what they are doing. By looking for proper names immediately followed
by present tense verbs, we can reliably find names that reference people actually in the image. This is important, as
captions are also full of names (i.e. Vaclav Havel in caption 1) that do not actually appear. Often, the captions also
help place the person in the frame (i.e. ?center? in the second image).
cobs et al, 1995) The first coefficient in each channel,
then, represents the average image intensity; the second
is the deviation from the mean for the right and left side;
the third splits the left hand side similarly, and so on. Ro-
tating through the channels, we use the first 64 largest
coefficients as a signature for the image. We say a pair of
coefficients match if both are within a given threshold of
each other. Images match if their first three coefficients
(average color) all match, and if the number of additional
matching coefficients is above a certain count. Identical
images will of course receive a perfect score using this
measure.
To tune the parameters of the matcher, we found sam-
ple photos to which CNN or the BBC had added borders
and the corresponding borderless originals from AP and
Reuters. We then examined how these changes affected
the coefficients, and we set the matching thresholds to
respond positively even with these changes. This led to
fairly broad ranges, ?5 for the average color coefficients
and ?3 for the rest (out of 0-255 scale). However, we
also insisted that at least 42 coefficients actually match.
A visual scan of the sets returned by our iconic matcher
shows very few false positives. The matcher frequently
accommodates borders or croppings that change up to
10% of the pixels in the original image. Its response to
these changes, however, is somewhat unpredictable. Two
crops of similar appearance can have very different ef-
fects upon the Haar parameters if one pushes many fea-
tures into different quadrants of the image than the other.
As Table 1 indicates, a significant percentage (10%) of
those articles we have collected from the BBC and CNN
share an image with another article. This phenomenon
seems to stem from three main sources. Across collec-
tions, different authors may use the same image to illus-
trate similar stories. Authors may also use the same im-
Table 1: Iconic Matches
Iconic Matches Collection Stats
Collection Total Docs BBC CNN
BBC 16990 BBC 3793 223
CNN 8397 CNN 1233
A shared picture is a very good indication that two ar-
ticles are in some way topically related. Our iconic
matcher establishes those links. On the left, the figure
gives the total number of articles we collected in a three
month (Oct-Dec, 2002) period from the BBC and CNN
collection, and on the right, how often the same image
was used for multiple stories. We have split these iconic
matches out into inter-agency and intra-agency totals.
More than 10 % of the articles in our collection share
an image.
age over time to provide temporal continuity as the un-
derlying story changes. Finally, the same image may be
used to indicate a broad theme, while the articles them-
selves discuss quite different topics. A series of articles
on an oil spill of the coast of Spain, for example, moved
from simply reporting the incident, to investigating the
captain, to discussing the environmental impact, always
using an illustration of an oil drenched cormorant.
3.2 Text Clustering
Our second tool for grouping articles comes from auto-
mated clustering of the AP and Reuters caption texts. We
implemented two different clustering algorithms. Each
generates a probability distribution over K topics for each
document. Documents are then assigned to the maximum
likelihood cluster.
We fit two models to the data. The first was a simple
unigram mixture model. This model posits that caption
words are generated by sampling from a multinomial dis-
tribution over the corpus vocabulary V . Topics are sepa-
rate distributions over V . For a given number of topics,
we have |K| ? |V | parameters, where K is the set of top-
ics. The probability of a caption in this model is
?
k?K
(
p(k)
?
w?V
p(w|k)
)
(1)
We can fit this model using EM, with the assignments
of captions to topics as our hidden variables. In our im-
plementation, we initialize p(k) and p(w|k) with random
distributions.
Effectively, we treat each caption as an unordered set
of keywords. Although this is a simple language model,
we expected it to fit the captions fairly well. Given their
extremely short length, we believed captions to have a far
higher percentage of topically important (and thus dis-
criminative) words than one would find in a more generic
article collection. In longer documents researchers have
investigated modelling documents as mixtures of topics
(Blei et al, 2001), but we believed captions truly were
narrowly focused around a single topic.
Still, our original vocabulary contained over 90,000
terms. To fit this model, we trimmed the tail end of
the vocabulary. We applied two heuristics. removing all
words that happened less than 200 times. This seems a
drastic reduction, but as figure 1 illustrates, the tail of our
vocabulary is primarily proper names. Moreover, we col-
lect more than 1000 captions a day. A single word, espe-
cially a name, could therefore easily occur 200 times in
a single day. Since we are interested in topics of larger
temporal extent than a day, this reduction seems at least
somewhat justified. We also removed all words of three
characters or less. During fitting, we normalized the doc-
ument word count vectors to a constant length.
Unfortunately, the model was still overwhelmed by
common words, and the maximum likelihood configura-
tion invariably driven to make every topic equally likely
and every topic distribution almost exactly the same. We
therefore were forced to additionally remove very com-
mon words, namely the 2000 most frequent words from
the web at large.1 This heuristic almost certainly removes
some words strongly associated with specific topics (e.g.
?ball? with sports). Still, the remaining middle frequency
words do a good job of separating captions into quali-
tatively good topics, Our contention is that this middle
frequency is closely aligned with the true statistics of the
entire corpus.
Our second algorithm, which we call a ?two-level?
mixture model, attempts to deal with very common words
1Berkeley Digital Library ?Web Term Document Fre-
quency? http://elib.cs.berkeley.edu/docfreq/index.html
in a more principled way. The top level is a single multi-
nomial distribution ? shared by all captions. The second
level has K topic distributions, equivalent to the sim-
ple unigram model. For each caption word, we sam-
ple a Bernoulli random variable ? to decide whether to
draw from the top-level or second-level distribution. This
model shunts common shared words into the top-level
?junk? distribution, leaving the topic distributions to re-
flect truly distinctive words. The probability of a docu-
ment in this model is
?
k?K
(?
w?V
(?p(w|k)p(k) + (1? ?)p(w|?))
)
(2)
We used EM once again to estimate these parameters. Re-
gardless of starting position or |K|, ? consistently con-
verges to just over .5 (.53 with std .004).
3.3 Quantitative Analysis
We fit each of these models 10 different times each for
K = 10, 20, ...100 where K is the number of topics. To
compare the quality of fit between different values of K,
we held out 10% of the captions and compared the neg-
ative log likelihood of the held out data for each run. A
model which assigns the highest probability to the test set
will have the lowest log likelihood. In figure 3, we plot
the average negative log likelihood for each of these runs.
Across all K, EM converged in just a few iterations.
3.4 Evaluation and Interfaces
Quantitatively our models appear to fit well, but an anal-
ysis of their usefulness for interacting with these collec-
tions is more difficult. Our collection has no canonical
topical structure against which we can compare our re-
sults. However, we have built various tools to aid in the
qualitative evaluation of our results.
3.4.1 Temporal Structure
The clustering algorithms discussed in the previous
section take no account of the time at which an article or
caption was published. News topics, however, certainly
have temporal structure. Some, like baseball, happen dur-
ing a specific season. Others, like an election day, are
events that are heavily discussed for a brief period of time
and then fade. Our first interface illustrates these tempo-
ral relationships. We plot each topic over time. Each
timestep is approximately a day.2 Each element in the
plot of a cluster represents the percentage of captions in
that cluster collected during each time period. We have
constructed a web interface that lays out all K topics as
columns in a matrix, moving through time from top to
2A timestep actually represents 1000 chronologically con-
tiguous captions, but we collect an average of 1000 captions a
day.
Figure 3: We fit two clustering models. The first was a simple unigram mixture model with K topics. The second
?Two Level? model extended the first with a global distribution such that words could choose to come either from the
topic distribution associated with that document or from the global one. This figure plots the average and minimum
negative log likelihood attained for values of K = 10, 20, 30, ..., 100. The simple unigram model uses a vocabulary
filtered of common words, 2000 terms smaller than that used by the ?two level? model. This accounts for the higher
log likelihood numbers on the right. When fit with the full vocabulary, the simple unigram model invariably creates K
identical topics, losing all topic structure to the noise generated from common words.
bottom. One may click on any individual element to bring
up a list of captions specific to that period and cluster, as
well as the word distribution that characterizes this topic.
(Figure 4) The example in this figure utilizes the simple
unigram model. One striking aspect of this view is that
topics clearly do appear to have time signatures. Some
are periodic, others ramp up, others are extremely peaked.
We are contemplating methods to integrate these tempo-
ral features into our clustering methods.
3.4.2 2D Embedding
Our second interface attempts to lay out topics on the
plane in such a way that distances between them are se-
mantically meaningful. First, we use a symmetrized KL
divergence to define a distance metric between topic dis-
tribution pairs. We define a symmetric KL divergence
between two topics distributions ti and tj as
KLsymmetric = 12(KL(ti||tj) +KL(tj ||ti)) (3)
KL(ti||tj) =
?
w?V
((p(w|ti)log( p(w|ti)p(w|tj) )) (4)
where V is the corpus vocabulary.
We then use Principal Coordinate Analysis to project
into the plane in a way that in various senses ?best? pre-
serves distances. We finally calculate the likelihood for
all captions in a given cluster and illustrate the topic with
the image associated with the maximum likelihood cap-
tion.
In our interface, (Figure 5) one may click on any to-
ken to bring up a list of all images and articles associ-
ated with this topic. In this example, we have actually
used the topic structure generated with captions to orga-
nize the BBC and CNN combined dataset. The clusters in
this figure were built using the simple unigram clustering
model.
One aspect of Principal Coordinate Analysis that is un-
desirable in our case is that it tends to emphasize accu-
rately representing large distances at the expense of small
ones. In topic space, distances between topics only seem
to have semantic meaning up to some threshold. Beyond
this threshold they are simply unrelated. We are actively
working on implementing a modified version of Principal
Coordinate Analysis that will lend more weight to smaller
distances for this interface.
4 A Celebrity Face Detector
Our second area of investigation with this dataset is au-
tomated methods for establishing correspondences be-
tween textual words or phrases and image regions. To
this end, we are investigating the creation of an automated
celebrity classifier from the AP and Reuters photographs.
Brown et al (P. Brown and Mercer, 1993) have
effectively used co-occurrence statistics to build bilin-
gual translation models. Duygulu, Barnard and Forsyth
(Duygulu et al, 2002) have effectively used these ma-
chine translation algorithms to establish correspondences
between keywords and types of image regions in the
Corel image collection.
Unlike Corel, our photos are primarily of people, and
so it seemed natural to focus first on proper names as op-
posed to more general noun classes. Proper nouns are rel-
atively easy to extract from our captions. Caption writers
are quite consistent in how they record individual?s names
and titles. Simply selecting strings of capitalized words
with just a few heuristics to accommodate the beginnings
of sentences, middle initials, etc. performs well. Com-
mon names like the President?s will be written in multiple
Figure 4: In this figure we see a clustering of 50 topics laid out temporally. The captions are clustered without respect
to time using EM and the simple unigram language model. In this example we have used 50 clusters. Each column
represents a single topic, and each row is approximately a one day time slice starting July 19, 2002 at top and ending
on Dec 8, 2002 at the bottom. The brightness of the entry reflects the percentage of all captions in this topic that
occurred during this time slice. To illustrate, we have labeled certain portions of the figure with the realworld topics
or events with which certain topics/time periods seem most associated. Topics appear to have time signatures. Some,
like football or championship baseball, are periodic. Others, like election day, slowly build to a peak and then rapidly
fade. Other, unexpected events, such as the arrest of the D.C. area snipers and Moscow hostage situation ramp up
suddenly and then slowly fade over time. We are investigating adding this temporal information into our clustering
models.
ways, but even in these cases a single form is overwhelm-
ingly predominant. As for the images, face detectors are
a relatively mature piece of vision technology and we can
reliably extract a large set of face cutouts.
We could not directly apply the co-occurrence meth-
ods used in previous work. First, our captions are full of
proper nouns (institutions, locations, and other people)
that have no visual counterpart in the image. Duygulu
et al faced a similar problem for certain keywords in
the Corel dataset, but to a far smaller degree. They could
treat it as a noise problem. Here, it overwhelms the actual
signal.
The image side compounds our problem. Duygulu et
al. were able to cluster image regions into equivalence
classes based on a set of extracted features. We have no
similarity metric for faces. Typically, one induces a met-
ric by fitting a parametric model to the data and exploring
differences in parameter space. Parametric models per-
form poorly on faces, however, due to the variability of
facial expressions.
If one were to manually label our collection with
names and locations of the individuals portrayed in each
photo, we believe we could generate hundreds or thou-
sands of unique face images for many individuals. Given
this supervised dataset, it might be possible to generate
a non-parametric model of faces, fitting a set of models
for each expression. Manually annotating half a million
photographs is impractical. Instead we have leveraged
the special linguistic structure of our captions to create a
?photographic entity? detector. In other words, a proper
name finder optimized to return only those names that ac-
tually occur in the photograph.
4.1 Who Is In The Picture?
We are confronted with the problem of trying to identify
those proper names that actually identify people in the
photo. A small amount of linguistic analysis has been
extremely helpful. We tried various proper name detec-
tors, but it proved difficult to return only people, let alne
people who actually appear in the images. Once again,
however, we can exploit journalistic conventions. With
few exceptions, the first sentence of a caption describes
the activity and participants in the picture itself. In 51%
of our captions, the beginning of the first sentence follows
the pattern [Noun Phrase][Present Tense Action Verb],
or less commonly [Noun Phrase][Present Tense Passive
Figure 5: In this interface we have defined a two dimensional distance metric between topics and laid them out on the
plane, illustrated with representative photos from the collection. The right hand side illustrates a closeup of the upper
right corner of this space, an area dominated by sports related topics. In our interface one may click on any token
to bring up a list of additional images and articles associated with this topic. In this example, the topics have been
generated using captions from the AP and Reuters photos, but we are actually using this topic structure to navigate
articles from CNN and the BBC. We contend that clustering with these captions generates topic distributions that focus
on words highly relevant to the topic. Topics are defined as probability distributions across the corpus vocabulary.
Our 2D embedding is derived by calculating the symmetrized KL divergence between each pair of topics and using
principle coordinate analysis to project into two dimensions in a manner that ? best? preserves the distances in the
original high dimensional space. (Ripley, 1996)
Verb]. (see figure 2)
The detector we have built identifies potential proper
names as strings of two or more capitalized words fol-
lowed by a potential present tense verb. Words are clas-
sified as possible verbs by first applying a list of morpho-
logical rules to possible present tense singular forms, and
then comparing these to a database of known verbs. Both
the morphological rules and the list of verbs are from
WordNet. (Wor, 2003)
When there is more than one person in the photo, the
author often inserts a term directly following the proper
name to help disambiguate the correspondence. This will
either be a position such as left or right, or an identify-
ing characteristic. This second form is most frequently
used with sports figures and gives a jersey number. Our
proper name finder returns the name, the disambiguator
if it exists, and the verb.
Our classifier either accepts a caption and returns a pro-
posed name or rejects the caption. We tested it on the
same sample we used for clustering (146,870 captions).
The name finder accepts 47% of these captions. We man-
ually examined 400 rejected captions. Of these, 50%
were true misses, where the caption contained a name
that matched a face in the image. Another 35% were im-
ages of people but the caption either contained no proper
names or only proper names of people that did not appear
in the image. The final 15% were images that contained
no people.
We also examined 1000 accepted captions. In 85% of
this sample, the classifier accurately extracted the name
of at least one person in the image. Of these errors,
the vast majority still followed our pattern of [Noun
Phrase][Present Tense Verb], and the subject of the noun
phrase actually did appear in the picture. Our rules sim-
ply failed to accurately parse the noun phrase. Over half
of these mistakes, for instance, were due to the phrase
?[Proper Name] of the United States [Verb],? and our
classifier returned ?United States? instead of the cor-
rect individual. More robust proper name finders should
largely eliminate these sources of error. The more impor-
tant point is that captions are so carefully structured that
very simple rules accurately model most of the collec-
tion. We could conceivably even use our face classifier to
learn some of these structural rules. If we could use the
images to posit names, and even positions, we might be
able to use this as a handle for learning certain types of
caption structure. If a photo were to have two strong face
responses, for instance, we might learn to look for those
? left?,?right? indicators in the text. We would also like
to investigate the possible clustering of verbs from image
data.
4.2 Iterative Improvements
With aggressive pruning of questionable outputs from the
name and face finders, we believe we can generate an
effectively supervised dataset of faces for thousands of
Figure 6: Not every person named in a caption appears in a picture. However, quite simple syntactic analysis of
captions yields some names of persons whose faces are very likely to appear in the picture. By looking for items where
the picture has a single, large face detector response ? so there is only one face present ? and analysis of the caption
produces a single name, we produce a directory of news personalities that is quite accurate. The top row shows some
entries from this directory: there are relatively few instances of each face, because our tests are quite restrictive, but
the faces corresponding to each name are correct and are seen from a variety of angles, meaning we may be able
to build a non-parametric face model for some individuals by a completely automatic analysis. The next three rows
show some possible failure modes of our approach: First, our analysis of the caption could yield more than one name.
Second, there may be more than one large face in the image, with only the wrong face producing a face detector
response. Third, the syntax may occasionally follow a syntactic pattern our algorithm does not handle. We are able
to extract proper names from 68,496 of 146,870 captions, with an estimated 85% of these actually naming a person
in the image. Restricting ourselves solely to large face responses, we are able to produce a gazetteer of 452 distinct
names (621 images total), containing only 60 incorrectly filed images.
individuals, many of whom will have hundreds or even
thousands of distinct face images. From these we hope to
build a non- parametric model of faces. The next interest-
ing task will be to investigate whether we can then return
to the textual side, using our face models to learn more
about linguistic structures of the captions. Bootstrapping
by alternating between the two sides of a mixed dataset
seems a very powerful model.
5 Conclusion
News photo captions are an interesting dataset both for
their unique textual properties, and for the opportunities
they provide to exploit relationships between the text and
image contents. We have used these captions to illumi-
nate underlying topical structure in the collection. This
research indicates that captions act much like very short
summaries, emphasizing words that are strongly associ-
ated with underlying themes in the news. We are in-
vestigating how well this topical structure translates to
more general collections of news articles. We have also
shown that images can provide links between articles that
are missed by textual analysis alone. Separately, we are
investigating the possibility of building non-parametric
models of celebrity faces. This line of research indicates
that by combining a face detector with an analysis of the
linguistic conventions of the text, captions can be used as
an almost supervised dataset of people in the news.
References
David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan.
2001. Latent Dirichlet Allocation. In Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems 14.
P. Duygulu, K. Barnard, J.F.G. De Freitas, and D.A.
Forsyth. 2002. Object recognition as machine transla-
tion: Learning a lexicon for a fixed image vocabulary.
Charles E. Jacobs, Adam Finkelstein, and David H.
Salesin. 1995. Fast multiresolution image query-
ing. Computer Graphics, 29(Annual Conference
Series):277?286.
Christopher D. Manning and Hinrich Schutze. 1999.
Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Process-
ing. MIT Press.
V.J. Della Pietra P. Brown, S.A. Della Pietra and R.L.
Mercer. 1993. The mathematics of statistical machine
translation: Parameter estimation. Computational Lin-
guistics, 32(2):263?311.
B. D. Ripley. 1996. Pattern Recognition and Neural Net-
works. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
2003. Wordnet, a lexical database for the English lan-
guage.
