DP: A Detector for Presuppositions in survey questions 
Katja WIEMER-HASTINGS 
Psychology Department / Institute for Intelligent 
Systems 
University of Memphis 
Memphis, TN 38152 
kwiemer @ latte.memphis.edu 
Peter WIEMER-HASTINGS 
Human Communication Research Centre 
University of Edinburgh 
2 Buccleuch Place 
Edinburgh EH8 9LW, UK 
peterwh@cogsci.ed.ac.uk 
Sonya RAJAN, Art GRAESSER, Roger KREUZ, & Ashish KARNAVAT 
Institute for Intelligent Systems, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN 38152 
sonyarajan@hotmail.com, graesser@memphis.edu, rkreuz@memphis.edu, akarnavat@hotmail.com 
Abstract 
This paper describes and evaluates a detector 
of presuppositions (DP) for survey questions. 
Incorrect presuppositions can make it 
difficult to answer a question correctly. 
Since they can be difficult to detect, DP is a 
useful tool for questionnaire designer. DP 
performs well using local characteristics of
presuppositions. It reports the presupposition 
to the survey methodologist who can 
determine whether the presupposition is 
valid. 
Introduction 
Presuppositions are propositions that take some 
information as given, or as "the logical 
assumptions underlying utterances" (Dijkstra & 
de Smedt, 1996, p. 255; for a general overview, 
see McCawley, 1981). Presupposed information 
includes state of affairs, such as being married; 
events., such as a graduation; possessions, uch as 
a house, children, knowledge about something; 
and others. For example, the question, "when did 
you graduate from college", presupposes the 
event that the respondent did in fact graduate 
from college. The answer options may be ranges 
of years, such as "between 1970 and 1980". 
Someone who has never attended college can 
either not respond at all, or give a random (and 
false) reply. Thus, incorrect presuppositions 
cause two problems. First, the question is 
difficult o answer. Second, assuming that people 
feel obliged to answer them anyway, their 
answers present false information. This biases 
survey statistics, or, in an extreme case, makes 
them useless. 
The detector for presuppositions (DP) is part of the 
computer tool QUAID (Graesser, Wiemer- 
Hastings, Kreuz, Wiemer-Hastings & Marquis, in 
press), which helps survey methodologists design 
questions that are easy to process. DP detects a 
presupposition and reports it to the survey 
methodologist, who can examine if the 
presupposition is correct. QUAID is a 
computerized QUEST questionnaire valuation 
aid. It is based on QUEST (Graesser & Franklin, 
1990), a computational model of the cognitive 
processes underlying human question answering. 
QUAID critiques questions with respect to 
unfamiliar technical terms, vague terms, working 
memory overload, complex syntax, incorrect 
presuppositions, and unclear question purpose or 
category. These problems are a subset of potential 
problems that have been identified by Graesser, 
Bommareddy, Swamer, and Golding (1996; see 
also Graesser, Kennedy, Wiemer-Hastings & 
Ottati, 1999). 
QUAID performs reliably on the first five problem 
categories. In comparison to these five problems, 
presupposition detection is even more challenging. 
For unfamiliar technical terms, for example, 
QUAID reports words with frequencies below a 
certain threshold. Such an elegant solution is 
impossible for presuppositions. Their forms vary 
widely across presupposition types. Therefore, 
their detection requires a complex set of rules, 
carefully tuned to identify a variety of 
presupposition problems. DP prints out the 
90 
presuppositions of a question, and relies on the 
survey methodologist to make the final decision 
whether the presuppositions are valid. 
1 How to detect presuppositions 
We conducted a content analysis of questions 
with presupposition problems to construct a list 
of indicators for presuppositions. 22 questions 
containing problematic presuppositions were 
selected from a corpus of 550 questions, taken 
from questionnaires provided by the U.S. Census 
Bureau. The 22 questions were identified based 
on ratings by three human expert raters. It may 
seem that this problem is infrequent, but then, 
these questions are part of commonly used 
questionnaires that have been designed and 
revised very thoughtfully. 
Additionally, we randomly selected a contrast 
question sample of 22 questions rated 
unproblematic with regard to incorrect 
presuppositions by all three raters. Examples (1) 
and (2) are questions rated as problematic by at 
least two raters; examples (3) and (4) present 
questions that do not contain presuppositions. 
(1) Is that the same place you USUALLY go 
when you need routine or preventive care, such as 
a physical examination or check up? 
(2) How much do your parents or parent know 
about your close friends' parents? 
(3) From date to December 31, did you take one 
or more trips or outings in the United States, of at 
least one mile, for the PRIMARY purpose of 
observing, photographing, orfeeding wildlife? 
(4) Are you now on full-time active duty with the 
armed forces? 
Example (1) presupposes the habit of making 
use of routine / preventive care; (2) 
presupposes that the respondent has close 
friends. 
As stated above, incorrect presuppositions are 
infrequent in well-designed questionnaires. For 
example, questions about details of somebody's 
marriage are usually preceded by a question 
establishing the person's marital status. 
In spite of this, providing feedback about 
presuppositions to the survey methodologist is
useful. Importantly, QUAID is designed to aid in 
the design process. Consider a survey on health- 
related issues. In the context of this topic, a 
survey methodologist may be interested in how 
many days of work a person missed because of 
illness, but not think about whether the person 
actually has a job. Upon entering the question 
"how many days of work did you miss last year 
because of illness" into the QUAID tool, DP 
would report that the question presupposes 
employment. The survey methodologist could 
then insert a question about employment. 
Second, there are subtle presuppositions that may 
go undetected even by a skilled survey designer. 
These are presuppositions about things that are 
likely (but not necessarily) true. For example, a
question may inquire about a person's close 
friends (presupposing close friends) or someone's 
standard place for preventive care (presupposing 
the habit of making use of preventive care). DP 
does not know which presuppositions are likely to 
be valid or invalid, and is therefore more likely to 
detect such subtle incorrect presuppositions than a 
human expert. 
1.1 The presupposition detector (DP) 
We constructed a set of presupposition detection 
rules based on the content analysis. The rules use 
a wide range of linguistic information about the 
input sentences, including particular words (such 
as "why"), part of speech categories (e.g., wh- 
pronoun), and complex syntactic subtrees (such as 
a quantification clause, followed by a noun 
phrase). 
1.1.1 The syntactic analysis component 
We used Eric Brill's rule-based word tagger (1992, 
1994a, 1994b), the de facto state of the art tagging 
system, to break the questions down into part-of- 
speech categories. Brill's tagger produces a single 
lexical category for each word in a sentence by 
first assigning tags based on the frequency of 
occurrence of the word in that category, and then 
applying a set of context-based re-tagging rules. 
The tagged text was then passed on to Abney's 
SCOL/CASS system (1996a, 1996b), an extreme 
bottom-up parser. It is designed to avoid 
ambiguity problems by applying rammar rules on 
a level-by-level basis. Each level contains rules 
that will only fire if they are correct with high 
probability. Once the parse moves on to a higher 
level, it will not attempt to apply lower-level rules. 
In this way, the parser identifies chunks of 
information, which it can be reasonably certain are 
91 
connected, even when it cannot create a complete 
parse of a sentence. 
1.1.2 The presupposition i dicators 
The indicators for presuppositions were tested 
against questions rated as "unproblematic" to 
eliminate items that failed to discriminate 
questions with versus without presuppositions. 
We constructed a second list of indicators that 
detect questions containing no presuppositions. 
All indicators are listed in Table 1. These lists 
are certainly far from complete, but they present a
good basis for evaluating of  how well 
presuppositions can be detected by an NLP 
system. These rules were integrated into a 
decision tree structure, as illustrated in Figure 1. 
Table 1: Indicators of absence or presence 
presuppositions 
First word(s) 
Presupposition No presupposition 
When VP Initial or following 
What time comma: 
Who VP - is there 
Why - are there 
How much 
How many Does / do NP have ... 
How often etc. Will NP have ... 
How VP Has / Have NP ... 
Where V NP Is / are NP ... 
Keywords usually ever 
Possessives: any 
mine, yours, anybody 
NP's anything 
while whether 
Indexicals: if 
this, these, such could, would 
Specific V infinitive 
constructions when NP 
of 
YES 
I 
Are indicators present hat question \[ 
does not contain presuppositon? I 
No/ 
/ 
Are indicators present hat question 
contains a presupposition? 
Is indicator reliable? 
J 
Figure 1 : The DP decision structure tree 
92 
1.2 Classifying presuppositions 
Different types of presuppositions can be 
distinguished based on particular indicators. 
Examples for presupposition types, such as 
events or possessions, were mentioned above. 
Table 2 presents an exhaustive overview of 
presupposition types identified in our analysis. 
Note that some indicators can point to more than 
one type of presupposition. 
Table 2 : Classification of presupposition based on 
indicators. In the right column, expressions in 
parentheses identify the presupposed unit. 
Indicator 
"how often" ...VP 
"how" aux NP VP 
"while"... VP 
"where"... VP 
"why"... VP 
Presupposition type: The 
question presupposes... 
an action (V) 
"usually"... VP 
"how often", 
"frequently", etc. 
a habit (V) 
"how many" NP 
"where is" NP 
Indexicals: 
"this" / "that" NP 
"these" / "those" NP 
"such a(n)" NP 
an entity: object, state, or 
person (NP) 
a shared referent orcommon 
ground (NP) 
"how much" NP ... 
"how much does" NP 
"know" 
"how many" NP ... 
Possessive pronouns 
Apostrophe 's': NP's 
a possession (NP); 
exception list: NP's that can be 
presupposed (name, age, etc.) 
"why" S a state of affairs, fact, or 
assertion (S) 
VP infinitive an intention / a goal (infinitive / 
"why" VP NP NP VP) 
"who" VP 
"When" VP 
..."when" NP VP 
an a~ent (A person who VP) 
an event (VP) 
DP reports when a presupposition is present, and 
it also indicates the type of presupposition that is 
made (e.g., a common ground presupposition or
the presupposition f a habit) in order to point the 
question designer to the potential presupposition 
error. DP uses the expressions in the right 
column in Table 2, selected in accordance with 
the indicators, and fills them into the brackets in 
its output (see Figure 1). For example, given the 
question "How old is your child?", DP would 
detect the possessive pronoun "your", and 
accordingly respond: "It looks like you are 
presupposing a possession (child). Make sure that 
the presupposition is correct by consulting the 
previous questions." 
2 Evaluation 
In this section, we report summary statistics for 
the human ratings of our test questions and the 
measures we computed based on these ratings to 
evaluate DP's performance. 
2.1 Human ratings 
We used human ratings as the standard against 
which to evaluate the performance of DP. Three 
raters rated about 90 questions from 12 
questionnaires provided by the Census Bureau. 
DP currently does not use context. To have a fair 
test of its performance, the questions were 
presented to the human raters out of context, and 
they were instructed to rate them as isolated 
questions. Ratings were made on a four-point 
scale, indicating whether the question contained 
no presupposition (1), probably contained no 
presupposition (2), probably contained a 
presupposition (3), or definitely contained a 
presupposition (4). We transformed the ratings 
into Boolean ratings by combining ratings of 1 and 
2 ("no problem") versus ratings of 3 and 4 
("problem"). We obtained very similar results for 
analyses of the ratings based on the four-point and 
the Boolean scale. For simplicity, we just report 
the results for the Boolean scale. 
2.2 Agreement among the raters 
We evaluated the agreement among the raters with 
three measures: correlations, Cohen's kappa, and 
percent agreement. Correlations were significant 
only between two raters (r = 0. 41); the 
correlations of these two with the third rater 
produced non-significant correlations, indicating 
that the third rater may have used a different 
strategy. The kappa scores, similarly, were 
significant only for two raters (_k_ = 0.36). In terms 
of percent agreement, he raters with correlated 
ratings agreed in 67% of the cases. The 
percentages of agreement with rater 3 were 57% 
and 56%, respectively. 
DP ratings were significantly correlated with the 
ratings provided by the two human raters who 
93 
agreed well (_r = 0.32 and 0.31), resulting in 
agreement of ratings in 63% and 66% of the 
questions. In other words, the agreement of 
ratings provided by the system and by two human 
raters is comparable to the highest agreement rate 
achieved between the human raters. 
Some of the human ratings diverged 
substantially. Therefore, we computed two 
restrictive measures based on the ratings to 
evaluate the performance of DP. Both scores are 
Boolean. The first score is "lenient"; it reports a 
presupposition only if at least two raters report a 
presupposition for the question (rating of 3 or 4). 
We call this measure P~j, a majority-based 
presupposition count. The second score is strict. 
It reports a presupposition only if all three raters 
report a presupposition. This measure is called 
Pcomp, a presupposition count based on complete 
agreement. It results in fewer detected 
presuppositions overall: Pcomp reports 
presuppositions for 29 of the questions (33%), 
whereas P~j reports 57 (64%). 
2.3 Evaluation of the DP 
DP ratings were significantly correlated only with 
Pcomp (0.35). DP and P~o~ ratings were in 
agreement for 67% of the questions. Table 3 lists 
hit and false alarm rates for DP, separately for P~j 
and P~omp. The hit rate indicates how many of the 
presuppositions identified by the human ratings 
were detected by DP. The false alarm rate 
indicates how often DP reported a presupposition 
when the human raters did not. The measures look 
better with respect to the complete agreement 
criterion, P~omp- 
Table 3 further lists recall and precision scores. 
The recall rate indicates how many 
presuppositions DP detects out of the 
presuppositions reported by the human rating 
criterion (computed as hits, divided by the sum of 
hits and misses). The precision score (computed 
as hits, divided by the sum of hits and false 
alarms) measures how many presuppositions 
reported by DP are actually present, as reported by 
the human ratings. 
Table 3: Performance measures for DP with respect to hits, false alarms, and misses. 
Hit rate False alarm rate Recall Precision d' 
P~j 0.54 0.34 0.66 0,74 0.50 
Pcomo 0.72 0.35 0.72 0,50 0.95 
All measures, except for precision, look 
comparable or better in relation to Pco~,, 
including d', which measures the actual power of 
DP to discriminate questions with and without 
presuppositions. Of course, picking a criterion 
with better matches does not improve the 
system's performance in itself. 
3 An updated version of DP 
Based on the first results, we made a few 
modifications and then reevaluated DP. In 
particular, we added items to the possession 
exception list based on the new corpus and made 
some of the no-presupposition rules more 
specific. As a more drastic change, we updated 
the decision tree structure so that presupposition 
indicators overrule indicators against 
presuppositions, increasing the number of 
reported presuppositions for cases of conflicting 
indicators: 
If there is evidence for a problem, report "Problem" 
Else 
if evidence against problem, report "No problem" 
else, report "Probably not a problem" 
Separate analyses show that the modification of 
the decision tree accounts for most of the 
performance improvement. 
3.1 Results 
Table 4 lists the performance measures for the 
updated DP. Hit and recall rate increased, but so 
did the false alarm rate, resulting in a lower 
precision score. The d' score of the updated 
system with respect o Pcomp (1.3) is substantially 
better. The recall rate for this setting is perfect, 
i.e., DP did not miss any presuppositions. Since 
survey methodologists will decide whether the 
presupposition is really a problem, a higher false 
alarm rate is preferable to missing out 
presupposition cases. Thus, the updated DP is an 
improvement over the first version. 
R/t 94
Table 4: Performance measures for the updated DP with respect to hits, false alarms, and misses. 
Hit rate False alarm rate Recall Precision d' 
Pmai 0.75 0.44 0.84 0.75 0.8 
P~o,~p 0.90 0.52 1.00 0.46 1.3 
Conclusion 
DP can detect presuppositions, and can thereby 
reliably help a survey methodologist to eliminate 
incorrect presuppositions. The results for DP 
with respect o Pco~p are comparable to, and in 
some cases even better than, the results for the 
other five categories. This is a very good result, 
since most of the five problems allow for "easy" 
and "elegant" solutions, whereas DP needs to be 
adjusted to a variety of problems. 
It is interesting that the performance of DP looks 
so much better when compared to the complete 
agreement score, Pcomp than when compared to 
P~j. Recall that Pcomp only reports a 
presupposition if all the raters report one. The 
high agreement of the raters in these cases can 
presumably be explained by the salience of the 
presupposition problem. This indicates that DP 
makes use of reliable indicators for its 
performance. Good agreement with the other 
measure, Pmaj, would suggest that DP additionally 
reports presuppositions i  cases where humans do 
not agree that a presupposition is present. The 
higher agreement with the stricter measure is thus 
a good result. 
DP currently works like the other modules of 
QUA\]D: it reports potential problems, but leaves 
it to the survey methodologist to decide whether 
to act upon the feedback. As such, DP is a 
substantial addition to QUA\]D. A future 
challenge is to turn DP into a DIP (detector of 
incorrect presuppositions), that is, to reduce the 
number of reported presuppositions to those 
likely to be incorrect. DP currently evaluates all 
questions independent of context, resulting in 
frequent detections. For example, 20 questions 
about "this person" may follow one question that 
establishes the referent. High-frequency 
repetitive presupposition reports could easily get 
annoying. 
Is a DIP system feasible? At present, it is 
difficult for NLP systems to use information from 
context in the evaluation of a statement. What is 
required to solve this problem is a mechanism that 
determines whether a presupposed entity (an 
object, an activity, an assertion, etc.) has been 
established as applicable in the previous discourse 
(e.g., in preceding questions). 
The Construction Integration (CI) model by 
Kintsch (1998) provides a good example for how 
such reference ambiguity can be resolved. CI uses 
a semantic network that represents an entity in the 
discourse focus (such as "this person") through 
higher activations of its links to other concept 
nodes. Perhaps models such as the CI model can 
be integrated into the QUAID model to perform 
context analyses, in combination with tools like 
Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA, Landauer & 
Dumais, 1997), which represents text units as 
vectors in a high-dimensional semantic space. 
LSA measures the semantic similarity of text units 
(such as questions) by computing vector cosines. 
This feature may make LSA a useful tool in the 
detection of a previous question that establishes a 
presupposed ntity in a later question. 
However, questionnaires differ from connected 
discourse, such as coherent stories, in aspects that 
make the present problem rather more difficult. 
Most importantly, the referent for "this person" 
may have been established in question umber 1, 
and the current question containing the 
presupposition "this person" is question umber 
52. A DIP system would have to handle a flexible 
amount of context, because the distance between 
questions establishing the correctness of a 
presupposition a d a question building up on it can 
vary. On the one hand, one could limit the 
considered context to, say, three questions and risk 
missing the critical question. On the other hand, it 
is computationally expensive to keep the complete 
previous context in the systems "working 
memory" to evaluate the few presuppositions 
which may refer back over a large number of 
questions. Solving this problem will likely require 
comparing a variety of different settings. 
Q~ 95
Acknowledgements 
This work was partially supported by the Census 
Bureau (43-YA-BC-802930) and by a grant from 
the National Science Foundation (SBR 9720314 
and SBR 9977969). We wish to acknowledge 
three colleagues for rating the questions in our 
evaluation text corpus, and our collaborator 
Susan Goldman as well as two anonymous 
reviewers for helpful comments. 
References 
Abney, S. (1996a). Partial parsing via finite-state 
cascades. In Proceedings of the ESSLLI '96 Robust 
Parsing Workshop. 
Abney, S. (1996b). Methods and statistical linguistics. 
In J. Klavans & P. Resnik (Eds.), The Balancing 
Act. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press 
Brill, E. (1992). A simple rule-based part of speech 
tagger. In Proceedings of the Third Conference on 
Applied Natural Language Processing. ACL. 
Brill, E. (1993). A corpus-based approach to language 
learning. Ph.D. thesis, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA. 
Brill, E. (1994). Some advances in rule-based part of 
speech tagging. In Proceedings of the Twelfth 
National Conference on Articial Intelligence. AAAI 
Press. 
Dijkstra, T., & de Smedt, K. (1996). Computational 
psycholinguistics. AI and connectionist models of 
human language processing. London: Taylor & 
Francis. 
Graesser, A. C., Bommareddy, S., Swamer, S., & 
Golding, J. (1996). Integrating questionnaire design 
with a cognitive computational model of human 
question answering. In N. Schwarz & S. Sudman 
(Eds.), Answering questions: Methods of 
determining cognitive and communicative processes 
in survey research (pp. 343-175). San Francisco, 
CA: Jossey-Bass. 
Graesser, A.C., & Franklin, S.P. (1990). QUEST: A 
cognitive model of question answering. Discourse 
Processes, 13, 279-304. 
Graesser, A.C., Kennedy, T., Wiemer-Hastings, P., & 
Ottati, V. (1999). The use of computational 
cognitive models to improve questions on surveys 
and questionnaires. In M. Sirken, D. Herrrnann, S. 
Schechter, N. Schwarz, J. Tanur, & R. Tourangeau 
(Eds.), Cognition and Survey Research (pp. 199- 
216). New York: John Wiley & Sons. 
Graesser, A.C., Wiemer-Hastings, K., Kreuz, R., 
Wiemer-Hastings, P., & Marquis, K. (in press). 
QUAID: A questionnaire evaluation aid for survey 
methodologists. Behavior Research Methods, 
Instruments, & Computers. 
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension. A paradigm for 
cognition. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Landauer, T.K., & Dumais, S.T. (1997). A solution to 
Plato's problem: The latent semantic analysis theory 
of acquisition, induction, and representation of 
knowledge. Psychological Review, 104, 211-240. 
McCawley, J.D. (1981). Everything that linguists have 
always wanted to know about logic. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
QI~ 96
