Proceedings of the Fourth International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 127?129,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Evaluations of NLG Systems: common corpus and tasks or common 
dimensions and metrics?   
C?cile Paris, Nathalie Colineau and Ross Wilkinson 
CSIRO ICT Centre 
Locked Bag 17, North Ryde 
NSW 1670, Australia 
{Cecile.Paris, Nathalie.Colineau, Ross.Wilkinson}@csiro.au 
 
  
 
Abstract 
In this position paper, we argue that a 
common task and corpus are not the only 
ways to evaluate Natural Language Gen-
eration (NLG) systems. It might be, in 
fact, too narrow a view on evaluation and 
thus not be the best way to evaluate these 
systems.  The aim of a common task and 
corpus is to allow for a comparative 
evaluation of systems, looking at the sys-
tems? performances. It is thus a ?system-
oriented? view of evaluation. We argue 
here that, if we are to take a system ori-
ented view of evaluation, the community 
might be better served by enlarging the 
view of evaluation, defining common 
dimensions and metrics to evaluate sys-
tems and approaches. We also argue that 
end-user (or usability) evaluations form 
another important aspect of a system?s 
evaluation and should not be forgotten. 
1 Introduction 
For this special session, a specific question was 
asked: what would a shared task and shared cor-
pus be that would enable us to perform compara-
tive evaluations of alternative techniques in natu-
ral language generation (NLG)? In this position 
paper, we question the appropriateness of this 
specific question and suggest that the community 
might be better served by (1) looking at a differ-
ent question: what are the dimensions and met-
rics that would allow us to compare various 
techniques and systems and (2) not forgetting but 
encouraging usability evaluations of specific ap-
plications. 
The purpose of defining a shared task and a 
shared corpus is to compare the performance of 
various systems. It is thus a system-oriented view 
of evaluation, as opposed to an end-user oriented 
(or usability) view of evaluation.  It is, however, 
potentially a narrow view of a system-oriented 
evaluation, as it looks at the performance of an 
NLG system within a very specific context ? thus 
essentially looking at the performance of a spe-
cific application.  We argue here that (1), even if 
we take a system-oriented view of evaluation, the 
evaluation of NLG systems should not be limited 
to their performance in a specific context but 
should take other system?s characteristics into 
account, and that (2) end-user evaluations are 
crucial.  
2 Enlarging the view of system-oriented 
evaluations 
The comparison of NLG systems should not 
be limited to a particular task in a specific con-
text. Most systems are designed for specific ap-
plications in specific domains and tend to be 
tuned for these applications.  Evaluating them in 
a context of a specific common evaluation task 
might de-contextualise them and might encour-
age fine-tuning for this task, which might not be 
useful in general. Furthermore, the evaluation of 
a system should not be limited to its performance 
in a specific context but should address charac-
teristics such as: 
? Cost of building (time and effort); 
? Ease of extension, maintainability and cus-
tomisability to handle new requirements 
(time, effort and expertise required); 
? Cost of porting to a new domain or applica-
tion (time, effort and expertise required);  
? Cost of data capture if required (how expen-
sive, expertise required); 
? Coverage issues (users, tasks, dimensions of 
context; and 
? Ease of integration with other software. 
These dimensions are important if we want the 
technology to be adopted and if we want poten-
127
tial users of the technology to be able to make an 
informed choice as to what approach to choose 
when.  
Most NLG systems are built around a specific 
application. Using them in the context of a dif-
ferent application or domain might be difficult. 
While one can argue that basic techniques do not 
differ from one application to another, the cost of 
the modifications required and the expertise and 
skills needed may not be worth the trouble. It 
may be simply cheaper and more convenient to 
rebuild everything. However, firstly, this might 
not be an option, and, secondly, it may increase 
the cost of using an NLG approach to such an 
extent as to make it unaffordable. In addition, 
applications evolve over time and often require a 
quick deployment. It is thus increasingly desir-
able to be able to change (update) an application, 
enabling it to respond appropriately to the new 
situations which it must now handle: this may 
require the ability to handle new situations (e.g., 
generate new texts) or the ability to respond dif-
ferently than originally envisaged to known 
situations. This is important for at least two rea-
sons: 
(1) We are designers not domain experts. 
Although we usually carry out a do-
main/corpus/task analysis beforehand to acquire 
the domain knowledge and understand the users? 
needs in terms of the text to be generated, it is 
almost impossible to become a domain expert 
and know what is the most appropriate in each 
situation. Thus, the design of a specific applica-
tion should allow the experts to take on control 
and ensure the application is configured appro-
priately. This imposes the additional constraint 
that an application should be maintainable di-
rectly by a requirement specialist, an author, ex-
pert or potentially the reader/listener; 
(2) Situations are dynamic ? what is satis-
factory today may be unsatisfactory tomorrow. 
We must be prepared to take on board new re-
quirements as they come in. 
These requirements, of course, come at a cost. 
With this in mind, then, we believe that there is 
another side to system-oriented evaluation which 
we, as designers of NLG systems, need to con-
sider: the ease or cost of developing flexible ap-
plications that can be easily configured and 
maintained to meet changing requirements.  As a 
start towards this goal, we attempted to look 
more precisely at one of the characteristics men-
tioned above, the cost of maintaining and extend-
ing an application, attempting to understand what 
we should take into account to evaluate a system 
on that dimension. We believe asking the follow-
ing questions might be useful. When there are 
new requirements: 
(1) What changes are needed and do the 
modifications require the development of new 
resources, the implementation of additional func-
tionality to the underlying architecture, or both? 
(2) Who can do it and what is the expertise 
required? ? NLG systems are now quite complex 
and require a lot of expertise that may be shared 
among several individuals (e.g., software engi-
neering, computational linguistics, domain ex-
pertise, etc.). 
(3) How hard it is? ? How much effort and 
time would be required to modify/update the sys-
tem to the new requirements? 
In asking these questions, we believe it is also 
useful to decouple a specific system and its un-
derlying architecture, and ask the appropriate 
questions to both. 
3 Usability Evaluations of NLG Systems 
When talking about evaluation of NLG systems, 
we should also remember that usability 
evaluations are crucial, as they can confirm the 
usefulness of a system for its purpose and look at 
the impact of the generated text on its intended 
audience. There has been an increasing number 
of such evaluations ? e.g., (Reiter et al, 2001, 
Paris et al, 2001, Colineau et al, 2002, 
Kushniruk et al, 2002, Elhadad et al, 2005) ? 
and we should continue to encourage them as 
well as develop and share methodologies (and 
pitfalls) for performing these evaluations. It is 
interesting, in fact, to note that communities that 
have emphasized common task and corpus 
evaluations, such as the IR community, are now 
turning their attention to stakeholder-based 
evaluations such as task-based evaluations. In 
looking at ways to evaluate NLG systems, we 
might again enlarge our view beyond 
reader/listener-oriented usability evaluations, as 
readers are not the only persons potentially 
affected by our technology. When doing our 
evaluations, then, we must also consider other 
parties. Considering NLG systems as information 
systems, we might consider the following 
stakeholders beyond the reader: 
? The creators of the information: for some 
applications, this may refer to the person 
creating the resources or the information re-
quired for the NLG system. This might be, 
for example, the people writing the frag-
ments of text that will be later assembled 
128
automatically. Or it might include the person 
who will author the discourse rules or the 
templates required. With respect to these 
people, we might ask questions such as: 
?Does employing this NLG system/approach 
save them time??, ?Is it easy for them to up-
date the information??1 
? The ?owners? of the information. We refer 
here to the organisation choosing to employ 
an NLG system. Possible questions here 
might be: ?Does the automatically generated 
text achieve its purpose with respect to the 
organisation??, ?Can the organisation convey 
similar messages with the automated system? 
(e.g., branding issues). 
4 Discussion 
In this short position paper, we have argued that 
we need to enlarge our view of evaluation to en-
compass both usability evaluation (and include 
users beyond readers/listeners) and system-
oriented evaluations. While we recognise that it 
is crucial to have ways to compare systems and 
approaches (the main advantage of having a 
common corpus and task), we suggest that we 
should look for ways to enable these compari-
sons without narrowing our view on evaluation 
and de-contextualising the systems under consid-
eration. We have presented some possible di-
mensions on which approaches and systems 
could be evaluated. While we understand how to 
perform usability evaluations, we believe that an 
important question is whether it is possible to 
agree on dimensions for system-oriented evalua-
tions and on ?metrics? for these dimensions, to 
allow us to evaluate the different applications 
and approaches, and allow potential users of the 
technology to choose the appropriate one for 
their needs. In our own work, we exploit an NLG 
architecture to develop adaptive hypermedia ap-
plications (Paris et al, 2004), and some of our 
goals (Colineau et al, 2006) are to: 
? Articulate a comprehensive framework for 
the evaluation of approaches to building 
tailored information delivery systems and 
specific applications built using these ap-
proaches. 
? Identify how an application or an ap-
proach measures along some dimensions 
                                                 
1 We realise that, for some NLG applications, there 
might be no authors if all the data exploited by the 
system comes from underlying existing sources, e.g., 
weather or stock data or existing textual resources. 
(in particular for system-oriented evalua-
tion). 
We believe these are equally important for the 
evaluation of NLG systems. 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank the reviewers of the 
paper for their useful comments.  
 References 
Colineau, N., Paris, C. & Vander Linden, K. 2002. An 
Evaluation of Procedural Instructional Text.  In the 
Proceedings of the International Natural Language 
Generation Conference (INLG) 2002, NY. 
Colineau, N., Paris, C. & Wilkinson, R. 2006.  To-
wards Measuring the Cost of Changing Adaptive 
Hypermedia Systems.   In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Adaptive Hypermedia 
and Adaptive Web-based Systems (AH2006). 259-
263, Dublin, Ireland.  LNCS 4018. 
Elhadad, N. McKeown, K. Kaufman, D. & Jordan, D. 
2005. Facilitating physicians' access to information 
via tailored text summarization. In AMIA Annual 
Symposium, 2005, Washington DC. 
Kushniruk, A., Kan, MY, McKeown, K., Klavans, J., 
Jordan, D., LaFlamme, M. & Patel, V. 2002. Us-
ability evaluation of an experimental text summari-
zation system and three search engines: Implica-
tions for the reengineering of health care interfaces. 
In Proceedings of the American Medical Informat-
ics Association Annual Symposium (AMIA 2002). 
Paris, C., Wan, S., Wilkinson, R. & Wu, M. 2001. 
Generating Personalised Travel Guides? And who 
wants them? In Proceedings of the 2001 Interna-
tional Conference on User Modelling (UM?01), 
Sondhofen, Germany. 
Paris, C., Wu, M., Vander Linden, K., Post, M. & Lu, 
S. 2004. Myriad: An Architecture for Contextual-
ised Information Retrieval and Delivery. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Adap-
tive Hypermedia and Adaptive Web-based Systems 
(AH2004). 205-214, The Netherlands. 
Reiter, E., Robertson, R., Lennox A. S. & Osman, L. 
(2001). Using a randomised controlled clinical trial 
to evaluate an NLG system. In Proceedings of 
ACL'01, Toulouse, France, 434-441. 
129
