XiSTS ? XML in Speech Technology Systems 
 
Michael Walsh Stephen Wilson Julie Carson-Berndsen 
Department of Computer Science 
University College Dublin 
Ireland 
{michael.j.walsh, stephen.m.wilson, julie.berndsen}@ucd.ie 
 
Abstract: This paper describes the use of XML in three generic interacting speech technology 
systems.  The first, a phonological syllable recognition system, generates feature-based finite-state 
automaton representations of phonotactic constraints in XML. It employs axioms of event logic to 
interpret multilinear representations of speech utterances and outputs candidate syllables to the second 
system, an XML syllable lexicon. This system enables users to generate their own lexicons and its default 
lexicon is used to accept or reject the candidate syllables output by the speech recognition system. 
Furthermore its XML representation facilitates its use by the third system which generates additional 
lexicons, based on different feature sets, by means of a transduction process. The applicability of these 
alternative feature sets in the generation of synthetic speech can then be tested using these new lexicons. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The flexibility and portability provided by 
XML, and its related technologies, result in 
them being well suited to the development 
of robust, generic, Natural Language 
Processing applications. In this paper we 
describe the use of XML within the context 
of speech technology software, with a 
particular focus on speech recognition. We 
present a framework, based on the model of 
Time Map Phonology (Carson-Berndsen, 
1998), for the development  and testing of 
phonological well- formedness constraints 
for generic speech technology applications. 
Furthermore, we illustrate how the use of a 
syllable lexicon, specified in terms of 
phonological features, and marked-up in 
XML, contributes to both speech recognition 
and synthesis. In the following sections 
three inter-connected systems are discussed. 
The first, the Language Independent 
Phonotactic System, LIPS, a syllable 
recognition application based on Time Map 
Phonology and a significant departure from 
current ASR technology, is described. The 
second system, Realising Enforced Feature-
based Lexical Entries in XML, REFLEX, is 
outlined and finally, the third system, 
Transducing Recognised Entities via XML, 
T-REX, is discussed. All three systems build 
on earlier work on generic speech tools 
(Carson-Berndsen, 1999; Carson-Berndsen 
& Walsh, 2000a). 
 
2. The Time Map Model  
 
This paper focuses on representing speech 
utterances in terms of non-segmental 
phonology, such as autosegmental 
phonology (Goldsmith, 1990), where 
utterances are represented in terms of tiers 
of autonomous features (autosegments) 
which can spread across a number of 
sounds. The advantage of this approach is 
that coarticulation can be modelled by 
allowing features to overlap. The Time Map 
model (Carson-Berndsen, 1998, 2000) 
builds on this autosegmental approach by 
allowing multilinear representations of 
autonomous features to be interpreted by an 
event-based computational linguistic model 
  
of phonology. The Time Map model 
employs a phonotactic automaton (finite-
state representation of the permissible 
combinations of sounds in a language), and 
axioms of event logic, to interpret 
multilinear feature representations. Indeed, 
much recent research (e.g. Ali et al, 1999; 
Chang, Greenberg & Wester, 2001) has 
focused on extracting  similar features to 
those used in our model. Figure 1 below, 
illustrates a mulitlinear feature-based 
representation of the syllable [So:n] 1. 
 
Figure 1. Multilinear representation of [So:n] 
 
Two temporal domains are distinguished by 
the Time Map model. The first, absolute 
(signal) time, considers features as events 
with temporal endpoints. The second, 
relative time, considers only the temporal 
relations of overlap and precedence as 
salient. Input to the model is in absolute 
time. Parsing, however, is performed in the 
relative time domain using only the overlap 
and precedence relations, and is guided by 
the phonotactic automaton which imposes 
top-down constraints on the relations that 
can occur in a particular language. The 
construction of the phonotactic automaton 
and the actual parsing process is carried out 
by LIPS. 
 
3. LIPS 
 
LIPS is the generic framework for the Time 
Map model. It incorporates finite-state 
                                                 
1All phonemes are specified in  SAMPA notation. 
methodology which enables users to 
construct their own phonotactic automata for 
any language by means of a graphical user 
interface. Furthermore, LIPS employs an 
event logic, enabling it to map from absolute 
time to relative time, and in a novel 
approach to ASR, carry out parsing on the 
phonological feature level. The system is 
comprised of two principal components, the 
network generator and the parser, outlined in 
the following subsections. 
 
3.1. The Network Generator 
 
The network generator interface allows 
users to build their own phonotactic 
automata. Users input node values and select 
from a list of feature overlap relations those 
that a given arc is to represent. These 
relations can be selected from a default list 
of IPA-like features or the user can specify 
their own set. In this way LIPS is feature-set 
independent. The network generator 
constructs feature-based networks and 
parsing takes place at the feature level. Once 
the user has completed the network 
specification, the system generates an XML 
representation of the phonotactic automaton. 
An automaton representing a small 
subsection of the phonotactics of English is 
illustrated in Figure 2. It is clear from this 
automaton that English permits an [S] 
followed by a [r] in syllable-initial position, 
but not the other way around. 
  
 
Figure 2. Phonotactic automaton  
  
 
 
Figure 3. XML representation of subsection of phonotactic automaton for English. 
 
Figure 3 illustrates a subsection of the XML 
representation of the English phonotactics 
output by the network generator. A single 
arc with a single phoneme, [S], and its 
overlap constraints, is shown.  
The motivation for generating an XML 
representation for our phonotactic  automata 
is that XML enables us to specify a well-
defined, easy to interpret, portable template, 
without compromising the generic nature of 
the network generator. That is to say the 
user can still specify a phonotactic 
automaton independent of any language or 
feature-set. The generated phonotactic 
automaton is then used to guide the second 
principal component of the system, the 
parser. 
3.2 The Parser 
 
LIPS employs a top-down and breadth-first 
parsing strategy and is best explained 
through exemplification. 
 
Purely for the purposes of describing how 
the parsing procedure takes place, we return 
to the phonotactic automaton of Figure 2, 
which of course represents only a very small 
subsection of English. This automaton will 
recognise such syllables as shum, shim, 
shem, shown, shrun, shran etc., some being 
actual lexicalised syllables of English and 
others being phonotactically well- formed, 
potential, syllables of English. For our 
example we take the multilinear 
  
representation of the utterance [So:n] as 
depicted in Figure 4 as our input to the 
parser. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Interaction between the input and the 
automaton. 
 
At the beginning of the parsing process the 
phonotactic automaton is anticipating a [S] 
sound, that is it requires three temporal 
overlap constraints to be satisfied, the 
feature voiceless must overlap the feature 
fricative,  the feature palato  must overlap 
the feature voiceless, and the feature 
fricative must overlap the feature palato. A 
variable window is applied over the input 
utterance and the features within the window 
are examined to see if they satisfy the 
overlap constraints. As can be seen from 
Figure 4 the three features are indeed 
present and all overlap in time. Thus the [S] 
is recognised and the two arcs bearing the 
[S] symbol are traversed and the window 
moves on. At this point then the automaton 
is anticipating either an [r] or a vowel sound. 
In a similar fashion the contents of the new 
window are examined and in the case of our 
example the vowel [o:] is recognised (the [r]  
is rejected). The vowel transition is 
traversed, the window moves on, and the 
automaton is expecting an [n] or an [m]. For 
full details of the parsing process see 
Carson-Berndsen & Walsh (2000b). Output 
from LIPS is then fed through the REFLEX 
system to determine if actual or potential 
syllables have been found. 
 
4. REFLEX 
 
REFLEX is a generic, language independent 
application, which allows for the rapid 
design and construction of syllable lexicons, 
for any language. One of the main focuses 
of other research working on broadening the 
scope of the lexicon across languages, has  
been in the development of multilingual 
lexicons. One such project, PolyLex (Cahill 
& Gazdar, 1999), captures commonalities 
across related languages using hierarchical 
inheritance mechanisms. One of the main 
concerns of the work presented here 
however, is to provide generic, reusable, 
tools which facilitate the development and 
testing of phonological systems, rather than 
the creation of such multilingual lexicons. 
 
Work on phonological features and lexical 
description has either been within this 
multilingual context (Tiberius & Evans, 
2000) or has concentrated on using a 
feature-based lexicon for comparison with 
features extracted from a sound signal 
(Reetz, 2000). By removing reference to 
specific languages and concentrating on 
providing mechanisms for lexical 
generation, REFLEX can generate a syllable 
lexicon for any language that can be 
adequately represented in a phonetic 
notation. 
 
Furthermore, the decision to use XML to 
represent the output data means that it is 
readily available for use and manipulation 
by other outside systems with minimal 
effort. All background processing is 
completely hidden; one deals only with the 
marked-up output, from which idiosyncratic 
user-required structures can be rapidly 
generated.  
  
The REFLEX system outputs a feature-
based syllable lexicon. This lexicon is a 
valid XML document, meaning that it 
conforms to the given REFLEX Document 
Type Definition (DTD). The DTD stipulates 
the structure, order and number of XML 
element tags and attributes, modelling all 
potential syllable structures (e.g. V, CV, 
CVC etc). 
 
An example of a typical lexical entry, in this 
case corresponding to the multilinear 
representation specified in Figure 5, [So:n] 
is given below. 
 
 
Figure 5. Typical lexical entry in XML 
 
The syllable element shown has four 
children, described as follows: 
 
1) A text child, in this case So:n, the 
SAMPA representation of the entire 
syllable. 2) An <onset> element whose 
attribute list denotes its position within the 
syllable, i.e.<onset type=?first?>, <onset 
type=?second?> etc. 3) Nucleus and 4) 
coda elements are similarly defined. 
 
 Each of the syllable?s elements, <onset>, 
<nucleus> and <coda>, may have only one 
child element, <segment>, which tags the 
given phoneme. Its attribute list describes 
the phonemes specification in terms of 
phonological features.  It also has a duration 
attribute, which is derived from corpus 
analysis. 
 
<segment phonation=?voiced? 
   manner=?nasal? place=?apical?  
  duration=?null?>n</segment> 
 
REFLEX provides two methods by which  
syllables can be added to the lexicon. The 
first, requires users to specify an input file of 
monosyllables represented in a phonetic 
notation, in this case SAMPA.  The second, 
enables the user to specify syllables, in 
terms of phonemes, position, and if desired, 
a typical duration, by means of a GUI 
illustrated below in Figure 6. 
  
 
 
 
Figure 6. REFLEX lexicographer interface 
 
Regardless of the input option chosen, new 
entries are added to the lexicon via a 
background process.  REFLEX makes use of 
DATR, a non-monotonic inheritance based 
lexical representation language (Evans & 
Gazdar, 1996) to carry out this process. 
DATR is used to quickly and 
comprehensively define the phonological 
feature descriptions for a given language. 
For a greater understanding of how this can 
be achieved see Cahill, Carson-Berndsen & 
Gazdar (2000). Using DATR?s inference 
mechanisms, REFLEX manipulates the 
output into a valid XML document, creating 
a sophisticated phonological feature-based 
lexicon, shown in Figure 5. 
  
All syllable elements are enclosed within the 
root <lexicon> tag, whose sole attribute 
specifies the lexicon?s language. 
 
        <lexicon language=?English?> 
                  <syllable>?</syllable> 
                        :  
                   <syllable>?</syllable> 
        </lexicon>                    
 
The REFLEX lexicon is a versatile tool that 
has a number of potential applications 
within the domain of speech technology 
systems. The following sub-sections 
illustrate how this syllable lexicon, by virtue 
of its being marked up in XML, can 
contribute to both speech recognition and 
synthesis. 
 
4.1 LIPS and REFLEX 
 
By allowing feature overlap constraints to be 
relaxed in the case of underspecified input, 
LIPS can produce a number of candidate 
syllables.  In Figure 4 above, at the final 
transition, the automaton is expecting either 
an [m] or an [n]. The input, however, is  
underspecified, no feature distinguishing 
between [m] or [n], or indeed any voiced 
nasal, is present. By allowing the overlap 
constraints for the [m]  and the [n] to be 
relaxed, LIPS can consider both [So:n] and 
[So:m] to be candidate syllables for the 
utterance. Both candidate syllables are well-
formed, adhering to the phonotactics of 
English, however only one, [So:n], is an 
actual syllable of English. Thus at this point 
a lexicon providing good coverage of the 
language should reject [So:m] and accept 
[So:n]. In order to achieve this, REFLEX 
makes use of the XPath specification (a 
means for locating nodes in an XML 
document) and formulates a query before 
applying it to the syllable lexicon. 2 In the 
                                                 
2 The full W3C XPath specification can be found at 
http://www.w3c.org/TR/xpath 
example given, REFLEX searches the 
document, checking the value of the text 
child of each syllable element, against each 
candidate syllable output by LIPS. Any 
successful matches returned are therefore 
not only well- formed, but are deemed to be 
actual syllables. Thus at this point, the 
lexicon is searched and the syllable [So:n] is 
recognised. The granularity of the REFLEX 
search capability is such, that it can be 
extended to the feature level. Users can 
search the lexicon for syllables that contain 
a number of specific features in certain 
positions, e.g. search for syllables that 
contain a voiced, labial, plosive in the first 
onset. Again, REFLEX forms an XPath 
expression and queries the lexicon, returning 
all matches.  REFLEX also functions as a 
knowledge source for the T-REX system. 
This system is responsible for mapping 
output from the lexicon into syllable 
representations using different feature sets, 
e.g. features from other phonologies, and is 
discussed below in the context of speech 
synthesis.  
 
5. T-REX 
 
The role of this module is to enable 
lexicographers and speech scientists etc. to 
generate, via a transduction process,  
syllable lexicons based on different  
phonological feature sets. The default 
feature set employed by REFLEX is based 
on IPA-like features. However, T-REX 
provides a GUI that permits lexicographers 
to define phoneme to feature attribute 
mappings. Given this functionality T-REX 
operates as a testbed for investigating the 
merits of different feature sets in the context 
of speech synthesis. Different lexicons are 
generated by associating new feature sets 
with the same phonetic alphabet (SAMPA) 
via a GUI. The new lexicon is then 
transduced by T-REX which maps all 
syllable entries from the default lexicon 
(with IPA-like features) to the new lexicon,  
  
applying the features input by the user, to 
their associated phonemes. In order to 
exemplify this we return to our sample 
syllable, [So:n]. Figure 2 above shows the 
lexical representation, using IPA-like 
features, for [So:n]. Figure 7 below shows 
new features being associated with the 
phoneme [S].  
 
 
 
Figure 7. GUI for T-REX 
 
Similarly, new features are associated with 
the remaining phonemes, [o:]  and [n], and 
indeed the rest of the SAMPA alphabet. On 
completion the user initiates the transduction 
process and a new lexicon is produced. The 
XML representation of the phoneme [S], in 
the new lexicon, is depicted in Figure 8. 
Note how the feature attributes differ from 
those in the default lexicon.  
 
 
 
Figure 8. Phoneme with transduced features 
 
The advantages of this transduction 
capability are that numerous lexicons can be 
rapidly developed and used to investigate 
the appropriateness of specific formal 
models of phonological representation for 
the purposes of speech synthesis. 
Furthermore, the same computational 
phonological model, i.e. the Time Map 
model, can be employed. Bohan et al(2001) 
describe how the phonotactic automaton is 
used to generate a multilinear event 
representation of overlap and precedence 
constraints for an utterance, which is then  
mapped to control parameters of the HLsyn 
(Sensimetrics Corporation) synthesis engine. 
Different feature sets can be evaluated by 
assessing how they influence the various 
control parameters of the HLsyn engine and 
the quality of the synthesised speech. 
 
6. Conclusion 
 
This paper has described how the use of 
XML together with a computational 
phonological model can contribute 
significantly to the tasks of speech 
recognition, speech synthesis and lexicon 
development. Phonotactic automata and 
multilinear representations were introduced 
and the interpretation of these 
representations was discussed. Three robust, 
well-defined systems, LIPS, REFLEX, and 
T-REX, were outlined. These systems offer 
generic structures coupled with the 
portability of XML. In doing so, they enable 
users to recognise speech, synthesise speech, 
and develop lexicons for different languages 
using different feature sets while 
maintaining a common interface.  The 
generic and portable nature of these systems 
means that languages with significantly 
different phonologies are supported. In 
addition, languages which, to date, have 
received little attention with respect to 
speech technology are equally provided for.  
 
Ongoing projects include work on Irish, 
which has a notably different phonology 
from English and on developing phonotactic 
automata and phonological lexicons for 
other languages. Furthermore, the models 
are being extended to include phoneme-
  
grapheme mappings based on the contexts 
defined by the phonotactic automata.  
 
7. Bibliography 
 
Ali, A.M..A.; J. Van der Spiegel; P. Mueller; G. 
Haentjaens & J. Berman (1999): An 
Acoustic-Phonetic Feature-Based System for 
Automatic Phoneme Recognition in 
Continuous Speech. In: IEEE International 
Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS-
99), III-118-III-121, 1999. 
Bohan, A.; E. Creedon, , J. Carson-Berndsen & 
F. Cummins (2001): Application of a 
Computational Model of Phonology to 
Speech Synthesis. In: Proceedings of 
AICS2001, Maynooth, September 2001. 
Cahill, L. & G. Gazdar (1999). The PolyLex 
architecture: multilingual lexicons for 
related languages. Traitement Automatique 
des Langues, 40(2), 5-23. 
Cahill, L.; J. Carson-Berndsen & G. Gazdar 
(2000), Phonology-based Lexical 
Knowledge Representation. In: F. van Eynde 
& D. Gibbon (eds.) Lexicon Development 
for Speech and Language Processing, 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht. 
Carson-Berndsen, J. (1998): Time Map 
Phonology: Finite State Models and Event 
Logics in Speech Recognition. Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht. 
Carson-Berndsen, J. (1999): A Generic Lexicon 
Tool for Word Model Definition in 
Multimodal Applications. Proceedings of 
EUROSPEECH 99, 6th European 
Conference on Speech Communication and 
Technology, Budapest, September 1999. 
 
 
 
Carson-Berndsen, J. (2000): Finite State Models, 
Event Logics and Statistics in Speech 
Recognition, In: Gazdar, G.; K. Sparck 
Jones & R. Needham (eds.): Computers, 
Language and Speech: Integrating formal 
theories and statistical data. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society, Series A, 
358(1770), 1255-1266. 
Carson-Berndsen, J. & M. Walsh (2000a): 
Generic techniques for multilingual speech 
technology applications, Proceedings of the 
7th Conference on Automatic Natural 
Language Processing, Lausanne, 
Switzerland, 61-70. 
Carson-Berndsen, J. & M. Walsh (2000b): 
Interpreting Multilinear Representations in 
Speech. In: Proceedings of the Eight 
International Conference on Speech Science 
and Technology, Canberra, December 2000. 
Chang, S.; S. Greenberg & M. Wester (2001): 
An Elitist Approach to Articulatory-
Acoustic Feature Classification. In: 
Proceedings of Eurospeech 2001, Aalborg. 
Evans, R & G. Gazdar (1996), DATR: A 
language for lexical knowledge 
representation. In: Computational 
Linguistics 22, 2, pp. 167-216. 
Goldsmith, J. (1990): Autosegmental and 
Metrical Phonology. Basil Blackwell, 
Cambridge, MA. 
Reetz, H. (2000) Underspecified 
Phonological Features for Lexical 
Access. In: PHONUS 5, pp. 161-173. 
Saarbr?cken: Institute of Phonetics, 
University of the Saarland. 
Tiberius, C. & R. Evans, 2000 
"Phonological feature based Multilingual 
Lexical Description," Proceedings of 
TALN 2000, Geneva, Switzerland. 
 
 
