Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2007), pages 480?483,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
WIT: Web People Search Disambiguation using Random Walks
Jose? Iria, Lei Xia, Ziqi Zhang
The University of Sheffield
211 Portobello Street
Sheffield S1 4DP, United Kingdom
{j.iria, l.xia, z.zhang}@sheffield.ac.uk
Abstract
In this paper, we describe our work on a ran-
dom walks-based approach to disambiguat-
ing people in web search results, and the im-
plementation of a system that supports such
approach, which we used to participate at
Semeval?07 Web People Search task.
1 Introduction
Finding information about people on the Web us-
ing a search engine is far from being a quick and
easy process. There is very often a many-to-many
mapping of person names to the actual persons, that
is, several persons may share the same name, and
several names may refer to the same person. In
fact, person names are highly ambiguous: (Guha and
Garg, 2004) reports that only 90.000 thousand dif-
ferent names are shared by 100 million people ac-
cording to the U.S. Census Bureau. This creates the
need to disambiguate the several referents typically
found in the web pages returned by a query for a
given person name.
The Semeval?07 Web People Search challenge
(Artiles et al, 2007) formally evaluated systems on
this task. In this paper, we describe our work on
a random walks-based approach to disambiguating
people in web search results, heavily influenced by
(Minkov et al, 2006). This particular model was
chosen due to its elegance in seamlessly combining
lexico-syntactic features local to a given webpage
with topological features derived from its place in
the network formed by the hyperlinked web pages
returned by the query, to arrive at one single mea-
sure of similarity between any two pages.
2 Proposed Method
In a nutshell, our approach 1) uses a graph to model
the web pages returned by the search engine query,
2) discards irrelevant web pages using a few sim-
ple hand-crafted heuristics, 3) computes a similarity
matrix for web pages using random walks over the
graph, and 4) finally clusters the web pages given the
similarity matrix. The next subsections detail these
steps.
2.1 Web People Search Graph
We build a directed weighted typed graph from the
corpus. The graph is a 5-tuple G = (V,E, t, l, w),
where V is the set of nodes,E : V ?V is the ordered
set of edges, t : V ? T is the node type function
(T = {t1, . . . , t|T |} is a set of types), l : E ? L is
the edge label function (L = {l1, . . . , l|L|} is a set of
labels), and w : L ? R is the label weight function.
We structure our problem domain with the types and
labels presented in Figure 1.
In order to transform the text into a graph that
conforms to the model shown, we take the output of
standard NLP tools and input it as nodes and edges
into the graph, indexing nodes by string value to en-
sure that identical contents for any given node type
are merged into a single node in the graph. To pro-
cess the corpus, we run a standard NLP pipeline
seperately over the metadata, title and body of the
HTML pages, but not before having transformed
its contents as much into plain text as possible, by
removing HTML tags, javascript code, etc. The
pipeline used is composed of tokenization, removal
of stop words and infrequent words, and stemming
with Porter?s algorithm. The resulting graph at this
480
Figure 1: The data representation model adopted
stage consists of the nodes of type Token, Webpage,
Metadata, Title and Body, properly interconnected.
We then run a named entity recognizer to associate
NE tags to the respective documents, via the con-
stituent words of the NE. The information about the
original URL of page is given by the corpus, while
Host is trivially obtained from it. We finalise the
graph by inserting an edge of type linked by between
any web page linked by another in the corpus, and
an edge of type related to between any web page re-
lated to another in the corpus, as given by Google?s
related: operator.
For the named entity recognition task, we have
compared GATE and OpenNLP toolkits. Although
both toolkits show comparable results, OpenNLP
demonstrated faster performance. Moreover, some
documents in the corpus consisted of very exten-
sive lists of names (e.g. phonebook records) which
slowed the NER to a halt in practice. To compen-
sate for this, we applied a chunking window at the
beginning and end of each body content and around
each occurrence of the person name being consid-
ered (and its variants determined heuristically). The
window size used was 3000 characters in length,
and an overlap between windows results in a merged
window.
2.2 Discarding using heuristics
To discard irrelevant documents within the corpus,
we manually devised two heuristics rules for classi-
fication by observing the training data at hand. The
heuristics are 1) whether the page has content at all,
2) whether the page contains at least one appearance
of mentioned person name with its variants. This
simple classification showed high precision and low
recall on the training data. We also tried a SVM-
based classifier trained on a typical bag-of-words
feature vector space obtained from the training data,
but found the such classifier not to be sufficiently re-
liable.
2.3 Random Walks Model
We aim to determine the similarity between any two
nodes of type Webpage in the graph. In our work,
similarity between two nodes in the graph is ob-
tained by employing a random walks model. A ran-
dom walk, sometimes called a ?drunkard?s walk,? is
a formalization of the intuitive idea of taking suc-
cessive steps in a graph, each in a random direction
(Lova?sz, 2004). Intuitively, the ?harder? it is for a
drunkard to arrive at a given webpage starting from
another, the less similar the two pages are.
Our model defines weights for each edge type,
which, informally, determine the relevance of each
feature type to establish a similarity between any
two pages. Let Ltd = {l(x, y) : (x, y) ? E ?
T (x) = td} be the set of possible labels for edges
leaving nodes of type td. We require that the weights
form a probability distribution over Ltd , i.e.
?
l?Ltd
w(l) = 1 (1)
We build an adjacency matrix of locally appropriate
similarity between nodes as
Wij =
{ ?
lk?L
w(lk)
|(i,?)?E:l(i,?)=lk|
, (i, j) ? E
0, otherwise
(2)
where Wij is the ith-line and jth-column entry of
W , indexed by V . Equation 2 distributes uniformly
the weight of edges of the same type leaving a given
node. We could choose to distribute them otherwise,
e.g. we could distribute the weights according to
some string similarity function or language model
(Erkan, 2006), depending on the label.
We associate the state of a Markov chain to ev-
ery node of the graph, that is, to each node i we
associate the one-step probability P (0)(j|i) of a ran-
dom walker traversing to an adjacent node j. These
481
probabilities are expressed by the row stochastic ma-
trix D?1W , where D is the diagonal degree ma-
trix given by Dii =
?
k Wik. The ?reinforced?
similarity between two nodes in the graph is given
by the t-step transition probability P (t)(j|i), which
can be simply computed by a matrix power, i.e.,
P (t)(j|i) = [(D?1W )t]ij .
Note that t should not be very large in our case.
The probability distribution of an infinite random
walk over the nodes, called the stationary distribu-
tion of the graph, is uninteresting to us for cluster-
ing purposes since it gives an information related to
the global structure of the graph. It is often used as
a measure to rank the structural importance of the
nodes in a graph (Page et al, 1998). For clustering,
we are more interested in the local similarities inside
a cluster of nodes that separate them from the rest of
the graph. Also, in practice, using t > 2 leads to
high computational cost requirements, as the matrix
becomes more dense as t grows.
Equation 2 introduces the need to learn the func-
tion w. In other words, we need to tune the model to
use the most relevant features for this particular task.
Tuning is performed on the training set by compar-
ing the standard purity and inverse purity measures
of the clusters against the gold standard, and using
a simulated annealing optimization method as de-
scribed in (Nie et al, 2005).
2.4 Commute Time Distance
The algorithm takes as input a symmetric similarity
matrix S, which we derive from the random walk
model of the previous section as follows. We com-
pute the Euclidean Commute Time (ECT) distance
(Saerens et al, 2004) of any two nodes of type Web-
page in the graph. The ECT distance is (also) based
on a random walk model, and presents the inter-
esting property of decreasing when the number of
paths connecting two nodes increases or when the
length of any path decreases, which makes it well-
suited for clustering tasks. Another nice property
of ECT is that it is non-parametric, so no tuning
is required here. ECT has connections with princi-
pal component analysis and spectral theory (Saerens
et al, 2004).
In particular, we are interested in the average
commute time quantity, n(i, j), which is defined as
the average number of steps a random walker, start-
ing in state i, will take before entering a given state j
for the first time, and go back to i. That is, n(i, j) =
m(j|i) + m(i|j), where the quantity m(j|i), called
the average first-passage time, is defined as the av-
erage number of steps a random walker, starting in
state i, will take to enter state j for the first time. We
compute the average first-passage time iteratively by
means of the following recurrence:
{
m(i|j) = 1 +
?|V |
k=1,k 6=i P
(t)(k|j)m(i|k), j 6= i
m(i|i) = 0
(3)
where P (t)(?|?) is the t-step transition probability of
the random walk model over G presented in the pre-
vious section.
Informally, we may regard the random walk
model presented in the previous section as a ?re-
fined? document similarity measure, replacing, e.g.,
the typical TF-IDF measure with a measure that
works in a similar way but over all features rep-
resented in the graph, whereas we can regard the
ECTmeasure presented in this section as a ?booster?
to a basic clustering techniques (cf. next section),
achieved by means of coupling clustering with a ran-
dom walk-based distance which has been shown to
be competitive with state-of-the-art algorithms such
as spectral clustering (Luh Yen et al, 2007).
2.5 Clustering
Clustering aims at partitioning n given data points
into k clusters, such that points within a cluster are
more similar to each other than ones taken from dif-
ferent clusters. An important feature of the clus-
tering algorithm that we require for the problem at
hand is its ability to determine the number k of nat-
ural clusters, since any number of referents may be
present in the web search results. However, most
clustering algorithms require this number to be an
input, which means that they may break up or com-
bine natural clusters, or even create clusters when no
natural ones exist in the data.
We use a form of group-average agglomerative
clustering as described in (Fleischman and Hovy,
2004), shown in Table 1, which works fast for this
problem. A difficult problem (with any clustering
approach) has to do with the number of initial clus-
ters or, alternatively, with setting a threshold for
when to stop clustering. This threshold could po-
482
Input: symmetric similarity matrix S, threshold ?
Output: a set of clusters C
1. (i, j)? find min score in S
2. if Sij > ? then exit
3. place i and j in the same cluster in C (merging
existing clusters of i and j if needed)
4. (average pairs of edges connecting to nodes i,j
from any node k)
4a. Sik ? (Sik + Sjk)/2, k 6= i, j
4b. Ski ? (Ski + Skj)/2, k 6= i, j
5. remove j-th column and j-th line from S (effec-
tively merging nodes i,j into a single node)
6. goto 1
7. return clusters C
Table 1: The simple group-average agglomerative
clustering algorithm used
tentially also be optimized using the training data;
however, we have opted for unsupervised heuristics
to do that, e.g. the well-known Calinski&Harabasz
stopping rule (Calinski&Harabasz, 1974).
3 Results Obtained
The results obtained by the system are presented in
the following table. The evaluation measures used
were f-measure, purity and inverse purity - for a de-
tailed description refer to the task description (Ar-
tiles et al, 2007).
aver f05 aver f02 aver pur aver inv pur
0,49 0,66 0,36 0,93
The results are below average for this Semeval
task, and should not be regarded as representative
of the approach adopted, since the authors have had
limited time available to ensure a pristine implemen-
tation of the whole approach.
References
Artiles, J., Gonzalo, J., & Sekine, S. (2007). The
SemEval-2007 WePS Evaluation: Establishing a
benchmark for the Web People Search Task. In Pro-
ceedings of Semeval 2007, Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Calinski and Harabasz (1974). A Dendrite Method for
Cluster Analysis Communications in Statistics, 3(1),
1974, 1-27.
Erkan, G. (2006). Language model-based document
clustering using random walks. Proceedings of the
main conference on Human Language Technology
Conference of the North American Chapter of the As-
sociation of Computational Linguistics (pp. 479?486).
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Fleischman, M. B., & Hovy, E. (2004). Multi-document
person name resolution. Proceedings of the ACL 2004.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Guha, R. V., & Garg, A. (2003). Disambiguating People
in Search. TAP: Building the Semantic Web.. ACM
Press.
Luh Yen, Francois Fouss, C. D., Francq, P., & Saerens,
M. (2007). Graph nodes clustering based on the
commute-time kernel. To appear in the proceedings of
the 11th Pacific-Asia Conference on Knowledge Dis-
covery and Data Mining (PAKDD 2007). Lecture
Notes in Computer Science (LNCS).
Minkov, E., Cohen, W. W., & Ng, A. Y. (2006). Con-
textual search and name disambiguation in email us-
ing graphs. SIGIR ?06: Proceedings of the 29th
annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Re-
search and development in information retrieval (pp.
27?34). ACM Press.
Nie, Z., Zhang, Y., Wen, J. R., & Ma, W. Y. (2005).
Object-level ranking: Bringing order to web objects.
Proceedings of WWW?05.
Page, L., Brin, S., Motwani, R., & Winograd, T. (1998).
The pagerank citation ranking: Bringing order to
the web (Technical Report). Stanford Digital Library
Technologies Project.
Saerens, M., Fouss, F., Yen, L., & Dupont, P. (2004). The
principal components analysis of a graph, and its re-
lationships to spectral clustering. Proceedings of the
15th European Conference on Machine Learning.
La?szlo? Lova?sz (1993). RandomWalks on Graphs: A Sur-
vey. Combinatorics, Paul Erdos is Eighty (Volume 2),
Keszthely (Hungary), 1993, p 1-46..
483
