Detecting Multiword Verbs in the English
Sublanguage of MEDLINE Abstracts
Chun Xiao and Dietmar Ro?sner
Institut fu?r Wissens- und Sprachverarbeitung
Otto-von-Guericke Universita?t Magdeburg
Universita?tsplatz 2, Magdeburg, Germany 39106
xiao|roesner@iws.cs.uni-magdeburg.de
Abstract
In this paper, we investigate the multiword
verbs in the English sublanguage of MED-
LINE abstracts. Based on the integration of
the domain-specific named entity knowledge
and syntactic as well as statistical information,
this work mainly focuses on how to evaluate a
proper multiword verb candidate. Our results
present a sound balance between the low- and
high-frequency multiword verb candidates in
the sublanguage corpus. We get a F-measure of
0.753, when tested on a manual sample subset
consisting of multiword candidates with both
low- and high-frequencies.
1 Introduction
During the construction of an information extraction
(IE) system in the biomedical domain, we found
that not only the task of named entity recognition
(NER), but also the appropriate handling of verbs
in this domain plays an important role. It is very
helpful to determine the domain-specific verbs in a
specific domain when extracting useful information,
because the domain-specific verbs construct seman-
tic relations between named entities (NEs). How-
ever, three problems in the handling of verbs in a
specific domain are still open:
The first problem is how to determine domain-
specific verbs. This problem has not received
enough notice from most of the researchers yet. Ac-
tually, domain-specific verbs have been mentioned
quite often in biomedical text processing (Thomas
et al, 2000; Ono et al, 2001; Xiao and Ro?sner,
2004b), but often referred to a set of manually or
experientially selected verbs. Spasic? et al (2003)
briefly presented a method to find domain-specific
verbs by filtering the verbs in a stoplist, at the same
time, using the co-occurrence of a verb and specific
terms in the text. In our experiment, the domain-
specific verbs are determined through the compari-
son between different corpora in different domains,
or through genre analysis of the sublanguage domi-
nated corpus.
The second problem is how to determine multi-
word verbs (MWVs). Here we do not make
differences between the more detailed classifi-
cation of multiword verbs, especially the verb-
particle constructions and verb-preposition con-
structions (Baldwin and Villavicencio, 2002). As
a subcategory of multiword expressions (Sag et al,
2002), MWVs raise the complexity of our process-
ing. Because some MWVs share the same verb
head but lead to different semantic interpretations,
like result in and result from, considering only verb
heads in the processing is obviously not sufficient.
A good IE system should deal with such MWVs au-
tomatically and appropriately.
The third problem is that there is a need to in-
vestigate the inflectional and derivational forms of
the verbs. An IE system may have to deal with a
set of patterns, in which the inflectional and deriva-
tional forms of the verbs should be taken into ac-
count. For example, in biomedical texts, the verb
interact defines a binary relation between two sub-
stances, whereas its nominalization morpheme in a
pattern such as the interaction of ... with ... also
constructs such a relation. Note that such patterns
often have close relationship with its common verb
lemma, which is often a MWV. For instance, the
above pattern can map to the MWV interact with.
Table 1 shows the distribution of all inflectional and
derivational forms of the verb inhibit in a corpus of
800 MEDLINE abstracts1 extracted from the GE-
NIA corpus.2 This verb is a very important domain-
specific verb in the biomedical domain. To deal with
those inflectional and derivational forms appropri-
ately will improve the performance of the IE sys-
tem.
The following text focuses on the second problem
1MEDLINE/PubMed is a collection of references and ab-
stracts from 4600 biomedical journals from all over the world,
available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/PubMed/.
2The GENIA Corpus V3.0p consists of 2000 POS-tagged
MEDLINE abstracts, V3.01 consists of the same 2000 abstracts
annotated semantically with the GENIA ontology, available at
http://www-tsujii.is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp/GENIA/.
Form Times Typical pattern
inhibitor(s) 161 a/the ... inhibitor ...
inhibition 167 ... inhibition of ...
inhibitory 61 ... inhibitory effect/factor ...
inhibiting 24 ... in inhibiting ...
inhibited 119 ... inhibited ...
be inhibited 73 ... be inhibited by ...
inhibit 63 ... inhibit ...
inhibits 57 ... inhibits ...
Table 1: Typical patterns of syntactic structures con-
taining the verb stem inhibit and their occurrences
in a test corpus with 800 MEDLINE abstracts.
above. Section 2 introduces a set of language pro-
cessing tools used in the experiment. Detailed de-
scription of the approach for the extraction of proper
MWVs is presented in section 3. The evaluation of
the result and the aspects that have influence on the
result are discussed in section 4, as well as our fu-
ture works. Finally, in the appendix, we list a num-
ber of MWVs that have been extracted by our ap-
proach.
2 Tokeniser, POS Tagger and Chunker
Our experiment in this paper is carried out mainly
on chunk sequences, therefore the following pro-
cessing components are necessary:
? Tokeniser: Following the whitespace-
delimited tokenisation discipline, the tokeniser
determines the segmentation of the non-lexical
entries such as tokens with non-alphabet char-
acters or abbreviations. After tokenisation, the
sentence boundaries are determined as well.
? POS tagger: The maximum entropy POS tag-
ger developed by Ratnaparkhi (Ratnaparkhi,
1996) and the rule-based POS tagger devel-
oped by Brill (Brill, 1994) are trained with
1200 abstracts extracted from the GENIA cor-
pus, which achieve accuracies of 97.97% and
98.06% respectively, when testing on the rest
800 abstract of the GENIA corpus. Since our
test corpus is directly extracted from the POS
tagged GENIA Corpus V3.0p, we do not have
to apply the process of tokenisation and POS
tagging.
? Chunker: In this experiment, unlike the tra-
ditional statistical method for collocation ex-
traction, where sentences are treated as word
sequences (Manning and Schu?tze, 2002), a
shallow chunking process is first carried out.
Then, sentences in our test corpus are treated
as chunk sequences.
Up to now, the chunker consists of two parts,
both utilize WordNet 1.7.13 (Fellbaum, 1999)
as the lexical resource for the lemmatization,
i.e., as the verb and noun stemmer.
? Verb chunker, which extracts the small-
est verb chunks (not including the MWV
structures) with the additional syntactic
information such as number (3rd singu-
lar present), voice (active/passive), and
negation. Since most of the scientific
abstracts are written in present or past
tense, the temporal information is not ex-
tracted especially. The verb chunker re-
turns the common verb lemma of a verb,
with the additional syntactic information
mentioned above. For example, given
an input verb chunk has not been estab-
lished, it returns [establish, singular, pas-
sive, negation].
? Noun chunker, which determines the
noun chunk boundaries, negation, num-
ber (singular/plural), as well as some
inner dependencies of the noun chunks
containing substructure(s). For example,
a noun chunk like [ [the retinoic acid-
synthesizing enzyme] [aldehyde dehydro-
genase 1] ] is actually an apposition struc-
ture.4 In this experiment, the singular
stem of a plural noun token is not returned
in order to avoid missing of necessary in-
formation. For example, although both
take place and take places can map to the
same base structure take place, they must
be treated separately.
3 MWV Extraction
3.1 Analysis of MWVs in the Corpus
The following experiment is carried out on a test
corpus consisting of 1800 abstracts from the GE-
NIA Corpus V3.0p, with 14955 sentences and
40.84K tokens (abstract titles are not included).
In general, the methodologies for the extrac-
tion of multiword expressions (MWEs, including
MWVs) can be classified into syntactic, statistical
and hybrid syntactic-statistical (Dias, 2003). Purely
syntactic processing of MWEs requires specific lin-
guistic knowledge across the different domains of a
language, such as a semantic ontology (Piao et al,
3http://www.cogsci.princeton.edu/?wn/index.shtml
4presented in pairs of matching parentheses.
2003). Purely statistical processing overgenerates
the MWE candidates (Gae?l Dias, 2002), and is not
sensitive enough to the MWE candidates with low
frequencies (Piao et al, 2003). It is practical in
some cases for a hybrid syntactic-statistical system
to pre-define a set of MWE pattern rules, then use
statistical techniques to filter proper candidates. But
it lacks the flexibility to obtain a comprehensive
coverage of possible MWE candidates, especially
when a MWV is non-contiguous in our case. In
addition, it also suffers from the problem of over-
generation, if the pre-defined syntactic pattern oc-
curs rarely in the corpus. Sag et al (2002) indicated
that it is very necessary to find the balance between
the two methods in hybrid systems. This point of
view is taken into account in our approach.
3.2 Extraction of Contiguous MWV
Candidates
A number of works about MWV extraction from
corpora are based on the output of a POS tag-
ger and a chunker (Baldwin and Villavicencio,
2002; Bannard et al, 2003), or the output of a
parser (McCarthy et al, 2003). These works ex-
tracted mainly the verb+particle structures. Similar
to those works, the MWV extraction in our exper-
iment is also based on the chunking output. But,
since MWVs has various POS tag patterns, it is not
practical to assign each pattern an according syntac-
tic rule. Therefore a variation of finite state automa-
ton is considered in our approach for the extraction
of MWVs. Let ? denote this automaton.
Definition ? = {S, I,O, F,G, START},
where:
? S is the set of automaton states,
S = {nextOut, stop, nextIn, head, halt};
? I is the input set, namely the chunks in both POS
tag sequence and lexical sequence;
? O is the output set, namely the MWV candidates,
O = {oi|oi is a successful MWV candidate.};
? F is the set of output controlling functions;
? G is the set of automaton state transition functions;
? START is the initial state of the automaton,
START = head.
Controlling functions in F define operations for
the output. Controlling functions in G define state
transitions of the automaton with respect to the fea-
tures from both POS tags and lexical entries of an
input chunk. An example is given as following.
? Example sentence: The 3?NF-E2/AP1 motif
is able to exert both positive and negative reg-
ulatory effects on the zeta 2-globin promoter
activity in K562 cells.
? Chunk sequence of the example:
Chunk Chunk tag
The 3?NF-E2/AP1 motif ENP
be EVP
able ADJP
to exert IVP
both positive and negative regulatory effects ENPS
on IN
the zeta 2-globin promoter activity ENP
in IN
K562 cells ENPS
. SEPR
where ADJP is an adjective phrase; ENP is a
singular English noun phrase; ENPS is a plu-
ral English noun phrase; EVP is a singular En-
glish verb phrase; IN is a preposition; IVP is
an infinitive verb phrase; and, SEPR is a sen-
tence seperator.
? Extraction of Contiguous MWV Candi-
dates: In the following table, the Input items
are the combination of both lexical sequences
and the corresponding chunk tags, but only
chunk tags are presented in the table. The out-
put operation ? means no operation. For this
example, it returns be able to as a MWV can-
didate.
Input State transition Output operation (oi)
Initialization nextOut ?
ENP nextOut ?
EVP head oi = ?be?
ADJP nextIn oi = ?be able?
IVP stop oi = ?be able to? (success)
IVP head oi+1 = ?exert?
ENPS stop oi+1 = ?exert? (failure)
IN nextOut ?
ENP nextOut ?
IN nextOut ?
ENPS nextOut ?
SEPR halt ?
3.3 Extraction of Non-contiguous MWV
Candidates
When a set of new controlling functions are given,
the finite automaton mentioned above also extracts
non-contiguous MWV candidates. We primarily fo-
cuses on non-contiguous MWVs in form of verb +
particle. As the particles in verb + particle MWVs
are often intransitive (Baldwin and Villavicencio,
2002; McCarthy et al, 2003), which are different
from the transitive prepositions followed by a noun
chunk, we use this feature and a nearest assumption
to extract non-contiguous MWV candidates. In gen-
eral, we assume that a non-contiguous MWV occurs
in a limited context window.5
Because of the specific test corpus in our ex-
periment, the non-contiguous MWV candidates ex-
tracted in our experiment are a relative small sub-set
of all the candidates.6 Most of them are not proper
candidates. We suppose that the genre of scientific
abstracts is an important reason for that: there are
much more specific nominal terms as well as spe-
cific verbs (not MWVs) in scientific abstracts than
in everyday language.
3.4 Solutions to Overgeneration of MWV
Candidates
It is not surprising that the finite automaton is
also sensitive to the low-frequent MWVs such as
?take place? (7 times in the test corpus) and ?shed
light on? (4 times). But several problems of over-
generation7 are still found, which include:
Case 1. Example: [take place]1.1, [take place
at]1.2, [take place in]1.3. In general, we assume
that the short structures are more reliable, espe-
cially when the occurrences of the short structures
are much more frequent than the long structures.
But in this example, all three phrases occur with the
same frequency in the test corpus, we still choose
the more reliable short structure, and add up all oc-
currences of these structures.
Case 2. Example: [be able to]2.1, [be important
for]2.2. The structure [2.1] is a MWV, but the struc-
ture [2.2], which has the same POS tag sequence
as [2.1], is actually not a MWV accepted by a lexi-
con. In this case, the verb head is usually one of the
most frequent verbs such as be, take, go, and etc. In
a previous experiment, we computed the logarithm
likelihood ratio of the two mutual hypotheses8 for
the contiguous MWV candidates extracted from the
test corpus, in order to find the reliability of such
collocations. But we got some unexpected results,
like be important in be important for was a more re-
liable structure than shed light in shed light on. It in-
dicates that this score is still not sensitive enough to
extremely sparse samples. In addition, this method
5Similar assumption or experiment data can be also found
in (Baldwin and Villavicencio, 2002; Bannard et al, 2003;
Dias, 2003).
641 non-contiguous MWV candidates extracted in this ex-
periment have the occurrences over ten, but there are 151 con-
tiguous MWV candidates whose occurrences are over ten.
7MWV candidates share the same lexical substring/string or
POS-tag subsequence/sequence.
8Take the bigram (w1w2) model as an example, hypoth-
esis H1: P (w2|w1) = p = P (w2|?w1), hypothesis H2:
P (w2|w1) = p1 6= p2 = P (w2|?w1). The likelihood ra-
tio ?2log? = ?2logL(H1)/L(H2) is more appropriate than
?2 test, since some MWVs are quite sparse in our test cor-
pus (Manning and Schu?tze, 2002).
is not suitable for non-contiguous MWV candidates.
In our experiment, we suppose that it is neither
the verb head nor the preposition that determines the
reliability of such MWV structures. Therefore we
only focus on the distribution of the rest words (able
or important) in the corpus. Such words, together
with the verb head in a MWV pattern like verb +
particle, in the following parts of paper, are given
the name MWV head. For instance, we find that
83% occurrences of able are in the MWV candidate
structure be able to, but only 8.4% occurrences of
important are in be important for. Hence the struc-
ture [2.1] is a much better candidate of MWV than
[2.2]. By this means, the low-frequency candidate
shed light on can also get a better rank than the rel-
ative high-frequency candidate be important for.
Case 3. Example: [take place]3.1, [bind DNA]3.2.
[3.1] is a MWV, but [3.2], which also has the
same POS tag sequence as [3.1], is not a MWV. In
our case, a set of domain-specific terms are avail-
able from the NE-annotated GENIA corpus V3.01.
Since we suppose that the MWVs contain only gen-
eral words, the word like DNA in this corpus can
be found in the specific word list, then this structure
can be excluded from the list of MWV candidates.
However, this method induces also problems. For
example, give rise to is a MWV, but rise is also in
the specific word list of this corpus. In this case,
the specific word list could be selected according to
some criteria (e.g., frequencies in the list of specific
terms), so that a much more comprehensive list of
MWV candidates can be produced without losing
the generality.
Case 4. Example: [be able to]4.1, [be
unaffected]4.2. The POS tag pattern of [4.2] is a
substring of [4.1], i.e., EVP + ADJP, but [4.2] is
obviously not a proper MWV candidate. We as-
sume that a proper MWV should have closed left
and right boundaries, which means, the left bound-
ary of a MWV candidate should be a verb, and
the right boundary should be a preposition (includ-
ing to) or a noun. Therefore such patterns with
open right boundaries like [4.2] in this example are
deleted from the candidate list.
Case 5. Example: [be associated with]5.1 and
[associate(d) with]5.2, [be used to]5.3 and [used
to]5.4. The pair of [5.1] and [5.2] have no seman-
tic differences between the past and present tense,
as well as no semantic transition of the MWV itself
between the passive and active voice. That means,
they can all map to the MWV base form associate
with. But there are semantic differences between
the pair of [5.3] and [5.4]. The past tense phrase
used to is a fixed idiomatic verb phrase (e.g., He
used to smoke a pipe.), like the present tense phrase
according to, generally they do not occur in forms
of other tense. There is no semantic relationship be-
tween [5.3] and [5.4] in some cases, although the
base forms of both structures are the same, i.e., use
to. In this experiment, we do not consider the later
case. All MWV candidates have the mapping to
their base form, but the information about the pas-
sive and active voice are reserved, so that some can-
didates in passive forms (e.g., be inhibited by) can
be excluded.
3.5 Evaluation of the Reliability of the MWV
Candidates
After the above processing on the set of MWV can-
didates extracted by the finite automaton, the fol-
lowing task is to examine the reliability of the can-
didates, especially for those candidates that share
the same MWV head. To solve this problem, sta-
tistical measurement is necessary. First, the fre-
quencies of the MWV candidates in the test cor-
pus are taken into account. For instance, result in
is the most frequent MWV candidate, which has
more than 320 occurrences, it is obviously a proper
MWV candidate. From Figure 1, we can find that a
large number of MWV candidates occur with rel-
ative low frequencies ranged from about 1 to 10.
In order to avoid accidental errors during the pro-
cess (mainly the wrong assignment of POS tags),
the MWV candidates with the lowest frequencies
from 1 to 4 are out of consideration. Second, the
distribution of the MWV head in the MWV candi-
dates is considered. We assume that a verb head of
a certain MWV has the inertia (big probability) to
construct other MWVs than to be isolated. For in-
stance, 89% of occurrences of the verb head result
are in result in, only 8.5% belongs to result from.
Although result from is not a high frequent MWV
candidate, it is still a proper one. Third, the con-
tiguous and non-contiguous MWV candidates are
treated as the same structure, so that such structures
are not ignored by the statistical measurement. That
means, if a MWV candidate occurs in both con-
tiguous and non-contiguous forms, then their occur-
rences are added up. According to our experiment
results, the occurrences of non-contiguous MWV
candidates are much less than the contiguous can-
didates, which leads to a very small number of non-
contiguous MWVs successfully extracted from our
test corpus.
To evaluate the reliability of a certain MWV can-
didate c in the candidate set C, following definitions
are given.
? head(c), the MWV head of c, c ? C;
Figure 1: The distribution of frequencies (frequen-
cies between 5 and 80).
? f(x), the frequency of x, x can be c, or head(c);
? F (c), the sum of occurrences of all candidates in
C, which share the same MWV head with c;
? E(c), the evaluation score of c,
E(c) = c1f(c) + c2
f(c)
f(head(c))
+ c3
F (c)
f(head(c))
(1)
where c1, c2 and c3 (c1, c2, c3 ? 0) are coefficients;
? t, the threshold of score evaluation,
t = a? minE(c) + b (2)
where c ? C, a ? 1, b ? 0.
If E(c) ? t, c is a proper candidate.
The flowchart of the process to filter proper
MWV candidates is shown in Figure 2.
Contiguous MWV
candidates
Non-contiguous MWV
candidates
Controls of Overgeneration
Domain-
specific
terms
Verb chunker
for common
verb lemmata
Examine the
compatibility
of long and
short
candidates
Examine
candidates with
passive and
active  forms
      Evaluation of reliability
If: E(c) > t
Output: reliable MWV candidate c
Filter
candidates
with open
boundaries
))((
)(
))((
)()()( 321 cheadf
cF
c
cheadf
cfccfccE ?
Figure 2: The process to find out proper MWVs.
In order to obtain the satisfying values of the co-
efficients and the threshold, a manual sample is cre-
ated, so that the values of the coefficients can be
tuned. It is not feasible that we give all extracted
MWV candidates a human evaluation, therefore we
c1 c2 c3 t Precision Recall F?=1
0.003 0.5 8 2.27 45.16% 100% 0.622
0.003 0.5 10 2.81 45.65% 100% 0.627
0.003 0.5 12 2.81 45.65% 100% 0.627
0.003 1 10 2.88 45.65% 100% 0.627
0.01 0.5 10 2.86 44.21% 100% 0.613
0.1 0.5 10 3.49 41.58% 100% 0.587
Table 2: Evaluation of the selection of proper MWV
candidates according to equation 1, when we set the
threshold t = 1?minE(c)+ 0, c ? CP (baseline).
chose the most frequent 33 candidates (f(c) ? 60),
31 candidates with moderate frequencies (14 ?
f(c) ? 19), and 95 candidates with low frequen-
cies (6 ? f(c) ? 7) as a manual sample set (CM ,
|CM | = 159). Those MWV candidates in the man-
ual sample set are looked up in a dictionary,9 if there
is such a MWV entry in the dictionary, then we as-
sign a proper flag to the candidate.
From the manual test sample set CM , we anno-
tate 42 items as proper MWVs (CP , |CP | = 42).
In the experiment, we set the coefficient c1 to be
the reciprocal of the largest occurrence of the MWV
candidates (c1 = 1/maxf(c), c ? C), and t is set
to be the linear function of the smallest score of
the MWV in CP by the reliability evaluation, e.g.,
t = minE(c), c ? CP . We use the scores of recall
(R), precision(P ), and F-measure (F?=1) to evalu-
ate our result. In the following equations, X denotes
the set of candidates in CP , whose scores of relia-
bility evaluation are greater than t, i.e., X = {c|c
? CP and E(c) ? t}; Y denotes the set of candi-
dates in CM , whose scores of reliability evaluation
are greater than t, i.e., Y = {c|c ? CM and E(c) ?
t}.
R = |X|/|Cp|,
P = |X|/|Y |,
F?=1 = 2PR/(P + R).
4 Result, Discussion, and Future Works
The result in Table 2 indicates that it is neither
the frequency of occurrences of a MWV candidate
(c1 = 0.003), nor the proportion of a MWV candi-
date to its head word (c2 = 0.5), especially the verb
head, but the inertia of a verb to construct MWVs
that determines a proper MWV candidate (c3 = 10).
The result strongly supports this assumption.
We also found that the initiation of the value of t
was very important. In Table 2, the minimum value
9Since WordNet is lacking in MWV entries, we used the
Oxford advanced learner?s dictionary of current English (En-
cyclopedic version, 1992), and the online English-German dic-
tionary LEO additionally, available at http://dict.leo.org/.
of E(c) in CP was set to be the baseline of all test
data. But we found that if the value of t was prop-
erly increased (according to equation 2), although
the precision was therefore reduced, the F-measure
was improved remarkably. Figure 3 shows how
the changes of value t effect the result, given the
same values of the coefficients in equation 1, that
c1 = 0.003, c2 = 0.5, and c3 = 10. We got a much
better F-measure when we set a = 2.3, b = 0.1 (or
b = 0.2), so that F?=1 = 0.753, if compared to the
data in Table 2, where a = 1, b = 0, F?=1 = 0.627.
The reason is that some MWV candidates in CP ,
like use to and carry out, have the MWV heads that
seem not to follow our assumption. Such verbs (use,
carry, including be, and etc.) are often the most
frequent verbs both in specific and general English
language. Thus the syntactic and semantic combi-
nations of such verbs and other words are quite rich,
which led to a relative low score of E(c) in our ex-
periment. Compared to recent other related works,
we found that (Baldwin and Villavicencio, 2002)
presented a F-measure of 0.896 by testing on WSJ.
But they focused on the single prepositional particle
situation, whereas our approach has the special in-
terest in multiple and non-preposition particle cases.
Moreover, they used quite a lot of syntactic tech-
niques for more precise extraction of verb-particle
constructions (not verb-preposition constructions),
which is not the case in ours.
Figure 3: Effect of different t values on P , R and
F?=1, given c1 = 0.003, c2 = 0.5, and c3 = 10.
In addition, several other aspects also have neg-
ative effects on the result. First, the sublanguage
is anyway specific compared with the general lan-
guage, therefore some MWV candidates were hard
to give an evaluation. For instance, transfect
into/with can be found in neither dictionaries we
used in this experiment, then it is hard to give them
human evaluation. Second, the POS tag errors dur-
ing the processing had also a negative effect. E.g.,
in MWV candidate be related to, related was POS
tagged as an adjective, which led to a reduction of
the value of E(relate to), since the MWV head of
this inflectional structure was set to be the adjective
related but not the root of the verb relate. Third,
the language resources used in our experiment pro-
vided sometimes not the information we needed.
For instance, WordNet was lacking in some specific
lexical entries of verbs such as synergize, pretreat,
and etc. Hence the distribution of their inflectional
and derivational forms, such as synergizes and pre-
treated, could not be analyzed correctly.
Our following work is to combine this work with
the domain-specific single verbs determined in the
corpus (Xiao and Ro?sner, 2004a), in order to get
a comprehensive understanding of domain-specific
verbs. And, it will also be investigated if more
domain specific resources (e.g., UMLS10 specialist
lexicon, etc.), as well as adaptation of general lan-
guage resources (e.g., WordNet, etc.) to this specific
domain can improve the evaluation in equation 1
or not. Another future work is to examine the dis-
tribution of the inflectional and derivational forms
of MWVs for both MWV candidate evaluation and
other IE tasks.
5 Appendix: Some extracted MWV
candidates, ordered by scores of E(c).
Note: what in the parentheses before each candidate is
the occurrences. If a MWV is annotated with a PAS
tag, it means that this MWV is often used in passive
form or as past participle phrase in this test corpus.
The complete list is available at: http://wwwai.cs.uni-
magdeburg.de/Members/xiao/mwvsAppendixTable.pdf
No. MWV candidate No. MWV candidate
1 (8) be subject to 2 (5) subjectPAS to
3 (7) give rise to 4 (7) take place
5 (325) result in 6 (271) lead to
7 (293) associatePAS with 8 (89) fail to
References
Timothy Baldwin and Aline Villavicencio. 2002.
Extracting the unextractable: A case study on
verb-particles. In Proceedings of CoNLL-2002,
pages 98?104. Taipei, Taiwan.
Colin Bannard, Timothy Baldwin, and Alex Las-
carides. 2003. A statistical approach to the se-
mantics of verb-particles. In Proceedings of the
ACL 2003 Workshop on Multiword Expressions:
Analysis, Acquisition and Treatment, pages 65?
72.
Eric Brill. 1994. Some advances in rule-based part
of speech tagging. In Proceedings of the Twelfth
10Unified Medical Language System (UMLS), see
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/.
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
pages vol(1):722?727.
Gae?l Dias. 2003. Multiword unit hybrid extrac-
tion. In Proceedings of the ACL 2003 Workshop
on Multiword Expressions: Analysis, Acquisition
and Treatment, pages 41?48.
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1999. WordNet: An
Electronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press.
Cambridge. Massachusetts.
Christopher D. Manning and Hinrich Schu?tze.
2002. Foundations of Statistical Natural Lan-
guage Processing. MIT Press.
Diana McCarthy, Bill Keller, and John Carroll.
2003. Detecting a continuum of compositionality
in phrasal verbs. In Proceedings of the ACL 2003
Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Analysis,
Acquisition and Treatment, pages 73?80.
T. Ono, H. Hishigaki, A. Tanigami, and T. Tak-
agi. 2001. Automated extraction of information
on protein-protein interactions from the biologi-
cal literature. Bioinformatics, pages 17(2):155?
161.
Scott S. L. Piao, Paul Rayson, Dawn Archer, An-
drew Wilson, and Tony McEnery. 2003. Extract-
ing multiword expressions with a semantic tag-
ger. In Proceedings of the ACL 2003 Workshop
on Multiword Expressions: Analysis, Acquisition
and Treatment, pages 49?56.
Adwait Ratnaparkhi. 1996. A maximum entropy
part-of-speech tagger. In Proceedings of the Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
Conference, University of Pennsylvania.
Ivan A. Sag, T. Baldwin, F. Bond, A. Copestake,
and D. Flickinger. 2002. Multiword expressions:
A pain in the neck for nlp. In Proceedings of
the Third International Conference on Intelligent
Text Processing and Computational Linguistics
(CICLING 2002), Mexico city, pages 1?15.
J. Thomas, D. Milward, C. Ouzounis, S. Pulman,
and M. Carroll. 2000. Automatic extraction of
protein interactions from scientific abstracts. In
The Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing?2000,
Hawaii, pages 541?551.
Chun Xiao and Dietmar Ro?sner. 2004a. Determin-
ing domain-specific verb vocabulary through cor-
pora comparison and genre analysis. submitted.
Chun Xiao and Dietmar Ro?sner. 2004b. Find-
ing high-frequent synonyms of a domain-specific
verb in english sub-language of medline abstracts
using wordnet. In The Second Global Wordnet
Conference, Brno, Czech Republic, pages 242?
247.
