The Standard of Chinese Corpus Metadata
He Tingting 
Huazhong Normal University 
tthe@mail.ccnu.edu.cn
Xu Xiaoqi 
Huazhong Normal University 
Xu_xiaoqi@hotmail.com
                                                          
 The paper is supported by National Language Application Project of Tenth five-years plan of China, (Grant No. ZDI105-
B01, ZDI105-43B); 
National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC), (Grant No.10071028);
Ministry of education of China,  Research Project for Science and technology, (Grant No. 105117). 
Abstract
The normalization of corpus metadata 
plays a key role in building sharable 
corpora. However, there is no uniform 
specification for defining and process-
ing metadata in Chinese corpus nowa-
days. This paper introduces a 
metadata system we?ve proposed for 
Chinese corpus. 46 elements are de-
fined in all, which can be divided into 6 
classes: information about copyright, 
information about background of lin-
guistic material creator, information 
about medium of linguistic material, 
information about the content of lin-
guistic material, information about 
collecting linguistic material, and in-
formation about management of lin-
guistic material. To distinguish one 
element from another, or our elements 
from someone else?s, we provide a po-
tent description method, where 10 sub-
sections are designed to describe the 
detailed properties for each element.
1 Introduction 
?Metadata? is first defined in computer science. 
It plays an important role in the management of 
electronic resources, especially the huge infor-
mation from Internet. By cataloguing the web 
pages, we can obtain a better search more effi-
ciently. Nowadays, metadata becomes a popular 
tool to describe administrative information about 
all kinds of resources. It defines schemes for 
resource description, and also provides universal 
mechanism for resource retrieval.
In corpus linguistic, metadata description has 
existed for a long time, and is generally referred 
to heading information. By defining metadata, 
more accurate and profuse annotation contents 
can be provided for corpus, such as, information 
about time, area, author and etc. However, there 
is no uniform specification for processing meta-
data in Chinese corpus at present. Thus, we de-
fine a core metadata set for Chinese corpus and 
normalize the description of set element. Basing 
on the Dublin Core metadata, which is widely 
accepted in philology, the definition takes much 
attention on the linguistic characteristics of Chi-
nese corpus, and is compatible to the OLAC 
metadata standards as well. Both creator and 
users of the corpus can get regulations of textual 
description and annotation strategy from this 
standard.
In section 2, we discuss some referenced 
standards and resources, including DC and 
OLAC metadata. Section 3 presents a frame-
work within which we design our metadata, and 
lists the main problems to be solved. Section 4 
summarizes our metadata description and re-
ports some further development of the standard. 
Conclusion is drawn in section 5. 
2 Related metadata resources 
2.1 Dublin Core metadata 
Dublin Core Metadata has been present in 
OCLC?NCSA ?National Center for Super-
computer Applications? Meta Workshop in 
1995.It?s a standard for cross-domain informa-
tion resource description, and has no fundamen-
tal restrictions to the types of resources to which 
the metadata can be assigned. DC metadata de-
fined 15 core elements, which are maintained 
and managed by DCMI (Dublin Core Metadata 
Initiative). The core elements are listed in table 
1.
24
In DC metadata, each element is described in 
10 property items that defined in ISO/IEC 
11179.They are: ?Name?, ?Identifier?, ?Ver-
sion?, ?Registration Authority?, ?Language?, 
?Definition?, ?Obligation?, ?Datatype?, ?Maxi-
mum Occurrence? and ?Comment?. However, 6 
items among them have settled value for each 
element as following:  
Version:1.1
Registration Authority: Dublin Core Meta-
data Initiative 
Language:en
Obligation: Optional 
Datatype: Character String 
Maximum Occurrence: Unlimited 
Elements
about Re-
source Con-
tent
Elements
about Copy-
right
Elements
about External 
Attribute de-
scription
Title Creator Date
Subject Publisher Type 
Description Contributor Format 
Language Rights Identifier 
Source
Relation 
&RYHUDJH
Table 1 Fifteen core elements in DC, 
which are divided into 3 classes. 
DC metadata is an important reference for 
the definition of Chinese corpus metadata. There 
are at least two reasons for this. 
(1) Both DC and corpus metadata are designed 
for large-scale users, who are not always pro-
fessional catalogue person. Thus apprehensi-
ble and general are two pivotal aims to 
achieve.
(2) DC metadata has been mostly assigned to 
electronic text from Internet webs, which are 
primary source of linguistic material as well. 
Therefore, it?s expected that the corpus can be 
used directly without reannotation if they are 
annotated with DC metadata before. 
2.2 OLAC metadata 
The OLAC?Open Language Archives Com-
munity Metadata?metadata set is based on the 
Dublin Core metadata set. In order to meet the 
specific needs of the language archiving com-
munity, the OLAC metadata set qualifies with 
three kinds of qualification: element refinement, 
encoding scheme, and content language. With 
these three attributes, an element in OLAC can 
indicate more information than the same one in 
DC does. Take the element ?Date? in OLAC for 
example, with the element refinement, it can 
represent either date of create, or date of issue, 
or date of modification in different occasions  
The elements in OLAC are listed in table 
2,and we can see that it uses all the 15 elements 
in DC. Element in OLAC are described in 5 
property items which are ?Name?, ?Definition?, 
?Comments?, ? Attributes? and ? Examples?. 
Elements about 
Resource Con-
tent
Elements
about
Copyright
Elements about 
External At-
tribute descrip-
tion
Title Creator Date
&RYHUDJH Publisher Identifier 
Description Contributor Format 
Language Rights Format.cpu 
Source Format.markup 
Relation Format.os 
Subject Format.sourcecode
Subject.language Format.encoding 
Type
Type.data
Type.function 
Table 2  Elements in OLAC, this set 
uses all fifteen elements in DC. 
Genre= Prose 
Style= narrative 
Mode= Written 
Topics= Literature 
Medium= Textbook 
Name= 
Sex=
Nationality= 
Language=Chinese
Publish House= National Institute for 
Compilation and Translation
Publish Place=Taiwan 
Publish Data= 
Title= starlight
Table 3 Example of metadata 
describing in Sinica corpus 
2.3 Research on large-scale corpus meta-
data
2.3.1 Sinica corpus metadata
Sinica corpus is developed and maintained by 
Institute of Information Science and CKIP group 
in Academia Sinica. It?s designed for analyzing 
modern Chinese. Texts are collected from dif-
ferent areas and classified according to five cri-
teria: genre, style, mode, topic, and source. 
25
Therefore, this corpus is a representative sample 
of modern Chinese language. 
Metadata in Sinica corpus lays special emphasis 
on describing the linguistics information of lin-
guistic material, such as ?Mode?, ?Style?, ?Me-
dium?, and ?Topic?. An example of metadata 
describing in Sinica corpus is  given in table 3. 
2.3.2 National modern Chinese corpus meta-
data
National modern Chinese corpus is the largest 
balance corpus in China at present. The selec-
tion of linguistic material follows the principles 
of commonality, description and practicability. 
In order to reflect the panorama of modern Chi-
nese, a lot of work has been done on designing 
balance gene. And the finally selected samples 
have a wide span on time, domain and medium. 
Metadata in National modern Chinese corpus 
pay much attention on copyright information 
and publish information of linguistic material. 
Furthermore, both a global serial number and a 
category number are designed to identify a cer-
tain sample. 
2.3.3 BNC metadata
The British National Corpus (BNC) is a 100 
million word collection of samples of written 
and spoken language from a wide range of 
sources, designed to represent a wide cross-
section of current British English, both spoken 
and written. Each text in BNC has a TEI header 
to indicate the identification and classification of 
individual text, special details such as speakers?, 
and the housekeeping information. The defini-
tion of text classification is meticulous. For spo-
ken text material, age, sex, and class of 
respondent are all make sense as well as the do-
main, region and type of the content. And for 
written text material classification, age, sex, type 
of author, audience, circulation, status, medium, 
and domain are laid emphasis on. However, 
some classification were still poorly defined and 
partially populated, such a ?dating?(date of copy 
or date of first publication?) and ?domain? (has 
something different with text-type?). 
2.3.4 Metadata in balanced corpus
In recent years, the awareness that text is not 
just text, but that texts comes in several forms, 
has spread from more theoretical and literary 
subfields of linguistics to the more practically 
oriented information retrieval and natural lan-
guage processing fields. As a consequence, sev-
eral test collections available for research 
explicitly attempt to cover many or most well-
established textual genres, or functional styles in 
well-balanced proportions 
In practice, choosing balance gene is a profes-
sional work that needs a scientific programming 
strategy. Sinclair suggested a minimum set of 
balance gene for general corpus in 1991 that 
indicates a popular classify principle for linguis-
tic: the style of linguistic (on-the-spot record or 
literature); the form of linguistic (formal or in-
formal); the medium type of linguistic (from 
book or magazine or paper); and the age, sex of 
the author. From the Sinica corpus and National 
modern Chinese corpus we?ve discussed above, 
we can see that the gene of time, style, area and 
subject are most in frequent use, which become 
our crucial reference for metadata designing. 
2.4 ISO1179 standard 
ISO1179 is an international standard about de-
veloping metadata. There are 6 parts in this 
standard, which are considered as our basic rule 
to follow. 
3 Framework of metadata description 
We describe metadata information from three 
aspects, which we consider as: content structure, 
syntax structure and semantic structure. Content 
structure is used to decide the elements in a 
metadata set. Syntax structure introduces a 
model or syntax to represent metadata, while 
semantic structure declares the signification 
concourse of elements. 
FIG.1.The framework of develop metadata 
A consistent strategy is essential when these 
three structures are used to define metadata. Our 
research is to solve three problems especially. 
3.1 Element selection 
Elements in metadata set are used to describe a 
resource from different aspects. Thus, the selec-
tion or designing of elements becomes an impor-
tant issue. When the selection depends on the 
26
experience of corpus creator rather than a nor-
mative rule, it?s hard for the metadata to assert 
the resource sufficiently. 
We referenced a lot from DC and OLAC 
metadata. For the universal use of these two 
metadata standards and the similarity between 
DC metadata and corpus metadata we discuss 
above, we finally used all the fifteen elements 
defined in DC standard. However, some ele-
ments are refined or splitted into several new 
elements on the basis of the old definition. For 
example, the elements ?Date? is extended as 
?Indite Date?, ?Issued Date?, ?Created Date? 
and ?Modified Date?, thus more detailed and 
definite information of date can be obtained for 
either a single sample or the whole corpus. And 
the same case for the element ?Language? from 
DC. We defined three kinds of information 
about language to describe both creator informa-
tion and content information. 
To fully consider the linguistic characteristics 
of Chinese corpus, we?ve introduced several 
popular metadata elements in balanced corpus, 
such as style, mode, medium and so on, which 
are also important balance gene for corpus de-
signing.
Therefore, we define 46 elements in all, 
which can be divided into 6 classes. They are: 
information about copyright, information about 
background of linguistic material creator, infor-
mation about medium of linguistic material, in-
formation about the content of linguistic 
material, information about collecting linguistic 
material, and information about management of 
linguistic material. Most elements we defined 
are intellectual metadata, while some structural 
metadata, access control metadata and critical 
metadata are included as well. 
3.2 Description field 
Metadata is structured data about data. It?s usu-
ally expressed with several property fields or 
subsections, which is regarded as its own data 
structure or syntax. Different metadata system 
may use different way to describe and naming 
its elements, thus it?s hard for metadata com-
munion or understanding the same element from 
two dissimilar systems.  
A unified method for description is helpful, 
and it?s expected to be succinct, general and dis-
tinguished. Our standard has provided 10 fields 
for a metadata description. Some are obligatory, 
that is to say you must give a value to such 
fields in order to confirm an element. And some 
are optional for the individuation use. This 
seems to do a better work than DC, while 6 
fields in it always have settled value. We spe-
cially introduce two subsections for naming an 
element, thus elements can be distinguished ex-
actly from either ?Name? or ?Long Name? field. 
We have exhibited such format in XML (eXten-
sible Markup Language), and created the DTD 
(Document Type Definition) file for it as well. 
3.3 Semantic description 
Semantic structure defines the detailed value of 
metadata, and finally affirms how to use it. 
Value land should be carefully considered to 
avoid confusion use. Many famous metadata 
standards have formed a maturity definition of 
elements. For example, DC use ISO 8601 to de-
fine element ?date?, Dublin Core Types for ele-
ment ?Resource Type? and URL or ISBN to 
define element ?Identifier?. We took much ac-
count of the linguistic characteristics of Chinese 
corpus and some value are assigned refer to lin-
guistics literature. 
4 Metadata standard 
4.1 Element set 
Our corpus metadata set is based on the Dublin 
Core metadata set and uses all fifteen elements 
defined in that standard. We?ve summarized 
some annotation items in other large-scale cor-
pus and developed an element set listed in table 
4.There are 46 elements in all. They are ex-
pected to describe the resources from six aspects. 
4.1.1 Information about copyright
The intellectual property right of corpus is copy-
right. According to the copyright law, corpus 
must show clearly its copyright information 
when being published or promulgated. Metadata 
in this class is about corpus? created or issued 
information, mainly including: 
?Title: the title of original linguistic material, 
such as books, articles, webs and so on.
?Source Identifier: the tag of source linguis-
tic material, such as ISBN for books and 
URL for webs. 
? Indite Date: is used to describe the writing 
time of original linguistic material, or the 
27
recording time of the oral linguistic mate-
rial.
? Issued Date: describe the publish time of a 
given linguistic material. 
?Copyright: show the composer, publishing 
company or the web site of the original lin-
guistic material. 
?Resource Type: resource?s physical type 
can be various, such as papery, electronic, 
recordy, or kinescope. 
4.1.2 Information about background of lin-
guistic material creator
We pay some attention on the individual infor-
mation of corpus? creator, because it?s helpful 
for analyzing linguistics characteristic about 
corpus. Such information includes native lan-
guage, born place, age, sex as well as creator?s 
name. For corpus? creator is not always a single 
person, we define ?Agent Type? to clarify such 
instance, and introduce other creators in ?Con-
tributor?.
4.1.3 Information about medium of linguistic 
material
Information about medium of linguistic material 
provides detailed data of publish region, influ-
ence area, circulation extent and so on, which 
are all important to evaluate the corpus? balance 
gene.
?Medium Type: linguistic material is usually 
selected from different published medium 
including paper, book, magazine, web or 
else.
?Publish Type and Publish Area: respec-
tively indicate the geographical area type or 
size, such as national or local, and the idio-
graphic cantons the area covers. 
?Publish Period and Amount: respectively 
show the publish frequency and copies of 
the publication. 
4.1.4 Information about the content of lin-
guistic material
Information about the content of linguistic mate-
rial describe corpus from the point of view of 
linguistics, such as mode and style. And other 
elements in this class focus on two things, that is 
what the material expressed and how it ex-
pressed. For example: 
?Subject: is used to express the theme of the 
linguistic material, while ?Description? 
gives some further detail of what is talk 
about.
?Markup Language: is especially defined to 
indicate the coding language of electronic 
resources.
4.1.5 Information about collecting linguistic 
material
Corpus is not a simple set of corpus. When se-
lect linguistic material, many factors are consid-
ered. We discuss the information about 
collecting linguistic material in written corpus 
and oral corpus respectively. 
In written corpus, elements mostly describe 
the information of material sample, such as how 
to abstract the sample or how long the sample 
linguistic material should be. Oral corpus has its 
particular way to collect materials, so we de-
scribe them from the scene character of the 
interlocution.
4.1.6 Information about management of lin-
guistic material
Information about management of linguistic ma-
terial record data for corpus management and 
further-processing. Most elements are designed 
for system administrator and it?s recommended 
that the data is user- sightless. Such as Tag in-
formation of linguistic material: 
? Identifier: defined for system to identify 
each linguistic material from this unique 
identifier.
?Sample Name: the material title in the cor-
pus .It can either be the original title of the 
material, or new name the corpus? creator 
gives afterward if it has. 
Log information of linguistic material process-
ing are defined for corpus updating and backup, 
such as input type, annotate type, create date and 
modified date. And system information, such as 
operation system (format.os) and CPU (for-
mat.cpu) are defined to describe the running en-
vironment of the corpus. 
28
in -
lecting linguistic material
Table.4.We define 46 elements in all. They are expected 
to describe the resources from six aspects.
4.2 Subsections
To distinguish one element from another, or our 
elements from someone else?s, we provide a 
potent description method. Ten subsections are 
defined as mutual attribute field. Each metadata 
element can be described with these subsections 
selectively or whole. 
4.2.1 Name
Unique for each element. Used as identifier 
when preserve data. Name is a sting of English 
letter.
4.2.2 Long Name
Displayed as full name in Chinese. 
4.2.3 Definition
Semantic content of an element. 
4.2.4 Comments
Extra or special explanations are put in com-
ments. 
4.2.5 Value Land
Specify the possible value land of metadata. 
4.2.6 Type
A ?Type? subsegment can be either ?basic ele-
ment? or ?file citation?, while ?file citation?  
denotes that the element?s definition has  
referenced some content from another file. 
4.2.7 DefinedIn
Indicate where the metadata has been ever de-
fined. It may be from DC, OLAC or user-
defined.
4.2.8 Obligation
Elements could be either obligatory or optional. 
When a metadata is obligatory, it must be used 
in corpus. 
4.2.9 Publish Date
Indicate the publish date of the metadata 
4.2.10 Publish File
Indicate the name of file in which the metadata 
first defined. 
4.3 Metadata description 
The way to describe a metadata element is to 
assign semantic content to each subsection we 
formation about col
information 
about
copyright
information
about
background 
of linguistic 
material
creator
information 
about me-
dium of 
linguistic 
material
information
about the 
content of 
linguistic 
material
Written
corpus Oral corpus 
information
about man-
agement of 
linguistic ma-
terial
Title Agent Type Medium Type Mode AbstractionType Environment Identifier
Source Iden-
tifier Creator Publish Type Style Position Event Sample Name
Indite Date Sex Publish Area Subject
Words
Amount of 
Resource
Place Input Type 
Issued Date Native Place Amount Description
Words
Amount of 
Sample 
Annotate Type
Copyright Native Lan-guage
Publish Pe-
riod Language Software
Resource
Type Age
Markup Lan-
guage Create Date
Contributor Relation Modified Date
Source Copyright after Annotation
Description of 
Copyright 
Limitation 
Format 
Format.cpu
Format.os 
29
defined before. There are 46 elements in all, and 
we give description of two elements to show the 
model.
'HVFULSWLRQ
Name:  Agent Type 
Long Name: ?????
Definition: The way in which corpus? crea-
tor organized. 
Comments: The creator of a corpus may be 
one person, several persons or an organization. 
Value Land: Defined as {sole, multiple, 
corporate, unknown, unclassified } according to
the design of BNC corpus. ?unknown? represent 
this property has not been obtained, while ?un-
classified? indicate the organized form has not 
been defined in our value land (equivalent to 
NULL in relation database). 
Type: basic element 
DefinedIn: user-defined
Obligation: commendatory 
Publish Date:  2005.1. 
Publish File: Standard of corpus metadata 
'HVFULSWLRQ
Name: Mode 
Long Name: ??
Definition: Type of writing 
Comments: 
Value Land: {kouyupingshi, kouyuyishu, 
shumianpingshi, shumianyishu} 
Type: basic element 
DefinedIn: user-defined
Obligation: commendatory 
Publish Date: 2005.1. 
Publish File: Standard of corpus metadata 
4.4 Encoding syntax 
4.4.1 XML
XML is a widely used language for defining 
data formats. It provides a very rich system to 
define complex documents and data structures. 
As long as a programmer has the XML defini-
tion for a collection of data (often called a 
"schema"), they can create a program to process 
any data format according to those rules. We?ve 
defined our metadata format by using XML in 
several schema files. 
4.4.2 Example of schema
The following codes define the element ?Style?, 
which is proposed to describe the style of article 
material in corpus. We defined four types of 
mode in our standard: narrative writing, exposi-
tory writing, argumentative writing and practical 
writing. In the schema, they are represented as 
?jixuwen?, ?shuomingwen?, ?lunshuwen?, and 
?yingyongwen? respectively. 
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="GB2312"?> 
<schema 
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"> 
  <annotation> 
    <documentation> 
      CMD Schema for Article Style, seiga, 1/7/05 
    </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <simpleType name="CMD-Style-Code"> 
    <restriction base="string"> 
      <enumeration value="jixuwen"/> 
      <enumeration value="shuomingwen"/> 
      <enumeration value="lunshuwen"/> 
      <enumeration value="yingyongwen"/> 
    </restriction> 
  </simpleType> 
</schema> 
Code1.define element ?Mode? in a schema
5 Conclusion 
Metadata is ?data about data?. In our norm, a lot 
work has been done to describe such data. We 
normalized data item, naming regulation, data 
type and data width.46 metadata elements have 
been defined to register information of resource, 
within which 15 belong to DC Metadata, 3 be-
long to OLAC Metadata, 15 belong to both DC 
and OLAC Metadata, and 28 are user-defined. 
According to this, we tag each metadata by its 
?DefinedIn? item. Corpus designers are able to 
choose element during the annotation. They can 
also add new elements to satisfy various re-
quirements basing on this standard. 
The standard use English string when de-
nominating metadata element, because some 
software cannot support Chinese variable. We 
develop DTD files and an assistant software 
(FIG.2-FIG.4) for the convenient of corpus an-
notation. By filling blanks with some metadata 
information in this software, users can directly 
get the XML code of an annotated corpus. 
We are to do some further experiment on corpus 
annotation and corpus management. With vari-
ous information the metadata interpreted, more 
works may lead to resources discovery and con-
tent rating. 
30
FIG.2Interface to input the information about 
copyright, background of linguistic material 
creator and medium of linguistic material 
 FIG.3Interface to input information about 
the content of linguistic material and collect-
ing linguistic material 
FIG.4 Interface to input information about 
management of linguistic material
References
[1]He tingting.Study on corpus. Doctoral dissertation 
of central china normal university 2003.4. 
[2]Dublin Core Metadata Initiative. 
http://dublincore.org/index.shtml
[3]OLAC Metadata Set . http://www.language-
archives.org/OLAC/olacms.html.
[4]International Organization for Standardza-
tion .http://www.iso.org/iso/en/ISOOnline.fromtpage.
[5]The standard and normalization construction of 
digital library. http://cdls.nstl.gov.cn/
[6]What is BNC. 
http://www.hcn.ox.ac.uk/BNC/what/index.html
[7]XML http://www.w3.org/TR/RE-XML
[8]Sun xiaofei. XML and modern digital library. 
Modern books information,2000,(4) 
[9]Cui gang,Sheng yongmei. Annotion of corpus. 
Pekin? Tsinghua. University press?2000?15(1) 
31
