News-Oriented Automatic Chinese Keyword Indexing 
Li Sujian1 
lisujian@pku.
edu.cn 
Wang Houfeng1 
wanghf@pku.edu.
cn 
Yu Shiwen1 
Yusw@pku.edu.
cn 
Xin Chengsheng2 
csxin@peoplemail.
com.cn 
1Institute of Computational Linguistics, Peking University, 100871 
2The Information Center of PEOPLE?S DAILY, 100733 
 
 
Abstract 
In our information era, keywords are very 
useful to information retrieval, text clus-
tering and so on.  News is always a do-
main attracting a large amount of 
attention.  However, the majority of news 
articles come without keywords, and in-
dexing them manually costs highly.  Aim-
ing at news articles? characteristics and 
the resources available, this paper intro-
duces a simple procedure to index key-
words based on the scoring system.  In the 
process of indexing, we make use of some 
relatively mature linguistic techniques and 
tools to filter those meaningless candidate 
items.  Furthermore, according to the hi-
erarchical relations of content words, 
keywords are not restricted to extracting 
from text. These methods have improved 
our system a lot.  At last experimental re-
sults are given and analyzed, showing that 
the quality of extracted keywords are sat-
isfying. 
1 Introduction 
With more and more information flowing into our 
life, it is very important to lead people to gain 
more important information in time as short as 
possible.  Keywords are a good solution, which 
give a brief summary of a document?s content.  
With keywords, people can quickly find what they 
are most interested in and read them carefully.  
That will save us a lot of time.  In addition, key-
words are also useful to the research of information 
retrieval, text clustering, and topic search [Frank 
1999].  Manually indexing keywords will cost 
highly.  Thus, automatically indexing keywords 
from text is of great interests. 
News is always the main domain that people 
pay a large amount of attention to.  Unfortunately, 
only a small fraction of documents in this field 
have keywords.  However, compared to unre-
stricted text, news articles are relatively easy to 
extract keywords from, because they have the fol-
lowing characteristics.  Firstly, a news document is 
always short in length, and usually, only important 
words or phrases repeat.  Secondly, as a rule, the 
purpose of news articles is to illustrate an event or 
a thing for readers.  Then this kind of articles usu-
ally place more emphasis on some name entities 
such as persons, places, organizations and so on.  
Lastly, important content often occurs the first time 
in the title, or in the anterior part of the whole text, 
especially the first paragraph or the first sentence 
in every paragraph.  These characteristics will help 
us in keywords indexing. 
Several methods have been proposed for ex-
tracting English keywords from text.  For example, 
Witten[1999] adopted Na?ve Bayes techniques, and 
Turney[1999] combined decision trees and genetic 
algorithm in his system.  These systems achieved 
satisfying results. However, they need a large 
amount of training documents with keywords, 
which are just what we are in need of now.  For the 
Chinese language, some researchers adopt the 
structure of PAT tree and make use of mutual in-
formation to obtain keywords [Chien 1997, Yang 
2002].  Unfortunately, the construction of PAT tree 
will cost a lot of space and time.  In this paper, 
aiming at the characteristics of news-oriented arti-
cles, resources and techniques of current situation, 
we will introduce a simple procedure to index 
keywords from text. Section 2 will describe the 
architecture of the whole system.  In section 3, we 
will introduce every module in detail, including 
how to obtain candidate keywords, how to filter 
out the meaningless items, and how to score possi-
ble keyword candidates according to their feature 
values.  In section 4, experimental results will be 
given and analyzed.  At last, we will end with the 
conclusion. 
2 
3 
3.1 
System Overview 
Keyword indexing can also be called keyword ex-
traction.  The definition of a keyword is not re-
stricted to one word in our conception.  Here, a 
keyword can be seen as a Chinese character string, 
which might consist of more than one Chinese 
word.  These character strings can summarize the 
content of the document they are in. 
Aiming at the task of keywords indexing, our 
system is designed and composed of three modules.  
As in figure 1, the first module is to recognize 
some Chinese character strings according to their 
frequency, and pick out those named entities in the 
text as the candidate keywords.  The second mod-
ule is a filter to remove all the meaningless charac-
ter strings from the set of candidates. And the third 
module is a selector, which evaluates every candi-
date according to its feature values and choose 
from the candidate set those keywords with higher 
score.  The higher score a character string has, the 
more content it will cover of the article it is in. 
 In our system, there are three kinds of lexicons. 
The lexicon of proper nouns is used to recognize 
named entities.  The general lexicon includes Chi-
nese words in common use, which is adopted for 
the segmentation and POS tagging of the text.  And 
the lexicon of content words is used to expand the 
set of keywords.  They will be introduced in detail 
in the following section. 
System Design 
Recognizer Module 
Character strings Recognizer
Selector
Filter
Segmentation
filter
Keywords
expansion
Feature
computation
Chinese character
strings
POS tagging
filter
Filter of items with
punctuations and
function words
Filter of overlapped
and dependent items
Recognizer through
Frequency Statistics
Named Entities
Recognizer
Original text
Candidate items with
feature values
Fig.1. System Architecture
keywords
Proper Nouns
Lexicon
Content Words
Lexicon
General
Lexicon
It can be seen that one document is composed of a 
set of character strings.  Every character string has 
its frequency in the document.  In general, those 
character strings that occur several times can re-
flect the topic of the document.  So, we take them 
out as keyword candidates. In addition, named en-
tities, such as person names, place names, organi-
zations, translation terms, titles of person and so on, 
are usually very important for the document with-
out reference to their frequency.  They will also be 
picked out from the text by named entities recog-
nizer and input into the filter module with other 
character strings.  
Unlike English, there are no explicit word 
boundaries in Chinese sentences, which makes it 
especially difficult to tell whether a character 
string is composed of one word or more than one 
word.  Due to this characteristic, we don?t use a 
dictionary, but get those character strings only ac-
cording to their frequency statistics.  We set a 
threshold value as 2 for the Chinese character 
strings considering the length of news documents.  
Suppose that a character string is c1c2?cn, and 
f(c1c2?cn) represents its frequency, then we ex-
tract c1c2?cn from text only if f(c1c2?cn) equals to 
or is more than 2.  That is, only a character string 
occurs two or more than two times, it can be se-
lected as a candidate keyword. 
There are two kinds of named entities.  The first 
are those which have rules of composition, mainly 
Chinese names and foreign terms.  They can be 
recognized with statistical and rule-based methods 
combined.  Chinese names are composed of family 
names and first names, whose lengths are respec-
tively 1 or 2 Chinese characters.  Furthermore, 
there is a relatively stable set of family names, 
which often provide the anchor to search a name. 
For foreign terms, there are a relatively set of Chi-
nese characters which are generally used as 
translation characters.  Due to the limitation of the 
paper?s length, we don?t introduce the process of 
recognition in detail here.  The other kind of 
named entities is mainly composed of proper 
nouns which represent names of places, organiza-
tions, person titles, etc.  They often occur in news 
documents, but don?t have rules of composition.  
Thus, we collect such words into our proper nouns 
lexicon.  Then the module can find these named 
entities through looking up in this lexicon. 
3.2 Filter Module 
So far, Chinese character strings are generated only 
through frequency statistics. Thus, some of them 
stand out just because of simple repetition and are 
probably not meaningful units of language.  We 
need to filter out those meaningless items.  As in 
figure 1, we adopt four kinds of filters in filter 
module. They work as follows. 
(1) Filter of Overlapped and Dependent Items  
 
evident that such character strings can?t serve as 
For two character strings S1 and S2, with S1 as a 
substring of S2, and the frequency of S1 is equal to 
that of S2, then S1 is overlapped by S2. In fact, we 
can set a threshold td for f(S1)-f(S2), where the 
function f(.) represents the frequency of some 
character string. If the value of f(S1)-f(S2) is less 
than td, then the string S1 is dependent on S2.  
Here, the overlapped and dependent substring will 
be removed from the candidate set. 
(2) Filter of Items with Punctuations and Func-
tion words 
The recognizer module treats equally all symbols 
in the text, such as Chinese characters and 
punctuations, etc. Thus when conducting the 
process of frequency statistics, for a character 
string, there might exist some punctuations and 
function words such as ???, ???, ???, ???, etc. 
These punctuations and function words usually 
occur in the head or tail of a character string.  It?s 
character strings can?t serve as keywords of an ar-
ticle, and they should be deleted from the candi-
date set. 
(3) Segmentation Filter 
We find the first occurrence position of every can-
didate keyword and get the sentence at the position.  
Then the sentence is segmented.  According to the 
segmented result, we can verify whether the char-
acter string is meaningful.  First of all, we get the 
segmentation result of the character string in the 
segmented sentence.  Suppose the character string 
ci?cj in the original text with the sentence 
c1c2?ci-1ci?cjcj+1?cn as its context, if the 
segmentation tool segments ci-1ci or cjcj+1 into one 
word, then ci?cj will not be regarded as an inte-
grated unit.  That is, this item will be seen as 
meaningless and filtered out from the set of candi-
date keywords.  Here we don?t adopt the method of 
conducting frequency statistics of words after seg-
mentation, but use segmentation tool after fre-
quency statistics of character strings.  There are 
some reasons. Above all, although the segmenta-
tion technique is relatively mature, its precision is 
still not high enough.  Then, for the same character 
string, its segmentation results often differ in dif-
ferent sentences.  Thus, it?s difficult to compute the 
frequency of a character string precisely.  Further-
more, now we only need to segment one sentence 
for a candidate keyword.  That will save us a great 
deal of time. 
(4) POS Filter 
Because keywords provide a brief summary for 
one document, they should be words or phrases 
that represent some meaning units such as nouns 
and noun phrases.  Therefore, a single word whose 
part of speech is preposition, adverb, adjective, or 
conjunctive is filtered out.  At the same time, verb 
phrases, adjective phrases, preposition phrases are 
also excluded from the candidate set.  The same as 
segmentation filter, we only do the POS tagging 
for the sentence where every candidate keyword 
occurs the first time.  If a candidate item is made of 
more than one word, it will have a sequence of 
POS tags according to which we can assign a 
phrase category.  The POS tags or phrase catego-
ries are the basis for POS filtering. 
Only conducting frequency statistics of charac-
ter strings can?t refine the candidate set well, and 
we utilize the relatively mature linguistic segmen-
tation and POS tagging techniques so that we can 
further improve the quality of the candidate key-
words.  Here, the general lexicon with about 
60,000 Chinese words is applied to the processes 
of segmentation and POS tagging. 
3.3 Selector Module 
After several filtering, now we can get a reduced 
set of candidate keywords.  Most character strings 
in the set are meaningful and reflect the content of 
the document to some extent.  For every candidate 
now, we adopt several features to describe it. The 
features include frequency, length, position of the 
first occurrence, part of speech and whether it is a 
proper noun or in a pair of specific punctuations, as 
in table 1.  At the same time, through the process-
ing of several linguistic tools in filter module, we 
can assign a value to every feature in every candi-
date item.   
feature meaning of feature 
freq Frequency of an item 
len Length of an item 
is_noun Whether an item is a noun phrase 
in_title Whether the first occurrence of an item is in the title of one document 
in_seg1 
Whether the first occurrence of an 
item is in the first paragraph of one 
document 
is_proper 
Whether an item is a proper noun, 
for example: person name, organi-
zation, translation term, place 
name, title of a person etc. 
in_sign 
Whether an item is bracketed by a 
pair of specific punctuations such 
as ???? and ????. 
Table 1. Features of candidate keywords 
We can find that the candidate set is still too 
large to select from it the keywords.  Then we will 
conduct feature calculation to refine the candidate 
set.  We have known that every candidate item has 
a feature-value set.  These feature values are our 
basis to evaluate every candidate item.  We com-
pute a score for every candidate keyword through 
the module of feature computation.  The higher the 
score, the more relevant the candidate is to the 
document. 
We compute the percentage how much manually 
indexed keywords of different lengths cover in the 
set of automatically generated candidates.  As in 
figure 2, Length represents the length of keywords 
and percentage denotes the corresponding percent-
age that keywords of this length are in the set.  The 
higher the percentage, the more likely the key-
words of this length are to be selected.  Therefore, 
we can make a conclusion that the score of a can-
didate is directly proportional to the percentage of 
its length.  Then we can acquire the relation be-
tween score and length of a candidate.  At the same 
time, we can also see that the score is directly 
proportional to a candidate?s frequency.  In 
addition, score is relevant to other features in table 
1.  Thus, we get formula 1, as following. 
 
Fig. 2. Relations between Percentage Selected 
and Length of Keywords 
??
???=
???= ??
otherwise0
feature i  thesatisfiesck  if1)(
)1.7)((
100ln)()(
th
)(
Ffi
2
ckf
fw
cklen
ckFreqckscore
i
cki
i
 (1) 
Where ck represents a candidate keyword, the 
function freq(ck) gets the frequency of ck, len(ck) 
represents its length, that is, the number of Chinese 
characters every item includes. F represents all the 
binary features of a candidate keyword as in table 
1. Every feature except the features of freq and len 
are denoted by fi.  fi(ck) is a binary function and its 
value is 0 or 1.  If a candidate item ck satisfies the 
ith feature, then the value is set to 1, otherwise, it?s 
set to 0.  wi is the corresponding weight of feature 
fi.  For features is_noun, in_title, in_seg1, 
is_proper and in_sign, we set their weights to 7, 13, 
5, 11 and 3 respectively by experience.  After each 
candidate keyword gets a score, we choose those 
whose scores rank higher as keywords.   
??
(physical
training)
????
(physical
management)
????
(sports)
??(track
and field)
??
(ball) ...
...
???
(pingpang)
???
(badminton)
??
(football) ...
Fig.3. A Sample Tree Structure of Content Words
 
Now the keywords we get are all selected from 
the original text.  However, some keywords may 
express the content of the document, but they don?t 
occur in the text.  Therefore, we have constructed 
one list of content words with hierarchical relations 
as in figure 3.  That is content words lexicon.  The 
lexicon contains about 1,200 words which are of-
ten used as keywords.  As the content words lexi-
con available now, we can look up in it and expand 
obtained keywords to a higher level, i.e., if a se-
lected keyword has a parent in the lexicon, the par-
ent word will be expanded as a keyword. 
4 Experimental Results and Analysis 
We select 37 news articles from China Daily as our 
testing material from which experts have manually 
extracted keywords.  There are 23 articles about 
national politics, 10 articles of international poli-
tics, and 4 sports news articles.  Here, we auto-
matically extracted keywords from them and 
evaluated the results with the standard measures of 
precision and recall, which are defined as follows: 
Where P represents precision, and R represents 
recall. In general, these two measures in one sys-
tem are opposite to each other.  When precision is 
higher, recall will be lower. Otherwise, when pre-
cision is improved, recall will decrease.  In table 2, 
we illustrate our experimental results.  The first 
three rows give measures for articles about differ-
ent styles and the figures in parentheses represent 
the number of articles.  The fourth row gives the 
average measure of our system.  For comparison, 
we also illustrate the results of Chien?s [1997] 
PAT-tree-based method from his experiments in 
the last row.  From this table, we can see that more 
emphasis is placed on precision in Chien?s system.  
However, we incline to enhancing recall when pre-
cision and recall are assured relatively balanced.  
When precision is lower, perhaps more noise is 
introduced into the set of candidate keywords.  Be-
cause we have adopted segmentation and POS tag-
ging tools which can verify whether a candidate 
character string is a meaningful unit and found that 
the noise introduced now is more or less relevant 
to the content of the article, we don?t have to worry 
more about precision.    Therefore, we hope to 
generate more keywords automatically under the 
condition that the number of noise words is ac-
cepted. 
 
 Recall Precision
National politics (23) 0.452 0.401 
International Politics (10) 0.644 0.594 
Sports news (4) 0.629 0.482 
Average 0.523 0.462 
Chien?s (exact match) 0.30 0.43 
Table 2. Experimental Results 
It has to be pointed out that there are no satis-
factory results in extracting keywords from texts 
[Chien, 1997].  Although some keywords extracted 
are the same as manually extracted ones in mean-
ing, they are often different due to one or two 
characters mismatched.  According to our analysis 
of experimental results, though only 46% of ex-
tracted keywords appear in the set of manual key-
words, the rest are also relevant to the text and 
adapt to the need of information retrieval.  At the 
same time, about 52% of the manual keywords are 
generated by the automatically indexing method, 
however, we can often find a substitute for most of 
the rest in the set of automatically generated key-
words.   
manually indexing keywords ofnumber 
recognized  keywords genuine ofnumber R
llyautomatica indexing keywords ofnumber 
recognized  keywords genuine ofnumber P
=
=
Most of the keywords missed occur only once 
in the text, but they are mostly proper nouns of 
places, organizations or titles of person.  And this 
reveals that we need to further improve the tech-
niques to recognize proper nouns. 
5 Conclusion and Future Work 
We have described a system for automatically in-
dexing keywords from texts.  One document is in-
putted into the recognizer module, the filter 
module and the selector module consecutively, 
with keywords output.  Here we utilize the mature 
techniques available now such as string frequency 
statistics, segmentation and POS tagging tools.  
Then, according to features, we propose our 
method to evaluate directly every candidate key-
word and select those with higher scores as key-
words.  At the same time, we break through the 
tradition of generating keywords only from the 
original text and acquire some keywords through 
looking up in the lexicon of content words with 
hierarchical relations. The experimental results 
show that our system can perform comparably to 
the state of the art. 
Owing to the limit of the training corpus, the 
parameters in scoring formula are set by experi-
ence values.  With our method, we can cumulate 
more and more documents with keywords.  Then 
we can adopt machine-learning methods to conduct 
keyword indexing, which can make parameters 
more objective.  That will be our further work. 
References 
[Chien 1997] Chien, L. F., PAT-Tree-Based Keyword 
Extraction for Chinese Information Retrieval, Pro-
ceedings of the ACM SIGIR International Confer-
ence on Information Retrieval, 1997, pp. 50--59.  
[Frank 1999] Frank E., Paynter G.W., Witten I.H., Gut-
win C., and Nevill-Manning C.G., Domain-specific 
keyphrase extraction, Proc. Sixteenth International 
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Morgan 
Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco, CA, 1999, pp. 
668-673. 
[Lai 2002] Yu-Sheng Lai, Chung-Hsien Wu, Meaning-
ful term extraction and discriminative term selection 
in text categorization via unknown-word methodol-
ogy, ACM Transactions on Asian Language Informa-
tion Processing (TALIP), Vol.1, No.1, March 2002, 
pp. 34-64. 
[Liu 1998] Liu Ting, Wu Yan, Wang Kaizhu, An Chi-
nese Word Automatic Segmentation System Based 
on String Frequency Statistics Combined with Word 
Matching, Journal of Chinese Information Processing, 
Vol.12, No.1, 1998, pp. 17-25. 
[Ong 1999] T. Ong and H. Chen,  Updateable PAT-Tree 
Approach to Chinese Key Phrase Extraction Using 
Mutual Information: A Linguistic Foundation for 
Knowledge Management, Proceedings of the Second 
Asian Digital Libaray Conference, Taipei, Taiwan, 
Novemeber 8-9, 1999.  
[Turney 1999] Turney, P.D., Learning to Extract Key-
phrases from Text, NRC Technical Report ERB-1057, 
National Research Council, Canada, 1999. 
[Witten 1999] Witten I.H., Paynter G.W., Frank E., 
Gutwin C., and Nevill-Manning C.G., KEA: Practical 
automatic keyphrase extraction, Proc. DL '99, 1999, 
pp. 254-256.  
[Yang 2002] Wenfeng Yang, Chinese keyword extrac-
tion based on max-duplicated strings of the docu-
ments, Proceedings of the 25th annual international 
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and develop-
ment in information retrieval, 2002, pp. 439-440. 
