Proceedings of HLT/EMNLP 2005 Demonstration Abstracts, pages 24?25,
Vancouver, October 2005.
A Flexible Conversational Dialog System for MP3 Player
Fuliang Weng
1
 Lawrence Cavedon
2
 Badri Raghunathan
1
 Danilo Mirkovic
2 
Ben Bei
1
Heather Pon-Barry
1
 Harry Bratt
3
 Hua Cheng
2
 Hauke Schmidt
1
 Rohit Mishra
4
 Brian Lathrop
4
Qi Zhang
1
   Tobias Scheideck
1
   Kui Xu
1
    Tess Hand-Bender
1
   Sandra Upson
1
     Stanley Peters
2
Liz Shriberg
3
 Carsten Bergmann
4
Research and Technology Center, Robert Bosch Corp., Palo Alto, California
1
Center for Study of Language and Information, Stanford University, Stanford, California
2
Speech Technology and Research Lab, SRI International, Menlo Park, California
3
Electronics Research Lab, Volkswagen of America, Palo Alto, California
4
{Fuliang.weng,badri.raghunathan,hauke.Schmidt}@rtc.bosch.com
{lcavedon,huac,peters}@csli.Stanford.edu
{harry,ees}@speech.sri.com
{rohit.mishra,carsten.bergmann}@vw.com
1 Abstract
In recent years, an increasing number of new de-
vices have found their way into the cars we drive.
Speech-operated devices in particular provide a
great service to drivers by minimizing distraction,
so that they can keep their hands on the wheel and
their eyes on the road. This presentation will dem-
onstrate our latest development of an in-car dialog
system for an MP3 player designed under a joint
research effort from Bosch RTC, VW ERL, Stan-
ford CSLI, and SRI STAR Lab funded by NIST
ATP [Weng et al2004] with this goal in mind.
This project has developed a number of new tech-
nologies, some of which are already incorporated
in the system.  These include: end-pointing with
prosodic cues, error identification and recovering
strategies, flexible multi-threaded, multi-device
dialog management, and content optimization and
organization strategies. A number of important
language phenomena are also covered in the sys-
tem?s functionality. For instance, one may use
words relying on context, such as ?this,? ?that,? ?it,?
and ?them,? to reference items mentioned in par-
ticular use contexts. Different types of verbal revi-
sion are also permitted by the system, providing a
great convenience to its users. The system supports
multi-threaded dialogs so that users can diverge to
a different topic before the current one is finished
and still come back to the first after the second
topic is done. To lower the cognitive load on the
drivers, the content optimization component orga-
nizes any information given to users based on on-
tological structures, and may also refine users?
queries via various strategies. Domain knowledge
is represented using OWL, a web ontology lan-
guage recommended by W3C, which should
greatly facilitate its portability to new domains.
The spoken dialog system consists of a number of
components (see Fig. 1 for details). Instead of the
hub architecture employed by Communicator pro-
jects [Senef et al 1998], it is developed in Java and
uses a flexible event-based, message-oriented mid-
dleware. This allows for dynamic registration of
new components. Among the component modules
in Figure 1, we use the Nuance speech recognition
engine with class-based ngrams and dynamic
grammars, and the Nuance Vocalizer as the TTS
engine. The Speech Enhancer removes noises and
echo. The Prosody module will provide additional
features to the Natural Language Understanding
(NLU) and Dialogue Manager (DM) modules to
improve their performance.
The NLU module takes a sequence of recognized
words and tags, performs a deep linguistic analysis
with probabilistic models, and produces an XML-
based semantic feature structure representation.
Parallel to the deep analysis, a topic classifier as-
signs top n topics to the utterance, which are used
in the cases where the dialog manager cannot make
24
any sense of the parsed structure. The NLU mod-
ule also supports dynamic updates of the knowl-
edge base.
The CSLI DM module mediates and manages in-
teraction. It uses the dialogue-move approach to
maintain dialogue context, which is then used to
interpret incoming utterances (including fragments
and revisions), resolve NPs, construct salient re-
sponses, track issues, etc. Dialogue states can also
be used to bias SR expectation and improve SR
performance, as has been performed in previous
applications of the DM. Detailed descriptions of
the DM can be found in [Lemon et al2002; Mirk-
ovic & Cavedon 2005].
The Knowledge Manager (KM) controls access to
knowledge base sources (such as domain knowl-
edge and device information) and their updates.
Domain knowledge is structured according to do-
main-dependent ontologies. The current KM
makes use of OWL, a W3C standard, to represent
the ontological relationships between domain enti-
ties. Prot?g? (http://protege.stanford.edu), a do-
main-independent ontology tool, is used to
maintain the ontology offline. In a typical interac-
tion, the DM converts a user?s query into a seman-
tic frame (i.e. a set of semantic constraints) and
sends this to the KM via the content optimizer.
The Content Optimization module acts as an in-
termediary between the dialogue management
module and the knowledge management module
during the query process. It receives semantic
frames from the DM, resolves possible ambigui-
ties, and queries the KM. Depending on the items
in the query result as well as the configurable
properties, the module selects and performs an ap-
propriate optimization strategy.
Early evaluation shows that the system has a
task completion rate of 80% on 11 tasks of MP3
player domain, ranging from playing requests to
music database queries. Porting to a restaurant se-
lection domain is currently under way.
References
Seneff, Stephanie, Ed Hurley, Raymond Lau, Christine Pao,
Philipp Schmid, and Victor Zue, GALAXY-II: A Reference
Architecture for Conversational System Development, In-
ternational Conference on Spoken Language Processing
(ICSLP), Sydney, Australia, December 1998.
Lemon, Oliver, Alex Gruenstein, and Stanley Peters, Collabo-
rative activities and multi-tasking in dialogue systems,
Traitement Automatique des Langues (TAL), 43(2), 2002.
Mirkovic, Danilo, and Lawrence Cavedon, Practical Multi-
Domain, Multi-Device Dialogue Management, Submitted
for publication, April 2005.
Weng, Fuliang, Lawrence Cavedon, Badri Raghunathan, Hua
Cheng, Hauke Schmidt, Danilo Mirkovic, et al, Develop-
ing a conversational dialogue system for cognitively over-
loaded users, International Conference on Spoken
Language Processing (ICSLP), Jeju, Korea, October 2004.
25
Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 185?188,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Maximum Entropy Framework that Integrates Word Dependencies and
Grammatical Relations for Reading Comprehension
Kui Xu1,2 and Helen Meng1
1Human-Computer Communications Laboratory
Dept. of Systems Engineering and
Engineering Management
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong SAR, China
{kxu, hmmeng}@se.cuhk.edu.hk
Fuliang Weng2
2Research and Technology Center
Robert Bosch Corp.
Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA
Fuliang.weng@rtc.bosch.com
Abstract
Automatic reading comprehension (RC)
systems can analyze a given passage and
generate/extract answers in response to
questions about the passage. The RC
passages are often constrained in their
lengths and the target answer sentence
usually occurs very few times. In order
to generate/extract a specific precise an-
swer, this paper proposes the integration
of two types of ?deep? linguistic features,
namely word dependencies and grammati-
cal relations, in a maximum entropy (ME)
framework to handle the RC task. The
proposed approach achieves 44.7% and
73.2% HumSent accuracy on the Reme-
dia and ChungHwa corpora respectively.
This result is competitive with other re-
sults reported thus far.
1 Introduction
Automatic reading comprehension (RC) systems
can analyze a given passage and generate/extract
answers in response to questions about the pas-
sage. The RC passages are often constrained in
their lengths and the target answer sentence usu-
ally occurs only once (or very few times). This
differentiates the RC task from other tasks such as
open-domain question answering (QA) in the Text
Retrieval Conference (Light et al, 2001). In order
to generate/extract a specific precise answer to a
given question from a short passage, ?deep? linguis-
tic analysis of sentences in a passage is needed.
Previous efforts in RC often use the bag-of-words
(BOW) approach as the baseline, which is further
augmented with techniques such as shallow syn-
tactic analysis, the use of named entities (NE) and
pronoun references. For example, Hirschman et
al. (1999) have augmented the BOW approach
with stemming, NE recognition, NE filtering, se-
mantic class identification and pronoun resolution
to achieve 36% HumSent1 accuracy in the Reme-
dia test set. Based on these technologies, Riloff
and Thelen (2000) improved the HumSent accuracy
to 40% by applying a set of heuristic rules that as-
sign handcrafted weights to matching words and NE.
Charniak et al (2000) used additional strategies for
different question types to achieve 41%. An exam-
ple strategy for why questions is that if the first word
of the matching sentence is ?this,? ?that,? ?these? or
?those,? the system should select the previous sen-
tence as an answer. Light et al (2001) also intro-
duced an approach to estimate the performance up-
per bound of the BOW approach. When we apply
the same approach to the Remedia test set, we ob-
tained the upper bound of 48.3% HumSent accuracy.
The state-of-art performance reached 42% with an-
swer patterns derived from web (Du et al, 2005).
This paper investigates the possibility of enhanc-
ing RC performance by applying ?deep? linguistic
analysis for every sentence in the passage. We
refer to the use of two types of features, namely
word dependencies and grammatical relations, that
1If the system?s answer sentence is identical to the corre-
sponding human marked answer sentence, the question scores
one point. Otherwise, the question scores no point. HumSent
accuracy is the average score across all questions.
185
are integrated in a maximum entropy framework.
Word dependencies refer to the headword depen-
dencies in lexicalized syntactic parse trees, together
with part-of-speech (POS) information. Grammat-
ical relations (GR) refer to linkages such as sub-
ject, object, modifier, etc. The ME framework
has shown its effectiveness in solving QA tasks (It-
tycheriah et al, 1994). In comparison with previ-
ous approaches mentioned earlier, the current ap-
proach involves richer syntactic information that
cover longer-distance relationships.
2 Corpora
We used the Remedia corpus (Hirschman et al,
1999) and ChungHwa corpus (Xu and Meng, 2005)
in our experiments. The Remedia corpus contains
55 training stories and 60 testing stories (about 20K
words). Each story contains 20 sentences on aver-
age and is accompanied by five types of questions:
who, what, when, where and why. The ChungHwa
corpus contains 50 training stories and 50 test stories
(about 18K words). Each story contains 9 sentences
and is accompanied by four questions on average.
Both the Remedia and ChungHwa corpora contain
the annotation of NE, anaphor referents and answer
sentences.
3 The Maximum Entropy Framework
Suppose a story S contains n sentences, C0, . . . , Cn,
the objective of an RC system can be described as:
A = arg maxCi?S P (Ci answers Q|Q). (1)
Let ?x? be the question (Q) and ?y? be the answer
sentence Ci that answers ?x?. Equation 1 can be
computed by the ME method (Zhou et al, 2003):
p(y|x) = 1Z(x) exp
?
j ?jfj(x,y), (2)
where Z(x) = ?y exp
?
j
?jfj(x,y) is a normalization
factor, fj(x, y) is the indicator function for feature
fj; fj occurs in the context x, ?j is the weight of
fj . For a given question Q, the Ci with the highest
probability is selected. If multiple sentences have
the maximum probability, the one that occurs
the earliest in the passage is returned. We used
the selective gain computation (SGC) algorithm
(Zhou et al, 2003) to select features and estimate
parameters for its fast performance.
Question: Who wrote the "Pledge of Allegiance"
Answer sentence: The pledge was written by Frances Bellamy.
PP(by)
by/IN
Frances/NNP Bellamy/NNP
was/VBD
NPB(Bellamy)
PP(of)
NP(Pledge)
VP(wrote)
Who/WP of/IN
WHNP(Who)
SBARQ(wrote)
wrote/VBD NP(Allegiance)
Allegiance/NNP "/??
NP(Pledge)
the/DT "/?? Pledge/NN
The/DT
NPB(pledge)
written/VBN
VP(written)
S(written)
VP(written)
pledge/NN
Figure 1. The lexicalized syntactic parse trees of a
question and a candidate answer sentence.
4 Features Used in the ?Deep? Linguistic
Analysis
A feature in the ME approach typically has binary
values: fj(x, y) = 1 if the feature j occurs; other-
wise fj(x, y) = 0. This section describes two types
of ?deep? linguistic features to be integrated in the
ME framework in two subsections.
4.1 POS Tags of Matching Words and
Dependencies
Consider the following question Q and sentence C ,
Q: Who wrote the ?Pledge of Allegiance?
C: The pledge was written by Frances Bellamy.
The set of words and POS tags2 are:
Q: {write/VB, pledge/NN, allegiance/NNP}
C: {write/VB, pledge/NN, by/IN, Frances/NNP,
Bellamy/NNP}.
Two matching words between Q and C (i.e. ?write?
and ?pledge?) activate two POS tag features:
fV B(x, y)=1 and fNN (x, y)=1.
We extracted dependencies from lexicalized
syntactic parse trees, which can be obtained accord-
ing to the head-rules in (Collins, 1999) (e.g. see
Figure 1). In a lexicalized syntactic parse tree, a
dependency can be defined as:
< hc ? hp > or < hr ? TOP >,
where hc is the headword of the child node, hp
is the headword of the parent node (hc 6= hp),
hr is the headword of the root node. Sample
2We used the MXPOST toolkit downloaded from
ftp://ftp.cis.upenn.edu/pub/adwait/jmx/ to generate POS
tags. Stop words including who, what, when, where, why,
be, the, a, an, and of are removed in all questions and story
sentences. All plural noun POS tags are replaced by their
single forms (e.g. NNS?NN); all verb POS tags are replaced
by their base forms (e.g. VBN?VB) due to stemming.
186
mod
be
write/V
subj
Question: Who wrote the "Pledge of Allegiance"
the/Det be/be
by/Prep
pcomp?n
Frances Bellamy/N
pledge/N
obj
det
write/V subj
Answer sentence: The pledge was written by Frances Bellamy.
Who/N the/Det
Pledge/N
det
punc
"/U of/Prep
Allegiance/N
punc
"/U
mod
obj
Figure 2. The dependency trees produced by MINI-
PAR for a question and a candidate answer sentence.
dependencies in C (see Figure 1) are:
<write?TOP> and <pledge?write>.
The dependency features are represented by the
combined POS tags of the modifiers and headwords
of (identical) matching dependencies3 . A matching
dependency between Q and C , <pledge?write>
activates a dependency feature: fNN?V B(x, y)=1.
In total, we obtained 169 and 180 word dependency
features from the Remedia and ChungHwa training
sets respectively.
4.2 Matching Grammatical Relationships (GR)
We extracted grammatical relationships from the de-
pendency trees produced by MINIPAR (Lin, 1998),
which covers 79% of the dependency relationships
in the SUSANNE corpus with 89% precision4 . IN
a MINIPAR dependency relationship:
(word1 CATE1:RELATION:CATE2 word2),
CATE1 and CATE2 represent such grammatical cat-
egories as nouns, verbs, adjectives, etc.; RELA-
TION represents the grammatical relationships such
as subject, objects, modifiers, etc.5 Figure 2 shows
dependency trees of Q and C produced by MINI-
PAR. Sample grammatical relationships in C are
pledge N:det:Det the, and write V:by-subj:Prep by.
GR features are extracted from identical matching
relationships between questions and candidate sen-
tences. The only identical matching relationship be-
tween Q and C , ?write V:obj:N pledge? activates a
grammatical relationship feature: fobj(x, y)=1. In
total, we extracted 44 and 45 GR features from the
Remedia and ChungHwa training sets respectively.
3We extracted dependencies from parse trees generated by
Collins? parser (Collins, 1999).
4MINIPAR outputs GR directly, while Collins? parser gives
better result for dependencies.
5Refer to the readme file of MINIPAR downloaded from
http://www.cs.ualberta.ca/ lindek/minipar.htm
5 Experimental Results
We selected the features used in Quarc (Riloff and
Thelen, 2000) to establish the reference performance
level. In our experiments, the 24 rules in Quarc are
transferred6 to ME features:
?If contains(Q,{start, begin}) and contains(S,{start,
begin, since, year}) Then Score(S)+=20? ?
fj(x, y) = 1 (0< j <25) if Q is a when question that
contains ?start? or ?begin? and C contains ?start,?
?begin,? ?since? or ?year?; fj(x, y) = 0 otherwise.
In addition to the Quarc features, we resolved five
pronouns (he, him, his, she and her) in the stories
based on the annotation in the corpora. The result
of using Quarc features in the ME framework is
38.3% HumSent accuracy on the Remedia test set.
This is lower than the result (40%) obtained by our
re-implementation of Quarc that uses handcrafted
scores. A possible explanation is that handcrafted
scores are more reliable than ME, since humans
can generalize the score even for sparse data.
Therefore, we refined our reference performance
level by combining the ME models (MEM) and
handcrafted models (HCM). Suppose the score of a
question-answer pair is score(Q,Ci), the conditional
probability that Ci answers Q in HCM is:
HCM(Q,Ci) = P (Ci answers Q|Q) = score(Q,Ci)?j?nscore(Q,Cj) .We combined the probabilities from MEM and
HCM in the following manner:
score?(Q, Ci) = ?MEM(Q, Ci) + (1 ? ?)HCM(Q, Ci).
To obtain the optimal ?, we partitioned the training
set into four bins. The ME models are trained on
three different bins; the optimal ? is determined
on the other bins. By trying different bins com-
binations and different ? such that 0 < ? < 1
with interval 0.1, we obtained the average optimal
? = 0.15 and 0.9 from the Remedia and ChungHwa
training sets respectively7 . Our baseline used the
combined ME models and handcrafted models to
achieve 40.3% and 70.6% HumSent accuracy in the
Remedia and ChungHwa test sets respectively.
We set up our experiments such that the linguistic
features are applied incrementally - (i) First , we use
only POS tags of matching words among questions
6The features in (Charniak et al, 2000) and (Du et al, 2005)
could have been included similarly if they were available.
7HCM are tuned by hand on Remedia, thus a bigger weight,
0.85 represents their reliability. For ChungHwa, a weight, 0.1
means that HCM are less reliable.
187
and candidate answer sentences. (ii) Then we add
POS tags of the matching dependencies. (iii) We ap-
ply only GR features from MINIPAR. (iv) All fea-
tures are used. These four feature sets are denoted
as ?+wp,? ?+wp+dp,? ?+mini? and ?+wp+dp+mini?
respectively. The results are shown in Figure 3 for
the Remedia and ChungHwa test sets.
With the significance level 0.05, the pairwise t-
test (for every question) to the statistical significance
of the improvements shows that the p-value is 0.009
and 0.025 for the Remedia and ChungHwa test sets
respectively. The ?deep? syntactic features signif-
icantly improve the performance over the baseline
system on the Remedia and ChungHwa test sets8.
Baseline +wp +wp+dp +mini +wp+dp+mini
Combinations of different features
H
um
Se
nt
 A
cc
ur
ac
y(%
)
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Remedia
ChungHwa
40.3 41.7
43.3 43 44.7
70.6 71.1 72.7 72.2
73.2
Figure 3. Baseline and proposed feature results on
the Remedia and ChungHwa test sets.
6 Conclusions
This paper proposes the integration of two types of
?deep? linguistic features, namely word dependen-
cies and grammatical relations, in a ME framework
to handle the RC task. Our system leverages
linguistic information such as POS, word depen-
dencies and grammatical relationships in order to
extract the appropriate answer sentence for a given
question from all available sentences in the passage.
Our system achieves 44.7% and 73.2% HumSent
accuracy on the Remedia and ChungHwa test sets
respectively. This shows a statistically significant
improvement over the reference performance levels,
40.3% and 70.6% on the same test sets.
Acknowledgements
This work is done during the first author?s internship
8Our previous work about developing the ChungHwa corpus
(Xu and Meng, 2005) shows that most errors can only be solved
by reasoning with domain ontologies and world knowledge.
at RTC Bosch Corp. The work is also affiliated with
the CUHK Shun Hing Institute of Advanced Engi-
neering and partially supported by CUHK4237/03E
from RGC of HKSAR Government.
References
Dekang Lin. 1998. Dependency-based Evaluation of
MINIPAR. Workshop on the Evaluation of Parsing
Systems 1998.
Ellen Riloff and Michael Thelen. 2000. A Rule-based
Question Answering System for Reading Comprehen-
sion Test. ANLP/NAACL-2000 Workshop on Read-
ing Comprehension Tests as Evaluation for Computer-
Based Language Understanding Systems.
Eugene Charniak, Yasemin Altun, Rofrigo D. Braz, Ben-
jamin Garrett, Margaret Kosmala, Tomer Moscovich,
Lixin Pang, Changhee Pyo, Ye Sun, Wei Wy, Zhongfa
Yang, Shawn Zeller, and Lisa Zorn. 2000. Reading
Comprehension Programs In a Statistical-Language-
Processing Class. ANLP-NAACL 2000 Work-
shop: Reading Comprehension Tests as Evaluation for
Computer-Based Language Understanding Systems.
Kui Xu and Helen Meng. 2005. Design and Develop-
ment of a Bilingual Reading Comprehension Corpus.
International Journal of Computational Linguistics &
Chinese Language Processing, Vol. 10, No. 2.
Lynette Hirschman, Marc Light, Eric Breck, and John D.
Burger. 1999. Deep Read: A Reading Comprehension
System. Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Marc Light, Gideon S. Mann, Ellen Riloff, and Eric
Breck. 2001. Analyses for Elucidating Current Ques-
tion Answering Technology. Journal of Natural Lan-
guage Engineering, No. 4 Vol. 7.
Michael Collins. 1999. Head-Driven Statistical Models
for Natural Language Parsing. PhD thesis, University
of Pennsylvania.
Abraham Ittycheriah, Martin Franz, Wei-Jing Zhu and
Adwait Ratnaparkhi. 2001. Question Answering Us-
ing Maximum-Entropy Components. Proceedings of
NAACL 2001.
Yaqian Zhou, Fuliang Weng, Lide Wu, Hauke Schmidt.
2003. A Fast Algorithm for Feature Selection in Con-
ditional Maximum Entropy Modeling. Proceedings of
EMNLP 2003.
Yongping Du, Helen Meng, Xuanjing Huang, Lide
Wu. 2005. The Use of Metadata, Web-derived An-
swer Patterns and Passage Context to Improve Read-
ing Comprehension Performance. Proceedings of
HLT/EMNLP 2005.
188
