Examining the Role of Statistical and Linguistic Knowledge 
Sources in a General-Knowledge Question-Answering System 
Cla i re  Card ie  1 and V incent  Ng  1 and Dav id  P ie rce  1 and Chr i s  Buck ley  2 
Depar tment  of Computer  Science, Cornell  University, I thaca, NY 148531 
SaB IR  Research 2 
E-mail: cardie,yung,pierce@cs.cornel l .edu, chr isb@sabir .com 
Abstract 
We describe and evaluate an implemented system 
for general-knowledge question answering. The sys- 
tem combines techniques for standard ad-hoc infor- 
mation retrieval (IR), query-dependent text summa- 
rization, and shallow syntactic and semantic sen- 
tence analysis. In a series of experiments we examine 
the role of each statistical and linguistic knowledge 
source in the question-answering system. In con- 
trast to previous results, we find first that statisti- 
cal knowledge of word co-occurrences a computed 
by IR vector space methods can be used to quickly 
and accurately locate the relevant documents for 
each question. The use of query-dependent text 
summarization techniques, however, provides only 
small increases in performance and severely limits 
recall levels when inaccurate. Nevertheless, it is the 
text summarization component that allows subse- 
quent linguistic filters to focus on relevant passages. 
We find that even very weak linguistic knowledge 
can offer substantial improvements over purely IR- 
based techniques for question answering, especially 
when smoothly integrated with statistical prefer- 
ences computed by the IR subsystems. 
1 In t roduct ion  
In this paper, we describe and evaluate an imple- 
mented system for general-knowledge question an- 
swering. Open-ended question-answering systems 
that allow users to pose a question of any type, in 
any language, without domain restrictions, remain 
beyond the scope of today's text-processing systems. 
We investigate instead a restricted, but nevertheless 
useful variation of the problem (TREC-8, 2000): 
Given a large text collection and a set of 
questions specified in English, find answers 
to the questions in the collection. 
In addition, the restricted task guarantees that: 
? the answer exists in the collection, 
? all supporting information for the answer lies in 
a single document, and 
? the answer is short m less than 50 bytes in 
length. 
Consider, for example, the question Which country 
has the largest part of the Amazon rain forest?, taken 
from the TREC8 Question Answering development 
corpus. The answer (in document LA032590-0089) 
is Brazil 
Previous research as addressed similar question- 
answering (QA) scenarios using a variety of natu- 
ral language processing (NLP) and information re- 
trieval (IR) techniques. Lehnert (1978) tackles the 
difficult task of answering questions in the context of 
story understanding. Unlike our restricted QA task, 
questions to Lehnert's ystem often require answers 
that are not explicitly mentioned in the story. Her 
goal then is to answer questions by making infer- 
ences about actions and actors in the story using 
world knowledge in the form of scripts, plans, and 
goals (Schank and Abelson, 1977). More recently, 
Burke et al (1995; 1997) describe a system that an- 
swers natural anguage questions using a database of 
question-answer pairs built from existing frequently- 
asked question (FAQ) files. Their FAQFinder sys- 
tem uses IR techniques to match the given question 
to questions in the database. It then uses the Word- 
Net lexical semantic knowledge base (Miller et al, 
1990; Fellbaum, 1998) to improve the quality of the 
match. 
Kupiec (1993) investigates a closed-class QA task 
that is similar in many respects to the TREC8 
QA task that we address here: the system answers 
general-knowledge questions using an encyclopedia. 
In addition, Kupiec assumes that all answers are 
noun phrases. Although our task does not explic- 
itly include a "noun phrase" constraint, the answer 
length restriction effectively imposes the same bias 
toward noun phrase answers. Kupiec's MURAX sys- 
tem applies a combination of statistical (IR) and 
linguistic (NLP) techniques. A series of secondary 
boolean search queries with proximity constraints i
combined with shallow parsing methods to find rele- 
vant sections of the encyclopedia, to extract answer 
hypotheses, and to confirm phrase relations speci- 
fied in the question. In an evaluation on 70 "Trivial 
180 
question 
document 
collection 
Retrieval i documents, i 
i text passages i 
i .-i 
i 
IR Subsystems i 
Summarization 
Parsing 
Semantic 
Types 
Linguistic 
Relationships 
Linguistic Filters 
answer 
hypotheses 
! 
Figure 1: General Architecture of the Question-Answering System 
Pursuit" who and what questions, Kupiec concludes 
that robust natural language analysis can add to the 
quality of the information retrieval process. In addi- 
tion, he claims that, for their closed-class QA task, 
vector space IR methods (Salton et al, 1975) appear 
inadequate. 
We present here a new approach to the re- 
stricted question-answering task described above. 
Like MURAX, our system draws from both statisti- 
cal and linguistic sources to find answers to general- 
knowledge questions. The underlying architecture of 
the system, however, is very different: it combines 
vector space IR techniques for document retrieval, a
vector space approach to query-dependent text sum- 
marization, shallow corpus-based syntactic analysis, 
and knowledge-based semantic analysis. We eval- 
uate the system on the TREC8 QA development 
corpus as well as the TREC8 QA test corpus. In 
particular, all parameters for the final QA system 
are determined using the development corpus. Our 
current results are encouraging but not outstanding: 
the system is able to correctly answer 22 out of 38 of 
the development questions and 91 out of 200 of the 
test questions given five guesses for each question. 
Furthermore, the first guess is correct for 16 out of 
the 22 development questions and 53 out of 91 of the 
test questions. 
More importantly, we investigate the relative role 
of each statistical and linguistic knowledge source 
in the proposed IR/NLP question-answering system. 
In contrast o previous results, we find that sta- 
tistical knowledge of word co-occurrences a com- 
puted by vector space models of IR can be used to 
quickly and accurately ocate relevant documents in
the restricted QA task. When used in isolation, vec- 
tor space methods for query-dependent text summa- 
rization, however, provide relatively small increases 
in performance. In addition, we find that the text 
summarization component can severely limit recall 
levels. Nevertheless, it is the summarization compo- 
nent that allows the linguistic filters to focus on rele- 
vant passages. In particular, we find that very weak 
linguistic knowledge can offer substantial improve- 
ments over purely IR-based techniques for question 
answering, especially when smoothly integrated with 
the statistical preferences computed by the IR sub- 
systems. 
In the next section, we describe the general archi- 
tecture of the question-answering system. Section 3 
describes the baseline system and its information re- 
trieval component. Sections 4-7 describe and evalu- 
ate a series of variations to the baseline system that 
incorporate, in turn, query-dependent text summa- 
rization, a syntactic filter, a semantic filter, and an 
algorithm that allows syntactic knowledge to influ- 
ence the initial ordering of summary extracts. Sec- 
tion 8 compares our approach to some of those in 
the recent TREC8 QA evaluation (TREC-8, 2000) 
and describes directions for future work. 
2 System Arch i tec ture  
The basic architecture of the question-answering sys- 
tem is depicted in Figure 1. It contains two main 
components: the IR subsystems and the linguistic 
filters. As a preliminary, ofl\]ine step, the IR sub- 
system first indexes the text collection from which 
answers are to be extracted. Given a question, the 
goal of the IR component is then to return a ranked 
list of those text chunks (e.g. documents, entences, 
or paragraphs) from the indexed collection that are 
most relevant o the query and from which answer 
hypotheses can he extracted. Next, the QA system 
optionally applies one or more linguistic filters to 
the text chunks to extract an ordered list of answer 
hypotheses. The top hypotheses are concatenated to 
form five 50-byte guesses as allowed by the TREC8 
guidelines. Note that many of these guesses may 
be difficult to read and judged as incorrect by the 
181 
TREC8 assessors: we will also describe the results 
of generating single phrases as guesses wherever this 
is possible. 
In the sections below, we present and evaluate a
series of instantiations of this general architecture, 
each of which makes different assumptions regarding 
the type of information that will best support he 
QA task. The next section begins by describing the 
baseline QA system. 
3 The Vector Space Model for 
Document Retrieval 
It is clear that a successful QA system will need 
some way to find the documents hat are most rele- 
vant to the user's question. In a baseline system, we 
assume that standard IR techniques can be used for 
this task. In contrast to MURAX, however, we hy- 
pothesize that the vector space retrieval model will 
suffice. In the vector space model, both the ques- 
tion and the documents are represented asvectors 
with one entry for every unique word that appears 
in the collection. Each entry is the term weight, a 
real number that indicates the presence or absence 
of the word in the text. The similarity between a
question vector, Q = ql ,q2,. . .  ,qn, and a document 
vector, D = dl, d2,. . . ,  tin, is traditionally computed 
using a cosine similarity measure: 
n 
8im(Q,D)  = Z d, .q, 
i..~ l
Using this measure, the IR system returns a ranked 
list of those documents most similar to the question. 
The  Baseline QA System: The  Smart  Vec- 
tor  Space Model .  For the IR component of the 
baseline QA system, we use Smart (Salton, 1971), 
a sophisticated text-processing system based on the 
vector space model and employed as the retrieval 
engine for a number of the top-performing systems 
at recent Text REtrieval Conferences (e.g. Buckley 
et al, 1998a, 1998b). Given a question, Smart re- 
turns a ranked list of the documents most relevant 
to the question. For the baseline QA system and all 
subsequent variations, we use Smart with standard 
term-weighting strategies I and do not use automatic 
relevance f edback (Buckley, 1995). In addition, the 
baseline system applies no linguistic filters. To gen- 
erate answers for a particular question, the system 
starts at the beginning of the top-ranked ocument 
returned by Smart for the question and constructs 
five 50-byte chunks consisting of document text with 
stopwords removed. 
lWe use Lnu term weighting for documents and Itu term 
weighting for the question (Singhal et al, 1996). 
Evaluation. As noted above, we evaluate ach 
variation of our QA system on 38 TREC8 devel- 
opment questions and 200 TREC8 test questions. 
The indexed collection is TREC disks 4 and 5 (with- 
out Congressional Records). Results for the baseline 
Smart IR QA system are shown in the first row of 
Table 1. The system gets 3 out of 38 development 
questions and 29 out of 200 test questions correct. 
We judge the system correct if any of the five guesses 
contains each word of one of the answers. The final 
column of results hows the mean answer ank across 
all questions correctly answered. 
Smart is actually performing much better than its 
scores would suggest. For 18 of the 38 development 
questions, the answer appears in the top-ranked doc- 
ument; for 33 questions, the answer appears in one 
of the top seven documents. For only two questions 
does Smart fail to retrieve a good document in the 
top 25 documents. For the test corpus, over half 
of the 200 questions are answered in the top-ranked 
document (110); over 75% of the questions (155) are 
answered in top five documents. Only 19 questions 
were not answered in the top 20 documents. 
4 Query-Dependent Text 
Summar izat ion  fo r  Quest ion  
Answering 
We next hypothesize that query-dependent text 
summarization algorithms will improve the perfor- 
mance of the QA system by focusing the system 
on the most relevant portions of the retrieved oc- 
uments. The goal for query-dependent summariza- 
tion algorithms is to provide a short summary of 
a document with respect to a specific query. Al- 
though a number of methods for query-dependent 
text summarization are beginning to be developed 
and evaluated in a variety of realistic settings (Mani 
et al, 1999), we again propose the use of vector space 
methods from IR, which can be easily extended to 
the summarization task (Salton et al, 1994): 
1. Given a question and a document, divide the 
document into chunks (e.g. sentences, para- 
graphs, 200-word passages). 
2. Generate the vector epresentation forthe ques- 
tion and for each document chunk. 
3. Use the cosine similarity measure to determine 
the similarity of each chunk to the question. 
4. Return as the query-dependent summary the 
most similar chunks up to a predetermined sum- 
mary length (e.g. 10% or 20% of the original 
document). 
This approach to text summarization was shown 
to be quite successful in the recent SUMMAC eval- 
uation of text summarization systems (Mani et al, 
1999; Buckley et al, 1999). Our general assumption 
182 
here is that Ii~ approaches can be used to quickly 
and accurately find both relevant documents and 
relevant document portions. In related work, Chali 
et al (1999) also propose text summarization tech- 
niques as a primary component for their QA system. 
They employ a combination of vector-space meth- 
ods and lexical chaining to derive their sentence- 
based summaries. We hypothesize that  deeper anal- 
ysis of the summary extracts is better accomplished 
by methods from NLP that can determine syntac- 
tic and semantic relationships between relevant con- 
stituents. There is a risk in using query-dependent 
summaries to focus the search for answer hypothe- 
ses, however: if the summarization algorithm is inac- 
curate, the desired answers will occur outside of the 
summaries and will not be accessible to subsequent 
components of the QA system. 
The Query -Dependent  Text  Summar izat ion  
QA System.  In the next version of the QA sys- 
tem, we augment he baseline system to perform 
query-dependent text summarization for the top k 
retrieved ocuments. More specifically, the IR sub- 
system returns the summary extracts (sentences or 
paragraphs) for the top k documents after sort- 
ing them according to their cosine similarity scores 
w.r.t, the question. As before, no linguistic filters are 
applied, and answers are generated by constructing 
50-byte chunks from the ordered extracts after re- 
moving stopwords. In the experiments below, k = 7 
for the development questions and k = 6 for the test 
questions. 2 
Eva luat ion .  Results for the Text Summarization 
QA system using sentence-based summaries are 
shown in the second row of Table 1. Here we see 
a relatively small improvement: the system now 
answers four development and 45 test questions 
correctly. The mean answer rank, however, im- 
proves noticeably from 3.33 to 2.25 for the develop- 
ment corpus and from 3.07 to 2.67 for the test cor- 
pus. Paragraph-based summaries yield similar but 
slightly smaller improvements; as a result, sentence 
summaries are used exclusively in subsequent sec- 
tions. Unfortunately, the system's reliance on query- 
dependent text summarization actually limits its po- 
tential: in only 23 of the 38 development questions 
(61%), for example, does the correct answer appear 
in the summary for one of the top k -- 7 documents. 
The QA system cannot hope to answer correctly any 
of the remaining 15 questions. For only 135 of the 
200 questions in the test corpus (67.5%) does the 
correct answer appear in the summary for one of 
2The value for k was chosen so that at least 80% of the 
questions in the set had answers appearing in the retrieved 
documents ranked 1-k. We have not experimented exten- 
sively with many values of k and expect that better perfor- 
mance can be obtained by tuning k for each text collection. 
the top k -- 6 documents. 3 It is possible that au- 
tomatic relevance feedback or coreference r solution 
would improve performance. We are investigating 
these options in current work. 
The decision of whether or not to incorporate text 
summarization i the QA system depends, in part, 
on the ability of subsequent processing components 
(i.e. the linguistic filters) to locate answer hypothe- 
ses. If subsequent components are very good at 
discarding implausible answers, then summarization 
methods may limit system performance. Therefore, 
we investigate next the use of two linguistic filters in 
conjunction with the query-dependent text summa- 
rization methods evaluated here. 
5 Incorporat ing  the  Noun Phrase  
F i l te r  
The restricted QA task that we investigate requires 
answers to be short - -  no more than 50 bytes in 
length. This effectively eliminates how or why ques- 
tions from consideration. Almost all of the remain- 
ing question types are likely to have noun phrases as 
answers. In the TREC8 development corpus, for ex- 
ample, 36 of 38 questions have noun phrase answers. 
As a result, we next investigate the use of a 
very simple linguistic filter that considers only noun 
phrases as answer hypotheses. The filter operates on 
the ordered list of summary extracts for a particular 
question and produces a list of answer hypotheses, 
one for each noun phrase (NP) in the extracts in the 
left-to-right order in which they appeared. 
The  NP-based  QA System.  Our implementa- 
tion of the NP-based QA system uses the Empire 
noun phrase finder, which is described in detail in 
Cardie and Pierce (1998). Empire identifies base 
NPs - -  non-recursive noun phrases - -  using a very 
simple algorithm that matches part-of-speech tag se- 
quences based on a learned noun phrase grammar. 
The approach is able to achieve 94% precision and 
recall for base NPs derived from the Penn Treebank 
Wall Street Journal (Marcus et al, 1993). In the 
experiments below, the NP filter follows the applica- 
tion of the document retrieval and text summariza- 
tion components. Pronoun answer hypotheses are 
discarded, and the NPs are assembled into 50-byte 
chunks. 
Eva luat ion.  Results for the NP-based QA sys- 
tem are shown in the third row of Table 1. The 
noun phrase filter markedly improves system per- 
formance for the development corpus, nearly dou- 
3Paragraph-based summaries provide better coverage on 
the test corpus than sentence-based summaries: for 151 ques- 
tions, the correct answer appears in the summary for one of 
the top k documents. This suggests that paragraph sum- 
maries might be better suited for use with more sophisticated 
linguistic filters that are capable of discerning the answer in 
the larger summary. 
1~"~ 183
Development Corpus Test Corpus 
Smart Vector Space Model 
Query-Dependent Text Summarization 
Text Summarization + NPs 
Text Summarization + NPs + Semantic Type 
Text Summarization with Syntactic Ordering + 
NPs + Semantic Type 
Correct (%) MAR 
3/38 0.079 3.33 
4/38 0.105 2.25 
7/38 0.184 2.29 
21/38 0.553 1.38 
22/38 0.579 1.32 
Correct(%) MAR 
29/200 0.145 3.07 
45/200 0.225 2.67 
50/200 0.250 2.66 
86/200 0.430 1.90 
91/200 0.455 1.82 
Table 1: Evaluation of the Role of Statistical and Limited Linguistic Knowledge for the TREC8 Question 
Answering Task. Results for 38 development and 200 test questions are shown. The mean answer ank 
(MAR) is computed w.r.t, all questions correctly answered. 
bling the number of questions answered correctly. 
We found these results somewhat surprising since 
this linguistic filter is rather weak: we expected it
to work well only in combination with the semantic 
filter described below. The noun phrase filter has 
much less of an effect on the test corpus, improving 
performance on questions answered from 45 to 50. 
In a separate experiment, we applied the NP filter 
to the baseline system that includes no text summa? 
rization component. Here the NP filter does not 
improve performance - - the system gets only two 
questions correct. This indicates that the NP filter 
depends critically on the text summarization com- 
ponent. As a result, we will continue to use query- 
dependent text summarization i  the experiments 
below. 
The NP filter provides the first opportunity to 
look at single-phrase answers. The preceding QA 
systems produced answers that were rather unnat- 
urally chunked into 50-byte strings. When such 
chunking is disabled, only one development and 20 
test questions are answered. The difference in per- 
formance between the NP filter with chunking and 
the NP filter alone clearly indicates that the NP fil- 
ter is extracting ood guesses, but that subsequent 
linguistic processing is needed to promote the best 
guesses to the top of the ranked guess list. 
6 Incorporat ing  Semant ic  Type  
In fo rmat ion  
The NP filter does not explicitly consider the ques- 
tion in its search for noun phrase answers. It is clear, 
however, that a QA system must pay greater atten- 
tion to the syntactic and semantic onstraints spec- 
ified in the question. For example, a question like 
Who was president of the US in 19957 indicates 
that the answer is likely to be a person. In addition, 
there should be supporting evidence from the answer 
document that the person was president, and, more 
specifically, held this office in the US and in 1995. 
We introduce here a second linguistic filter that 
considers the primary semantic onstraint from the 
question. The filter begins by determining the ques- 
tion type, i.e. the semantic type requested in the 
question. It then takes the ordered set of summary 
extracts supplied by the IR subsytem, uses the syn- 
tactic filter from Section 5 to extract NPs, and gen- 
erates an answer hypothesis for every noun phrase 
that is semantically compatible with the question 
type. Our implementation of this semantic class fil- 
ter is described below. The filter currently makes no 
attempt to confirm other linguistic relations men- 
tioned in the question. 
The  Semantic Type  Checking QA System. 
For most questions, the question word itself deter- 
mines the semantic type of the answer. This is true 
for who, where, and when questions, for example, 
which request a person, place, and time expression 
as an answer. For many which and what questions, 
however, determining the question type requires ad- 
ditional syntactic analysis. For these, we currently 
extract the head noun in the question as the question 
type. For example, in Which country has the largest 
part o$ the Amazon rain :forest? we identify country 
as the question type. Our heuristics for determining 
question type were based on the development cor- 
pus and were designed to be general, but have not 
yet been directly evaluated on a separate question 
corpus. 
? Given the question type and an answer hypoth- 
esis, the Semantic Type Checking QA System then 
uses WordNet o check that an appropriate ancestor- 
descendent relationship holds. Given Brazil as an 
answer hypothesis for the above question, for exam- 
ple, Wordnet's type hierarchy confirms that Brazil 
is a subtype of country, allowing the system to con- 
clude that the semantic type of the answer hypoth- 
esis matches the question type. 
For words (mostly proper nouns) that do not ap- 
pear in WordNet, heuristics are used to determine 
semantic type. There are heuristics to recognize 
13 basic question types: Person, Location, Date, 
Month, Year, Time, Age, Weight, Area, Volume, 
Length, Amount, and Number. For Person ques- 
tions, for example, the system relies primarily on a 
rule that checks for capitalization and abbreviations 
' I IOA  184
in order to identify phrases that correspond to peo- 
ple. There are approximately 20 such rules that to- 
gether cover all 13 question types listed above. The 
rules effectively operate as a very simple named en- 
tity identifier. 
Eva luat ion .  Results for the Semantic Type 
Checking variation of the QA system are shown in 
the fourth row of Table 1. Here we see a dramatic 
increase in performance: the system answers three 
times as many development questions (21) correctly 
over the previous variation. This is especially en- 
couraging iven that the IR and text summarization 
components limit the maximum number correct o 
23. In addition, the mean answer rank improves 
from 2.29 to 1.38. A closer look at Table 1, however, 
indicates problems with the semantic type checking 
linguistic filter. While performance on the develop- 
ment corpus increases by 37 percentage points (from 
18.4% correct to 55.3% correct), relative gains for 
the test corpus are much smaller. There is only an 
improvement of 18 percentage points, from 25.0% 
correct (50/200) to 43.0% correct (86/200). This 
is a clear indication that the heuristics used in the 
semantic type checking component, which were de- 
signed based on the development corpus, do not gen- 
eralize well to different question sets. Replacing the 
current heuristics with a Named Entity identifica- 
tion component or learning the heuristics using stan- 
dard inductive learning techniques should help w i th  
the scalability of this linguistic filter. 
Nevertheless, it is somewhat surprising that very 
weak syntactic information (the NP filter) and weak 
semantic lass information (question type checking) 
can produce such improvements. In particular, it 
appears that it is reasonable to rely implicitly on 
the IR subsystems to enforce the other linguistic re- 
lationships pecified in the query (e.g. that Clinton 
is president, hat this office was held in the US and 
in 1995). 
Finally, when 50-byte chunking is disabled for 
the semantic type checking QA variation, there is 
a decrease in the number of questions correctly an- 
swered, to 19 and 57 for the development and test 
corpus, respectively. 
7 Syntact i c  P re ferences  fo r  Order ing  
Summary  Ext rac ts  
Syntactic and semantic linguistic knowledge has 
been used thus far as post-processing filters that lo- 
cate and confirm answer hypotheses from the statis- 
tically specified summary extracts. We hypothesized 
that further improvements might be made by allow- 
ing this linguistic knowledge to influence the initial 
ordering of text chunks for the linguistic filters. In a 
final system, we begin to investigate this claim. Our 
general approach is to define a new scoring mea- 
sure that operates on the summary extracts and can 
be used to reorder the extracts based on linguistic 
knowledge. 
The  QA System wi th  L inguist ic  Reorder ing  
o f  Summary  Ext racts .  As described above, our 
final version of the QA system ranks summary ex- 
tracts according to both their vector space similarity 
to the question as well as linguistic evidence that the 
answer lies within the extract. In particular, each 
summary extract E for question q is ranked accord- 
ing to a new score, Sq: 
sq(E) = w(E) . LRq(E) 
The intuition behind the new score is to prefer sum- 
mary extracts that exhibit the same linguistic rela- 
tionships as the question (as indicated by LRq) and 
to give more weight (as indicated by w) to linguistic 
relationship matches in extracts from higher-ranked 
documents. More specifically, LRq(E ) is the num- 
ber of linguistic relationships from the question that 
appear in E. In the experiments below, LRq(E) 
is just the number of base NPs from the question 
that appear in the summary extract. In future 
work, we plan to include other pairwise linguistic 
relationships (e.g. subject-verb relationships, verb- 
object relationships, pp-attachment relationships). 
The weight w(E) is a number between 0 and 1 that 
is based on the retrieval rank r of the document that 
contains E: 
w(E) = max(m, 1 - p. r) 
In our experiments, m = 0.5 and p = 0.1. Both 
values were selected manually based on the develop- 
ment corpus; an extensive search for the best such 
values was not done. 
The summary extracts are sorted according to the 
new scoring measure and the ranked list of sentences 
is provided to the linguistic filters as before. 
Eva luat ion .  Results for this final variation of the 
QA system are shown in the bottom row of Table 1. 
Here we see a fairly minor increase in performance 
over the use of linguistic filters alone: the system 
answers only one more question correctly than the 
previous variation for the development corpus and 
answers five additional questions for the test cor- 
pus. The mean answer rank improves only negligi- 
bly. Sixteen of the 22 correct answers (73%) appear 
as the top-ranked guess for the development corpus; 
only 53 out of 91 correct answers (58%) appear as 
the top-ranked guess for the test corpus. Unfortu- 
nately, when 50-byte chunking is disabled, system 
performance drops precipitously, by 5% (to 20 out 
of 38) for the development corpus and by 13% (to 
65 out of 200) for the test corpus. As noted above, 
this indicates that the filters are finding the answers, 
but more sophisticated linguistic sorting is needed 
to promote the best answers to the top. Through 
185 
its LRq term, the new scoring measure does pro- 
vide a mechanism for allowing other linguistic re- 
lationships to influence the initial ordering of sum- 
mary extracts. The current results, however, indi- 
cate that with only very weak syntactic information 
(i.e. base noun phrases), the new scoring measure 
is only marginally successful in reordering the sum- 
mary extracts based on syntactic information. 
As noted above, the final system (with the liberal 
50-byte answer chunker) correctly answers 22 out of 
38 questions for the development corpus. Of the 16 
errors, the text retrieval component is responsible for 
five (31.2%), the text summarization component for 
ten (62.5%), and the linguistic filters for one (6.3%). 
In this analysis we consider the linguistic filters re- 
sponsible for an error if they were unable to pro- 
mote an available answer hypothesis to one of the 
top five guesses. A slightly different situation arises 
for the test corpus: of the 109 errors, the text re- 
trieval component is responsible for 39 (35.8%), the 
text summarization component for 26 (23.9%), and 
the linguistic filters for 44 (40.4%). As discussed in 
Section 6, the heuristics that comprise the semantic 
type checking filter do not scale to the test corpus 
and are the primary reason for the larger percentage 
of errors attributed to the linguistic filters for that 
corpus. 
8 Re la ted  Work  and  Conc lus ions  
We have described and evaluated a series of 
question-answering systems, each of which incorpo- 
rates a different combination of statistical and lin- 
guistic knowledge sources. We find that even very 
weak linguistic knowledge can offer substantial im- 
provements over purely IR-based techniques espe- 
cially when smoothly integrated with the text pas- 
sage preferences computed by the IR subsystems. 
Although our primary goal was to investigate the 
use of statistical and linguistic knowledge sources, it 
is possible to compare our approach and our results 
to those for systems in the recent TREC8 QA evalu- 
ation. Scores on the TREC8 test corpus for systems 
participating in the QA evaluation ranged between 
3 and 146 correct. Discarding the top three scores 
and the worst three scores, the remaining eight sys- 
tems achieved between 52 and 91 correct. Using the 
liberal answer chunker, our final QA system equals 
the best of these systems (91 correct); without it, 
our score of 65 correct places our QA system near 
the middle of this group of eight. 
Like the work described here, virtually all of the 
top-ranked TREC8 systems use a combination of 
IR and shallow NLP for their QA systems. IBM's 
AnSel system (Prager et al, 2000), for example, 
employs finite-state patterns as its primary shallow 
NLP component. These are used to recognize a 
fairly broad set of about 20 named entities. The 
IR component indexes only text passages associ- 
ated with these entities. The AT&T QA system 
(Singhal et al, 2000), the Qanda system (Breck et 
al., 2000), and the SyncMatcher system (Oard et 
al., 2000) all employ vector-space methods from IR, 
named entity identifiers, and a fairly simple ques- 
tion type determiner. In addition, SyncMatcher 
uses a broad-coverage d pendency parser to enforce 
phrase relationship constraints. Instead of the vec- 
tor space model, the LASSO system (Moldovan et 
al., 2000) uses boolean search operators for para- 
graph retrieval. Recognition of answer hypotheses 
in their system relies on identifying named entities. 
Finally, the Cymphony QA system (Srihari and Li, 
2000) relies heavily on named entity identification; it 
also employs tandard IR techniques and a shallow 
parser. 
In terms of statistical and linguistic knowledge 
sources employed, the primary difference between 
these systems and ours is our lack of an adequate 
named entity tagger. Incorporation of such a tag- 
ger will be a focus of future work. In addition, we 
believe that the retrieval and summarization compo- 
nents can be improved by incorporating automatic 
relevance feedback (Buckley, 1995) and coreference 
resolution. Morton (1999), for example, shows that 
coreference r solution improves passage retrieval for 
their question-answering system. We also plan to 
reconsider paragraph-based summaries given their 
coverage on the test corpus. The most critical area 
for improvement, however, is the linguistic filters. 
The semantic type filter will be greatly improved by 
the addition of a named entity tagger, but we believe 
that additional gains can be attained by augmenting 
named entity identification with information from 
WordNet. Finally, we currently make no attempt to 
confirm any phrase relations from the query. With- 
out this, system performance will remain severely 
limited. 
9 Acknowledgments  
This work was supported in part by NSF Grants IRI- 
9624639 and GER-9454149. 
Re ferences  
E. Breck, J. Burger, L. Ferro, D. House, M. Light, 
and I. Mani. 2000. A Sys Called Qanda. In 
E. Voorhees, editor, Proceedings of the Eighth 
Text REtrieval Conference TREC 8. NIST Spe- 
cial Publication. In press. 
C. Buckley, M. Mitra, J. Walz, and C. Cardie. 
1998a. SMART high precision: TREC 7. In 
E. Voorhees, editor, Proceedings of the Seventh 
Text REtrieval Conference TREC 7, pages 285- 
298. NIST Special Publication 500-242. 
C. Buckley, M. Mitra, J. Walz, and C. Cardie. 
1998b. Using clustering and superconcepts within 
186 
SMART : TREC 6. In E. Voorhees, editor, Pro- 
ceedings of the Sixth Text REtrieval Conference 
TREC 6, pages 107-124. NIST Special Publica- 
tion 500-240. 
C. Buckley, C. Cardie, S. Mardis, M. Mitra, 
D. Pierce, K. Wagstaff, and J. Walz. 1999. The 
Smart/Empire TIPSTER IR System. In Proceed- 
ings, TIPSTER Text Program (Phase III). Mor- 
gan Kauhnann. To appear. 
Chris Buckley. 1995. Massive Query Expansion 
/or Relevance Feedback. Cornell University, Ph.D. 
Thesis, Ithaca, New York. 
R. Burke, K. Hammond, and J. Kozlovsky. 
1995. Knowledge-Based Information Retrieval 
from Semi-Structured Text. In Working Notes of 
the AAAI Fall Symposium on AI Applications in 
Knowledge Navigation and Retrieval, pages 19-24. 
AAAI Press. 
R. Burke, K. Hammond, V. Kulyukin, S. Lyti- 
hen, N. Tomuro, and S. Schoenberg. 1997. ques- 
tion answering from Frequently-Asked Question 
Files. Technical Report TR-97-05, University of 
Chicago. 
C. Cardie and D. Pierce. 1998. Error-Driven Prun- 
ing of Treebank Grammars for Base Noun Phrase 
Identification. In Proceedings of the 36th An- 
nual Meeting of the Association .for Computa- 
tional Linguistics and COLING-98, pages 218- 
224, University of Montreal, Montreal, Canada. 
Association for Computational Linguistics. 
Y. Chali, S. Matwin, and S. Szpakowicz. 1999. 
Query-Biased Text Summarization as a Question- 
Answering Technique. In Proceedings o.f the AAAI 
Fall Symposium on Question Answering Systems, 
pages 52-56. AAAI Press. AAAI TR FS-99-02. 
C. Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronical Lex- 
iced Database. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
J. Kupiec. 1993. MURAX: A Robust Linguistic ap- 
proach For Question Answering Using An On- 
Line Encyclopedia. In Proceedings of A CM SI- 
GIR, pages 181-190. 
W. Lehnert. 1978. The Process o/ Question Answer- 
ing. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ. 
I. Mani, T. Firmin, D. House, G. Klein, B. Sund- 
heim, and L. Hirschman. 1999. The TIPSTER 
SUMMAC Text Summarization Evaluation. In 
Ninth Annual Meeting o.f the EACL, University 
of Bergen, Bergen, Norway. 
M. Marcus, M. Marcinkiewicz, and B. Santorini. 
1993. Building a Large Annotated Corpus of En- 
glish: The Penn Treebank. Computational Lin- 
guistics, 19(2):313-330. 
G. A. Miller, R. Beckwith, C. FeUbaum, D. Gross, 
and K. J. Miller. 1990. WordNet: an on-line lex- 
ical database. International Journal of Lexicogra- 
phy, 3(4):235-245. 
D. Moldovan, S. Harabagiu, M. Pa~ca, R. Mihal- 
cea, R. Goodrum, R. Girju, and V. Rus. 2000. 
LASSO: A Tool for Surfing the Answer Net. In 
E. Voorhees, editor, Proceedings of the Eighth 
Text REtrieval Conference TREC 8. NIST Spe- 
cial Publication. In press. 
T. S. Morton. 1999. Using Coreference to Im- 
prove Passage Retrieval for Question Answering. 
In Proceedings of the AAAI Fall Symposium on 
Question Answering Systems, pages 72-74. AAAI 
Press. AAAI TR FS-99-02. 
D. W. Oard, J. Wang, D. Lin, and I. Soboroff. 2000. 
TREC-8 Experiments at Maryland: CLIR, QA 
and Routing. In E. Voorhees, editor, Proceedings 
o.f the Eighth Text REtrieval Conference TREC 8. 
NIST Special Publication. In press. 
J. Prager, D. Radev, E. Brown, A. Coden, and 
V. Samn. 2000. The Use of Predictive Anno- 
tation for Question Answering in TRECS. In 
E. Voorhees, editor, Proceedings o/ the Eighth 
Text REtrieval Conference TREC 8. NIST Spe- 
cial Publication. In press. 
G. Salton, A. Wong, and C.S. Yang. 1975. A vector 
space model for information retrieval. Communi- 
cations o/the ACM, 18(11):613-620. 
G. Salton, J. Allan, C. Buckley, and M. Mitra. 1994. 
Automatic analysis, theme generation and sum- 
marization of machine-readable t xts. Science, 
264:1421-1426, June. 
Gerard Salton, editor. 1971. The SMART Re- 
trieval System--Experiments in Automatic Doc- 
ument Processing. Prentice Hall Inc., Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ. 
R. C. Schank and R. P. Abelson. 1977. Scripts, 
plans, goals, and understanding. Lawrence Erl- 
bantu Associates, Hillsdale, NJ. 
Amit Singhal, Chris Buckley, and Mandar Mitra. 
1996. Pivoted document length normalization. In 
H. Frei, D. Harman, P. Schauble, and R. Wilkin- 
son, editors, Proceedings o/the Nineteenth An- 
nual International ACM SIGIR Conference on 
Research and Development in Information Re- 
trieval, pages 21-29. Association for Computing 
Machinery. 
A. Singhal, S. Abney, M. Bacchiani, M. Collins, 
D. Hindle, and F. Pereira. 2000. AT&T at TREC- 
8. In E. Voorhees, editor, Proceedings of the 
Eighth Text REtrieval Conference TREC 8. NIST 
Special Publication. In press. 
R. Srihari and W. Li. 2000. Question Answer- 
ing Supported by Information Extraction. In 
E. Voorhees, editor, Proceedings of the Eighth 
Text REtrieval Conference TREC 8. NIST Spe- 
cial Publication. In press. 
TREC-8. 2000. Proceedings of the Eighth Text RE- 
trieval Conference TREC 8. NIST. In press. 
1Q'7  187
