Systematic Verb Stem Generation for Arabic ?
Jim Yaghi
DocRec Ltd.,
34 Strathaven Place, Atawhai,
Nelson, New Zealand.
jim@docrec.com
Sane M Yagi
Department of English,
University of Sharjah,
Sharjah, U.A.E.
saneyagi@yahoo.com
Abstract
Performing root-based searching, concordancing,
and grammar checking in Arabic requires an
efficient method for matching stems with roots and
vice versa. Such mapping is complicated by the
hundreds of manifestations of the same root. An
algorithm based on the generation method used by
native speakers is proposed here to provide a map-
ping from roots to stems. Verb roots are classified
by the types of their radicals and the stems they
generate. Roots are moulded with morphosemantic
and morphosyntactic patterns to generate stems
modified for tense, voice, and mode, and affixed
for different subject number, gender, and person.
The surface forms of applicable morphophonemic
transformations are then derived using finite state
machines. This paper defines what is meant by
?stem?, describes a stem generation engine that the
authors developed, and outlines how a generated
stem database is compiled for all Arabic verbs.
1 Introduction
Morphological parsers and analysers for Arabic are
required to dissect an input word and analyse its
components in order to perform even the simplest
of language processing tasks. The letters of the
majority of Arabic words undergo transformations
rendering their roots unrecognisable. Without the
root, it is difficult to identify a word?s morphose-
mantic template, which is necessary for pinpointing
its meaning, or its morphosyntactic pattern, which
is essential for realising properties of the verb,
such as its tense, voice, and mode, and its subject?s
number, gender, and person. It is fundamental that
an analyser be able to reverse the transformations
a word undergoes in order to match the separated
root and template with the untransformed ones in its
database. Unfortunately, defining rules to reverse
transformations is not simple.
? The authors wish to thank the anonymous reviewers of this
article as their suggestions have improved it significantly.
Research in Arabic morphology has primarily fo-
cused on morphological analysis rather than stem
generation.
Sliding window algorithms (El-Affendi, 1999)
use an approximate string matching approach of
input words against lists of roots, morpholog-
ical patterns, prefixes, and suffixes. Algebraic
algorithms (El-Affendi, 1991), on the other hand,
assign binary values to morphological patterns and
input words, then perform some simple algebraic
operations to decompose a word into a stem and
affixes. Permutation algorithms (Al-Shalabi and
Evens, 1998) use the input word?s letters to generate
all possible trilateral or quadrilateral sequences
without violation of the original order of the letters
which is then compared with items in a dictionary of
roots until a match is found. Linguistic algorithms
(Thalouth and Al-Dannan, 1990; Yagi and Harous,
2003) remove letters from an input word that belong
to prefixes and suffixes and place the remainder
of the word into a list. The members of this list
are then tested for a match with a dictionary of
morphological patterns.
The primary drawback of many of these tech-
niques is that they attempt to analyse using the infor-
mation found in the letters of the input word. When
roots form words, root letters are often transformed
by replacement, fusion, inversion, or deletion, and
their positions are lost between stem and affix let-
ters. Most attempts use various closest match algo-
rithms, which introduce a high level of uncertainty.
In this paper, we define Arabic verb stems such that
root radicals, morphological patterns, and transfor-
mations are formally specified. When stems are
defined this way, input words can be mapped to cor-
rect stem definitions, ensuring that transformations
match root radicals rather than estimate them.
Morphological transformation in our definition
is largely built around finite state morphology
(Beesley, 2001) which assumes that these trans-
formations can be represented in terms of regular
relations between regular language forms. Beesley
(2001) uses finite state transducers to encode the
intersection between roots, morphological patterns,
and the transformation rules that account for mor-
phophonemic phenomena such as assimilation,
deletion, epenthesis, metathesis, etc.
In this paper, a description of the database re-
quired for stem generation is presented, followed by
a definition of stem generation. Then the database
together with the definition are used to implement a
stem generation engine. This is followed by a sug-
gestion for optimising stem generation. Finally, a
database of generated stems is compiled in a format
useful to various applications that the conclusion al-
ludes to.
In the course of this paper, roots are represented
in terms of their ordered sequence of three or four
radicals in a set notation, i.e., {F,M,L,Q}. When
the capitalised Roman characters F, M, L, and Q
are used, they represent a radical variable or place
holder. They stand for First Radical (F), Medial
Radical (M), Last Radical in a trilateral root (L), and
Last Radical in a quadrilateral root (Q).
For readability, all Arabic script used here is fol-
lowed by an orthographic transliteration between
parentheses, using the Buckwalter standard1. Buck-
walter?s orthographic transliteration provides a one-
to-one character mapping from Arabic to US-ASCII
characters. With the exception of a few charac-
ters, this transliteration scheme attempts to match
the sounds of the Roman letters to the Arabic ones.
The following list is a subset of the less obvious
transliterations used here: ? (@), ? (Y), ? (a), ? (i),
? (u), ? (o), and ? (~).
2 Stem Generation Database
Template
entry_id
TemplatesList->string_id
RootType
Pattern
Variant
Voice
Tense
Transform->transform_id
Affixes->affix_id
MainDictionary
stem_id
RootsList->root_id
entry->entry_id
RootsList
root_id
F
M
L
R
TemplateList
string_id
string
Figure 1: The stem generation database tables and
their relations.
1The complete table of orthographic transliteration may be
found at http://www.qamus.org/transliteration.htm
Arabic stems can be generated if lists of all roots
and all morphological patterns are provided. It is
necessary that this data be coupled with a database
that links the roots with their morphological patterns
(or templates) so that only valid stems are gener-
ated for each root. The roots in this database may
be moulded with morphosemantic and morphosyn-
tactic patterns to generate intermediate form stems.
The stemsmay then be transformed into final surface
forms with a number of specific morphophonemic
rules using a finite state transducer compiling lan-
guage.
Figure 1 shows a summary of the stem generation
tables and their relations. The RootsList table con-
tains all verb roots from the popular Arabic dictio-
nary, Al-Waseet, (Mustapha et al, 1972), with F, M,
L, and Q representing the table fields for up to four
radicals per root. A root identifier is used to link
this table to the Template table. The Template table
lists all morphosemantic and morphosyntactic pat-
terns used to generate stems from roots of a certain
type. This table also specifies the syntactic proper-
ties of stems (voice and tense) generated by using the
template entry. The MainDictionary table links the
RootsList and Template tables together and specifies
which entries apply to which roots.
Stems generated with these tables are unaffixed
stems. The affix id field links each entry to a subject
pronominal affix table that uses transformation rules
generating affixed stems. Although object pronom-
inal affixes are not dealt with in this paper, they are
generally agglutinating in nature and therefore cause
no morphophonemic alterations to a stem. They
can be added for generation or removed for analysis
without affecting the stem at all.
Affixation and transformation rules are both
specified using PERL regular expressions (Friedl,
2002). Regular expressions (Regexp) is an alge-
braic language that is used for building finite state
transducers (FSTs) that accept regular languages. In
the next section, Regexp is used to performmorpho-
phonemic transformations and to generate affixed
forms of stems. If generated stems are to be useful
for root extraction and morphological analysis, it is
essential at every stage of generation to be able to
track exactly which letters are members of the root
radical set, which belong to the template, and what
transformations occur on the untransformed stem
producing the final surface form.
3 Definition of Stem Generation
In order to be useful in analysis applications, Arabic
stems need to be in a surface form which will only
undergo agglutinating changes for any further mor-
phological modification. Stems should be defined in
terms of the root radicals,morphosemantic and mor-
phosyntactic template letters, and morphophonemic
alterations. By doing so, inversing stem transforma-
tions becomes trivial. We require the automatic stem
generator to always be aware of the origin of each of
the letters in stems it generates and to be able to dis-
tinguish between letters in the original radical set or
in the template string. The stem generator may then
be used to compile a complete list of all affixed stems
from database roots while retaining all transforma-
tion information. The resulting list of stems may
then be turned into a searchable index that holds the
complete morphological analysis and classification
for each entry.
Since originally Arabic words can have a maxi-
mum of four root radicals, a root radical set R is
defined in terms of the ordered letters of the root as
follows:
R = {rF, rM, rL, rQ} (1)
In the database, pattern, root, variant, and voice-
tense ids identify a particular morphological pattern
s. Templates are used to generate a stem from a root.
The text of s is defined in terms of the letters and di-
acritics of the template in sequence (x1...xl) and the
radical position markers or place holders (hF, hM,
hL, and hQ), that indicate the positions that letters
of the root should be slotted into:
s = x1x2...hF...hM...hL...hQ...xn (2)
Stem Generator (SG) uses regular expressions as
the language for compiling FSTs for morphophone-
mic transformations. Transformation rules take into
account the context of root radicals in terms of their
positions in the template and the nature of the tem-
plate letters that surround them. Transformations
are performed using combinations of regular expres-
sion rules applied in sequence, in amanner similar to
how humans are subconsciously trained to process
the individual transformations. The resulting tem-
plate between one morphophonemic transformation
and the next is an intermediate template. However,
in order to aid the next transformation, the trans-
formed radicals are marked by inserting their place
holders before them. For example, hF ?? hM ?? hL ??
(FraMsaLma) is an intermediate template formed
by the root radical set R ={?, ?, ?} ({r, s, m})
and the morphological pattern s = hF ? hM ? hL ?
(FaMaLa).
To create the initial intermediate template i0 from
the radical set R and morphological pattern s, a
function Regexp(String, SrchPat,ReplStr) is
defined to compile FSTs from regular expressions.
The function accepts in its first argument a string
that is tested for a match with the search pattern
(SrchPat) in its second argument. If SrchPat
is found, the matching characters in String are
replaced with the replace string (ReplStr). This
function is assumed to accept the standard PERL
regular expression syntax.
A function, CompileIntermediate(R, s), ac-
cepts the radical set R and morphological pattern
s to compile the first intermediate template i0. A
regular expression is built to make this transforma-
tion. It searches the morphological pattern text for
radical place holders and inserts their respective
radical values after them. Since Regexp performs
substitutions instead of insertions, replacing each
marker with itself followed by its radical value is
effectively equivalent to inserting its radical value
after it. Let p be a search pattern that matches all
occurrences of place holders hF, hM, hL, or hQ
in the morphological pattern, then an initial inter-
mediate form i0 may be compiled in the following
manner:
i0 = CompileIntermediate(R, s)
= Regexp(s, p, pRp)
= {x1...hFrF...hMrM...hLrL...hQrQ...xn}
(3)
Let T = {t1...tm} be the transformation rules ap-
plied on each intermediate template to create subse-
quent intermediate templates. Transformation rules
are defined as:
tj = (SrchPatj , ReplStrj) (4)
A second function Transform(i, t) is required to
perform transformations. A subsequent intermedi-
ate template ij+1 is the recursive result of transform-
ing the current intermediate template ij with the next
rule tj+1. Each transformation is defined as:
ij+1 = Transform(ij , tj+1) for 0 ? j < m
= Regexp(ij , SrchPatj+1, ReplStrj+1)
(5)
At any point in the transformation process, the
current transformed state of radicals (R?) and tem-
plate string (s?)may be decomposed from the current
intermediate template as follows:
CompileIntermediate?1(ij) = (R?, s?) (6)
To turn final intermediate template im into a
proper stem, a regular expression is built that
deletes the place holders from the intermediate
template. To do this with a regular expression, the
place holders matched are replaced with the null
string during the matching process as follows:
Regexp(im, p, null) (7)
Basic stems are only modified for tense and voice.
Additional morphosyntactic templates or affixation
rules further modify proper stems for person, gen-
der, number, and mode. Affixation rules are regu-
lar expressions like transformation rules. However,
these rules modify final intermediate templates by
adding prefixes, infixes, or suffixes, or modifying or
deleting stem letters. They require knowledge of
the radical positions and occasionally their morpho-
phonemic origins. Adding affixes to a stem operates
on the intermediate template which retains the nec-
essary information.
Let a be the affixation rule that is being applied to
a certain intermediate template:
a = (SrchPat,ReplStr) (8)
Now using the function Transform that was
defined earlier, affixes are added to im to produce
the intermediate affixed template im+1:
im+1 = Transform(im, a)
= Regexp(im, SrchPat,ReplStr)
(9)
To convert for output im+1 to an affixed stem, one
may remove place holders using the following:
Regexp(im+1, p, null) (10)
With this definition, generated stems are de-
scribed by intermediate templates. Intermediate
templates retain knowledge of the current state of
template and radical letters without losing the abil-
ity to recall their origins. This algorithm, therefore,
would avoid guesswork in the identification of root
radicals. Automatic rule-based stem generation
and analysis are both facilitated by this feature of
intermediate templates.
4 Stem Generation Engine
A stem generation engine may be built on the ba-
sis of the definition just advanced. The three com-
ponents, Stem Transformer, Affixer, and Slotter, ap-
plied in sequence, make up SG. Stem Transformer
applies the appropriate transformation rules to the
morphological pattern, Affixer adds specific affixes
to the transformed template; and Slotter applies the
radicals to the transformed affixed template to pro-
duce the final affixed stem.
SG begins with a stem ID from the MainDic-
tionary table as input to Stem Transformer (See Fig-
ure 1). The root and entry associated with the stem
ID are used to identify the radicals of the root, the
morphological pattern string, a list of transformation
rules, and an affix table ID.
i    transform_ruletemplate_string
F M L R
Stem Transformer
Transformed
Intermediate StemDecompose
Intermediate Stem Transform
Compose
th
template_string F M L R
i=0...n
final when i=n
when i<n
final when i=n
search_patternreplace_string
Figure 2: Stem Transformer
Stem Transformer applies transformation rules
that are localised to the root radicals and letters
of the template in the contexts of one another. To
prepare the template and root for transformation, the
engine begins by marking radicals in the template.
Stem Transformer is applied incrementally using
the current radical set, the template string, and one
transformation rule per pass, as in Figure 2. The out-
put of each pass is fed back into StemTransformer in
the form of the jth-rule-transformed template string
and radicals, along with the (j+1)th transformation
rule. When all rules associated with the template are
exhausted, the resultant template string and radicals
are output to the next phase.
To illustrate, assume the morphological pattern
s =m? hF ? u? hM ? hL ? (AiFotaMaLa), the radical set
R ={?, ?, ?} ({@,k,r}), and the transformation rule
set T = {1, 12}.
Stem Transformer generates a proper stem using
the following steps:
Equation 3 above creates the initial intermediate
template when passed the radical set and morpho-
logical template, thus producing:
i0 = CompileIntermediate(R, s)
= m? hF ?? u? hM ?? hL ??
(AiF@taMkaLra)
The first transformation rule t1 = 1, t1 ? T is a
regular expression that searches for au (t) following
hF and replaces u (t) with a copy of rF. To trans-
form i0 into i1 with rule t1, Equation 5 is used, thus
producing:
i1 = Transform(i0, t1)
= m? hF ?? ?? hM ?? hL ??
(AiF@o@aMkaLra)
Next, a gemination rule t2 = 12, t2 ? T is applied
to i1. The gemination regular expression searches
for an unvowelled letter followed by a vowelled du-
plicate and replaces it with the geminated vowelled
letter. Once more, Equation 5 is used to make the
transformation:
i2 = Transform(i1, t2)
= m? hF ?H hM ?? hL ??
(AiF@~aMkaLra)
To obtain the proper stem from the intermediate
template, the final intermediate template i2 may be
substituted into Equation 7:
Stem = Regexp(i2, p, null)
= m??H????
(Ai@~akara)
To summarise, the final output of Stem Trans-
former is a root moulded into a template and a
template-transformed radical set. These outputs
are used as input to the affixation phase which
succeeds stem transformation. Affixer, applied
iteratively to the product of Stem Transformer,
outputs 14 different subject-pronominally affixed
replace_string (affix)
F M L R
Affixer
Transformed
Intermediate StemDecompose
Intermediate Word Transform
Compose Generic IntermediateStem Match
template_string F M L R
final final
from Stem Transformer
template_string
Figure 3: The Affixer Phase
morphosyntactic forms for every input except
the imperative which only produces 5. There are
9 different tense-voice-mode combinations per
subject pronominal affix, so most roots produce 117
affixed stems per dictionary entry. Affixer is run
with different replace strings that are specific to the
type of affix being produced. It modifies copies of
the transformed stem from the previous phase, as in
Figure 3. Using the example cited shortly before,
Affixer is passed the last intermediate template im
and the affix regular expression a. In this example,
a is a regular expression that searches for hLrL and
replaces it with hLrL? u? (LrLato); this corresponds
to the past active third person feminine singular
affix.
Now applying Equation 9 produces:
i3 = Transform(i2, a)
= m? hF ?H hM ?? hL ?? u?
(AiF@~aMkaLrato)
In the last stage of stem generation, Slotter re-
places the place holders in the transformed template
with the transformed radical set, producing the final
form of the affixed stem. For the example, the result
of applying Equation 10 is:
Regexp(i3, p, null) = m??H???u??
(Ai@~akarato)
Transform
F M L R
Slotter
from Affixer
template_string
Transform
Transform
template_string
replace R literal with R value
replace L literal with L value
template_string
replace M literal with M value
Transform
template_string
replace F literal with F value
Affixed Word
final
Figure 4: The Slotter Phase
5 Optimisation
Data produced for the use of SG was designed
initially with no knowledge of the actual patterns
and repetitions that occur with morphophonemic
and affix transformation rules. In fact, SG is made
to create stems this way: A root is added to a
morphosemantic template, then morphosyntactic
templates are applied to it, inducing in some pat-
terns morphophonemic transformation. However,
while this may be useful in many language teaching
tools, it is extremely inefficient. The original data
was used to discover patterns that would allow
stems to be created in an optimal manner.
Following the classification in Yaghi (2004), there
are 70 verb root types associated with 44 theoreti-
cally possible morphological patterns. There is an
element of repetition present in the classification. In
addition, the Template table lists sequences of rules
that operate on morphological patterns in a manner
similar to how native speakers alter patterns phone-
mically. These rules could be composed into a sin-
gle FST that yields the surface form.
For example, in the previous section, the mor-
phophonemic transformation rule set T = {1, 12}
could have been written into one rule. In its non-
optimised form the rule duplicates rF in place of
u (t) creating intermediate form m? hF ?? ?? hM ?? hL ??
(AiF@o@aMkaLra) and then deletes the first of the
duplicate letters and replaces it with a gemination di-
acritic that is placed on the second repeat letter. The
resulting surface form is m??H???? (Ai@~akara). Instead,
one rule could achieve the surface form by replac-
ing the letter u (t) in the template with a geminated
? (@) yielding the same result.
Compiling separate regular expressions for each
transformation rule is costly in terms of processing
time especially when used with back-references, as
SG does. Back-references group a sub-pattern and
refer to it either in the search pattern or substitute
string. Such patterns are not constant and are re-
quired to be recompiled for every string they are
used with. It is desirable, therefore, to minimise the
number of times patterns are compiled. To optimise
further, the transformation may be made on the mor-
phological pattern itself, thus producing a sound sur-
face form template. This procedure would eliminate
the need to perform morphophonemic transforma-
tions on stems.
Each template entry in the Template table (see
Figure 1) is given a new field containing the surface
form template. This is a copy of the morphological
pattern with morphophonemic transformations ap-
plied. A coding scheme is adopted that continues
to retain letter origins and radical positions in the
template so that this will not affect affixation. Any
transformations that affect the morphological pat-
tern alone are applied without further consideration.
The coding scheme uses the Roman charactersF,M,
L, andQ to represent place holders in the templates.
Each place holder is followed by a single digit in-
dicating the type of transformation that occurs to
the radical slotted in that position. The codes have
the following meanings: 0=no alteration, 1=dele-
tion, 2=substitution, 3=gemination. If the code used
is 2, then the very next letter is used to replace the
radical to which the code belongs.
Take for example, the Template table entry for the
root type 17 (all roots with F=? (w) and L=? (y)), its
morphological pattern m? hF?u? hM ? hL ? (AiFotaMaLa),
and its variant (ID 0). The morphophonemic
transformation rules applied to the template are
T={20,12,31,34,112}. These rules correspond to
the following:
? 20=change rF to a duplicate of the next letter
u (t)
? 12=geminate duplicate letters
? 31=delete diacritic after the? (y) in positionhL
? 34=convert ? (y) to m (A)
? 112=convert m to ? (Y)
Surface Form m? rF2uH rM0? rL2? (Ai F2t~a M0a L2Y)
Affix rL?? u? ?? m ( L2yotumaA)
Combined Result m? rF2uH rM0? rL2?? u? ?? m (Ai F2t~a M0a L2yotumaA)
Table 1: Surface form template aligned with an affix entry rule.
The surface form template can be rewritten as
m? hF2uH hM ? hL2? (AiF2t~aM0aL2Y). This can be
used to form stems such as m?vH??? (Ait~adaY) by slot-
ting the root {?, ?, ?} ({w,d,y}).
The affix tables use a similar notation for coding
their rules. Every affix rule indicates a change to be
made to the surface form template and begins with a
place holder followed by a code 0 or 2 unless the rule
redefines the entire template in which case the entry
begins with a 0. Radical place holders in affix rules
define changes to the surface form template. These
changes affect the template from the given radical
position to the very next radical position or the end
of the template, whichever is first.
Affix rules with code 0 following radical place
holders signify that no change should be made to
that section of the surface form template. However,
a code 2 after a place holder modifies the surface
form template in that position by replacing the letter
that follows the code with the rest of that segment of
the rule. Affix rules using code 2 after place holders
override any other code for that position in the sur-
face form template because affixation modifies mor-
phophonemically transformed stems.
Creating affixed stems from templates and
affixes formatted in this way becomes far more
optimal. If a surface form template was specified
as m? rF2uH rM0? rL2? (AiF2t~aM0aL2Y) and it
was to be combined with the affix rule rL2?? u? ?? m
(L2yotumaA) then SG simply needs to align the
affix rule with the surface form template using the
place holder symbol in the affix rule and replace
appropriately as in Table 1.
With the resulting affixed surface form template
SGmay retain the radicals of the original root where
they are unchanged, delete radicals marked with
code 1 and 3, and substitute letters following code
2 in place of their position holders. If the example
above is used with the root {?, ?, ?} ({w, d, y}),
the final stem is: m?vH???w???n (Ait~adayotumaA, mean-
ing "the two of you have accepted compensation for
damage").
To use the original regular expression transfor-
mations would take an average of 18000 seconds
to produce a total of 2.2 million valid stems in the
database. With the optimised coding scheme, the
time taken is reduced to a mere 720 seconds; that is
4% of the original time taken.
6 Generated Stem Database Compiler
Figure 5: Output from the Stem Generation CGI
Once the dictionary database has been completed
and debugged, an implementation of SG generates
for every root, template, and affix the entire list of
stems derived from a single root and all the pos-
sible template and affix combinations that may ap-
ply to that root entry. The average number of dic-
tionary entries that a root can generate is approxi-
mately 2.5. Considering that each entry generates
117 different affixed stems, this yields an average of
approximately 300 affixed stems per root. However,
some roots (e.g., {?,u,o} ({k,t,b})) produce 13
different entries, which makes approximately 1,500
affixed stems for each of such roots.
The generated list is later loaded into a B-Tree
structured database file that allows fast stem search
and entry retrieval.
A web CGI was built that uses the Stem Genera-
tion Engine to produce all affixed stems of any given
root. A section of the results of this appears in Fig-
ure 5.
7 Conclusions
In this paper, we have discussed our attempt at imi-
tating the process used by Arabic speakers in gener-
ating stems from roots. We formulated a definition
of the process, facilitating an encoding of Arabic
stems. The encoding represents stems in terms of
their components while still allowing a simple map-
ping to their final surface forms. A stem?s compo-
nents are a root, morphosemantic and morphosyn-
tactic templates, and any morphophonemic alter-
ations that the stem may have underwent. In do-
ing so, the problem has been reduced to the much
smaller task of obtaining stems for the words sub-
ject to analysis, and then matching these against the
surface forms of the pre-analysed stems. The encod-
ing retains most of the information essential to stem
generation and analysis, allowing us to trace the var-
ious transformations that root radicals undergowhen
inflected. Root extractors and morphological anal-
ysers can match an input word with a defined verb
stem, then use the information in the definition to de-
termine with certainty the stem?s root and morpho-
logical pattern?s meaning. The authors intend to use
a similar strategy to define stems for Arabic nouns.
Mapping from words to defined stems is now
much easier. The stem generation algorithm here
attempts to produce a comprehensive list of all
inflected stems. Any verb may be found in this
list if some simple conjoin removal rules are first
applied. Conjoins are defined here as single letter
conjunctions, future or question particles, emphasis
affixes, or object pronominal suffixes that aggluti-
nate to a verb stem. Because conjoins may attach
to a verb stem in sequence and without causing
any morphological alteration, extracting stems
from Arabic words becomes similar to extracting
stems from English words. In fact, many of the
Arabic word analysis approaches reviewed in the
introduction to this paper would yield more accurate
results if applied to stem extraction instead of root
extraction. It would become possible to use for this
purpose conventional linguistic, pattern matching,
or algebraic algorithms.
The dictionary database described here can be
used to form the core of a morphological analyser
that derives the root of an input word, identifies its
stem, and classifies its morphosemantic and mor-
phosyntactic templates. An analyser based on these
principles may be used in many useful applications,
some of which are detailed in Yaghi (2004). Exam-
ple applications include root, lemma based, and ex-
act word analysis, searching, incremental searching,
and concordancing.
References
S. S. Al-Fedaghi and F. S. Al-Anzi. 1989. A
New Algorithm to Generate Arabic Root-Pattern
Forms. In Proceedings of the 11th National Com-
puter Conference and Exhibition, pages 391?400,
Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, March.
Riyad Al-Shalabi and Martha Evens. 1998. A
Computational Morphology System for Arabic.
In Proceedings of the COLING/ACL98, pages
66?72, Montr?eal, Qu?ebec, Canada, August.
Kenneth R Beesley. 2001. Finite-State Morpho-
logical Analysis and Generation of Arabic at Xe-
rox Research: Status and Plans in 2001. In ARA-
BIC Language Processing: Status and Prospects,
Toulouse, France, July. Arabic NLP Workshop at
ACL/EACL 2001.
Mohammed A. El-Affendi. 1991. An Algebraic Al-
gorithm for Arabic Morphological Analysis. The
Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering,
16(4B).
Mohammed A. El-Affendi. 1999. Performing Ara-
bicMorphological Search on the Internet: ASlid-
ing Window Approximate Matching Algorithm
and its Performance. Technical report, CCIS Re-
port King Saud University.
Jeffery E. F. Friedl. 2002. Mastering Regular Ex-
pressions. O?Reilly, 2nd edition, July.
Lama Hamandi, Rached Zantout, and Ahmed Gues-
soum. 2002. Design and Implementation of an
Arabic Morphological Analysis System. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Re-
search Trends in Science and Technology 2002,
pages 325?331, Beirut, Lebanon.
IbrahimMustapha, Ahmed H.Al-Zayat, Hamid Ab-
delQadir, and Mohammed Ali Al-Najjar, editors.
1972. Al-Moajam Al-Waseet. Cairo Arab Lan-
guage Academy, Cairo, Egypt.
B. Thalouth and A. Al-Dannan. 1990. A Compre-
hensive Arabic Morphological Analyzer Genera-
tor. In Pierre Mackay, editor, Computers and the
Arabic Language. Hemisphere Publishing, New
York.
Jim Yaghi. 2004. Computational Arabic Verb Mor-
phology: Analysis and Generation. Master?s the-
sis, University of Auckland.
Sane M. Yagi and Saad Harous. 2003. Arabic Mor-
phology: An Algorithm and Statistics. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2003 International Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (IC-AI 2003), Las Vegas,
Nevada.
