Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions, pages 929?936,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Word Sense Disambiguation using lexical cohesion in the context 
Dongqiang Yang | David M.W. Powers 
School of Informatics and Engineering 
Flinders University of South Australia  
PO Box 2100, Adelaide 
Dongqiang.Yang|David.Powers@flinders.edu.au 
  
  
 
Abstract 
This paper designs a novel lexical hub to 
disambiguate word sense, using both syn-
tagmatic and paradigmatic relations of 
words. It only employs the semantic net-
work of WordNet to calculate word simi-
larity, and the Edinburgh Association 
Thesaurus (EAT) to transform contextual 
space for computing syntagmatic and 
other domain relations with the target 
word. Without any back-off policy the 
result on the English lexical sample of 
SENSEVAL-21 shows that lexical cohe-
sion based on edge-counting techniques 
is a good way of unsupervisedly disam-
biguating senses.  
1 Introduction 
Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) is generally 
taken as an intermediate task like part-of-speech 
(POS) tagging in natural language processing, 
but it has not so far achieved the sufficient preci-
sion for application as POS tagging (for the his-
tory of WSD, cf. Ide and V?ronis (1998)). It is 
partly due to the nature of its complexity and 
difficulty, and to the widespread disagreement 
and controversy on its necessity in language en-
gineering, and to the representation of the senses 
of words, as well as to the validity of its evalua-
tion (Kilgarriff and Palmer, 2000). However the 
endeavour to automatically achieve WSD has 
been continuous since the earliest work of the 
1950?s. 
In this paper we specifically investigate the 
role of semantic hierarchies of lexical knowledge 
on WSD, using datasets and evaluation methods 
from SENSEVAL (Kilgarriff and Rosenzweig, 
                                                 
1 http://www.senseval.org/ 
2000) as these are well known and accepted in 
the community of computational linguistics.  
With respect to whether or not they employ 
the training materials provided, SENSEVAL 
roughly categorizes the participating systems 
into ?unsupervised systems? and ?supervised 
systems?. Those that don?t use the training data 
are not usually truly unsupervised, being based 
on lexical knowledge bases such as dictionaries, 
thesauri or semantic nets to discriminate word 
senses; conversely the ?supervised? systems 
learn from corpora marked up with word senses.  
The fundamental assumption, in our ?unsu-
pervised? technique for WSD in this paper, is 
that the similarity of contextual features of the 
target with the pre-defined features of its sense in 
the lexical knowledge base provides a quantita-
tive cue for identifying the true sense of the tar-
get. 
The lexical ambiguity of polysemy and ho-
monymy, whose distinction is however not abso-
lute as sometimes the senses of word may be in-
termediate, is the main object of WSD. Verbs, 
with their more flexible roles in a sentence, tend 
to be more polysemous than nouns, so worsening 
the computational feasibility. In this paper we 
disambiguated the sense of a word after its POS 
tagging has assigned them either a noun or a verb 
tag. Furthermore, we deal with nouns and verbs 
separately.  
2 Some previous work on WSD using 
semantic similarity 
Sussna (1993) utilized the semantic network of 
nouns in WordNet to disambiguate term senses 
to improve the precision of SMART information 
retrieval at the stage of indexing, in which he 
assigned two different weights for both direc-
tions of edges in the network to compute the 
similarity of two nodes. He then exploited the 
moving fixed size window to minimize the sum 
929
of all combinations of the shortest distances 
among target and context words.  
Pedersen et al (2003) extended Lesk?s defini-
tion method (1986) to discriminate word sense 
through the definitions of both target and its IS-A 
relatives, and achieved a better result in the Eng-
lish lexical sample task of SENSEVAL-2, com-
pared with other edge-counting or statistical es-
timation metrics on WordNet. 
Humans carefully select words in a sentence to 
express harmony or cohesion in order to ease the 
ambiguity of the sentence. Halliday and Hasan 
(1976) argued that cohesive chains unite text 
structure together through reiteration of reference 
and lexical semantic relations (superordinate and 
subordinate). Morris and Hirst (1991) suggested 
building lexical chains is important in the resolu-
tion of lexical ambiguity and the determination 
of coherence and discourse structure. They ar-
gued that lexical chains, which cover the multi-
ple semantic relations (systematic and non-
systematic), can transform the context setting 
into the computational one to narrow down the 
specific meaning of the target, manually realiz-
ing this with the help of Roget?s Thesaurus. They 
defined a lexical chain within Roget?s very gen-
eral hierarchy, in which lexical relationships are 
traced through a common category.  
Hirst and St-Onge (1997) define a lexical 
chain using the syn/antonym and hyper/hyponym 
links of WordNet to detect and correct malaprop-
isms in context, in which they specified three 
different weights from extra-strong to medium 
strong to score word similarity to decide the in-
serting sequence in the lexical chain. They first 
computationally employed WordNet to form a 
?greedy? lexical chain as a substitute of the con-
text to solve the matter of malapropism, where 
the word sense is decided by its preceding words.  
 Around the same time, Barzilay and Elhadad 
(1997) realized a ?non-greedy? lexical chain, 
which determined the word sense after process-
ing of all words, in the context of text summari-
zation.   
In this paper we propose an improved lexical 
chain, the lexical hub, that holds the target to be 
disambiguated as the centre, replacing the usual 
chain topology used in text summarization and 
cohesion analysis. In contrast with previous 
methods we only record the lexical hub of each 
sense of the target, and we don?t keep track of 
other context words. In other words, after the 
computation of lexical hub of the target, we can 
immediately produce the right sense of the target 
even though the senses of the context words are 
still in question. We also transform the context 
surroundings through a word association thesau-
rus to explore the effect of other semantic rela-
tionships such as syntagmatic relation against 
WSD.  
3 Selection of knowledge bases 
WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) provides a fine-
grained enumerative semantic net that is com-
monly used to tag the instances of English target 
words in the tasks of SENSEVAL with different 
senses (WordNet synset numbers). WordNet 
groups related concepts into synsets and links 
them through IS-A and PART-OF links, empha-
sizing the vertical interaction between the con-
cepts that is much paradigmatic.  
Although WordNet can capture the fine-
grained paradigmatic relations of words, another 
typical word relationship, syntagmatic connect-
edness, is neglected. The syntagmatic relation-
ship, which is often characterized with different 
POS tag, and frequently occurs in corpora or 
human brains, plays a critical part in cross-
connecting words from different domains or POS 
tags.  
It should be noted that WordNet 2.0 makes 
some efforts to interrelate nouns and verbs using 
their derived lexical forms, placing associated 
words under the same domain. Although some 
verbs have derived noun forms that can be 
mapped onto the noun taxonomy, this mapping 
only relates the morphological forms of verbs, 
and still lacks syntagmatic links between words.  
The interrelationship of noun and verb hierar-
chies is far from complete and only a supplement 
to the primary IS-A and PART-OF taxonomies 
in WordNet. Moreover as WordNet generally 
concerns the paradigmatic relations (Fellbaum, 
1998), we have to seek for other lexical knowl-
edge sources to compensate for the shortcomings 
of WordNet in WSD.   
The Edinburgh Association Thesaurus2 (EAT) 
provides an associative network to account for 
word relationship in human cognition after col-
lecting the first response words for the stimulus 
words list (Kiss et al, 1973).  Take the words eat 
and food for example. There is no direct path 
between the concepts of these two words in the 
taxonomy of WordNet (both as noun and verb), 
except in the gloss of the first and third sense of 
eat to explain ?take in solid food?, or ?take in 
food?, which glosses are not regularly or care-
                                                 
2 http://www.eat.rl.ac.uk/ 
930
fully organized in WordNet. However in EAT 
eat is strongly associated with food, and when 
taking eat as a stimulus word, 45 out of 100 sub-
jects regarded food as the first response.  
Yarowsky (1993) indicated that the objects of 
verbs play a more dominant role than their sub-
jects in WSD and nouns acquire more stable dis-
ambiguating information from their noun or ad-
jective modifiers.  
In the case of verbs association tests, it is also 
reported that more than half the response words 
of verbs (the stimuli) are syntagmatically related 
(Fellbaum, 1998). In experiments of examining 
the psychological plausibility of WordNet 
relationships, Chaffin et al (1994) stated that 
only 30.4% of the responses of 75 verb stimuli 
belongs to verbs, and more than half of the re-
sponses are nouns, of which nearly 90% are 
categorized as the arguments of the verbs.  
Sinopalnikova (2004) also reported that there 
are multiple relationships found in word associa-
tion thesaurus, such as syntagmatic, paradigmatic 
relations, domain information etc.  
In this paper we only use the straightforward 
forms of context words separating the effect of 
syntactic dependence on the WSD. As a supple-
ment of enriching word linkage in the WSD, we 
retrieve the lexical knowledge from both Word-
Net and EAT. We first explore the function of 
semantic hierarchies of WordNet on WSD, and 
then we transform the context word with EAT to 
investigate whether other relationships can im-
prove WSD. 
4 System design 
In order to find semantically related words to 
cohesively form lexical hubs, we first employ the 
two word similarity algorithms of Yang and 
Powers (2005; 2006) that use WordNet to com-
pute noun similarity and verb similarity respec-
tively. We next construct the lexical hub for each 
target sense to assemble the similarity score be-
tween the target and its context words together. 
The maximum score of these lexical hubs spe-
cifically predicts the real sense of the target, also 
implicitly captures the cohesion and real mean-
ing of the word in its context.  
4.1 Similarity metrics on nouns  
Yang and Powers (2005) designed a metric, 
??? *)2,1( tccSim =  
utilizing both IS-A and PART-OF taxonomies of 
WordNet to measure noun similarity, and they 
argued that the similarity of nouns is the maxi-
mum of all their concept similarities. They de-
fined the similarity (Sim) of two concepts (c1 and 
c2) with a link type factor (?t) to specify the 
weights of different link types (t) (syn/antonym, 
hyper/ hyponym, and holo/meronym) in the 
WordNet, and a path type factor (?t) to reduce 
the uniform distance of the single link, along 
with a depth factor (?) to restrict the maximum 
searching distance between concepts. Since their 
metric on noun similarity is significantly better 
than some popular measures and even outper-
forms some subjects on a standard data set, we 
selected it as a measure on noun similarity in our 
WSD task. 
4.2 Similarity metrics on verbs  
Yang and Powers (2006) also redesigned their 
noun model, 
it
ccDist
i
tstrccSim ???
)2,1(
1
**)2,1(
=
?=  
to accommodate verb case, which is harder to 
deal with in the shallow and incomplete taxon-
omy of verbs in WordNet. As an enhancement to 
the uniqueness of verb similarity they also con-
sider three fall-back factors, where if ?str is 1 
normally but successively falls back to: 
? ?stm: the verb stem polysemy ignoring sense 
and form 
? ?der: the cognate noun hierarchy of the verb  
? ?gls: the definition of the verb 
They also defined two alternate search proto-
cols: rich hierarchy exploration (RHE) with no 
more than six links and shallow hierarchy explo-
ration (SHE) with no more than two links.  
One minor improvement to the verb model in 
their system comes from comparing the similar-
ity of verbs and nouns using the noun model 
metric for the derived noun form of verb. It thus 
allows us to compare nouns and verbs and avoids 
the limitation of having to have the same POS 
tag. 
4.3 Depth in WordNet 
Yang and Powers fine-tuned the parameters of 
the noun and verb similarity models, finding 
them relatively insensitive to the precise values, 
and we have elected to use their recommended 
values for the WSD task. But it is worth 
mentioning that their optimal models are 
achieved in purely verbal data sets, i.e. the 
similarity score is context-free.  
931
In their models, the depth in the WordNet, i.e. 
the distance between the synsets of words (?), is 
indeed an outside factor which confines the 
searching scope to the cost of computation and 
depends on the different applications. If we tuned 
it using the training data set of SENSEVAL-2 we 
probably would assign different values and might 
achieve better results. Note that for both nouns 
and verbs we employ RHE (rich hierarchy explo-
ration) with ? = 2 making full use of the taxon-
omy of WordNet and making no use of glosses. 
4.4 How to setup the selection standard for 
the senses 
Other than making the most of WSD results, our 
main motive for this paper is to explore to what 
extent the semantic relationships will reach accu-
racy, and to fully acknowledge the contribution 
of this single attribute working on WSD, which 
is encouraged by SENSEVAL in order to gain 
further benefits in this field (Kilgarriff and 
Palmer, 2000). Without any definition, which is 
previously surveyed by Lesk (1986) and Peder-
sen et al (2003), we screen off the definition fac-
tor in the metric of verb similarity, with the in-
tention of focusing on the taxonomies of Word-
Net. 
Assuming that the lexical hub for the right 
sense would maximize the cohesion with other 
words in the discourse, we design six different 
strategies to calculate the lexical hub in its unor-
dered contextual surroundings.  
We first put forward three metrics to measure 
up the similarity of the senses of the target and 
the context word: 
? The maximized sense similarity 
( )),(max),( , jikjikmax CTSimCTSim =  
where T denotes the target, Tk is the kth 
sense of the target; Ci is the ith context word 
in a fixed window size around the target, Ci,j 
the jth sense of Ci. Note that T and C can be 
any noun and verb, along with Sim the met-
rics of Yang and Powers. 
? The average of sense similarity 
? ?
= =
=
m
j
m
j
jikjikikave CTLinksCTSimCTSim
1 1
,, ),(),(),(
where Links(Tk,Ci,j)=1, if Sim(Tk,Ci,j)>0, oth-
erwise 0. 
? The sum of sense similarity 
?
=
=
m
j
jikiksum CTSimCTSim
1
, ),(),(  
where m is the total sense number of Ci. 
Subsequently we can define six distinctive 
heuristics to score the lexical hub in the follow-
ing parts: 
? Heuristic 1 ? Sense Norm  (HSN) 
???
?
???
?= ? ?
= =
l
i
l
i
ikikmax
k
CTLinkwCTSimTSense
1 1
),(),(maxarg)(
where Linkw(Ti)=1 if Simmax(Tk,Ci)>0, oth-
erwise 0 
? Heuristic 2 ? Sense Max (HSM) 
An unnormalized version of HSN is: 
???
?
???
?= ?
=
l
i
ikmax
k
CTSimTSense
1
),(maxarg)(  
? Heuristic 3 ? Sense Ave (HSA) 
Taking into account all of the links between 
the target and its context word, the correct 
sense of the target is: 
???
?
???
?= ?
=
l
i
ikave
k
CTSimTSense
1
),(maxarg)(  
? Heuristic 4 ? Sense Sum (HSS) 
The unnormalized version of HSA is: 
???
?
???
?= ?
=
l
i
iksum
k
CTSimTSense
1
),(maxarg)(  
? Heuristic 5 ? Word Linkage (HWL) 
The straightforward output of the correct 
sense of the target in the discourse is to count 
the maximum number of context words 
whose similarity scores with the target are 
larger than zero:  
???
?
???
?= ?
=
l
i
ik
k
CTLinkwTSense
1
),(maxarg)(  
? Heuristic 6 ? Sense Linkage (HSL) 
No matter what kind of relations between the 
target and its context are, the sense of the 
target, which is related to the maximum 
counts of senses of all its context words, is 
scored as the right meaning:  
???
?
???
?= ??
= =
l
i
m
j
jik
k
CTLinksTSense
1 1
, ),(maxarg)(  
Therefore the lexical hub of each sense of the 
target only relies on the interaction of the target 
and its each context word, rather than of the con-
text words. The implication is that the lexical 
hub only disambiguates the real sense of the tar-
932
get other than the real meaning of the context 
word; the maximum scores or link numbers (on 
the level of words or senses) in the six heuristics 
suggest that the correct sense of the target should 
cohere with as many words or their senses as 
practicable in the discourse.  
When similarity scores are ties we directly 
produce all of the word senses to prevent us from 
guessing results. Some WSD systems in SEN-
SEVAL handle tied scores simply using the first 
sense (in WordNet) of the target as the real 
sense. It is no doubt that the skewed distribution 
of word senses in the corpora (the first sense of-
ten captures the dominant sense) can benefit the 
performance of the systems, but at the same time 
it mixes up the contribution of the semantic hier-
archy on WSD in our system.  
5 Results 
We evaluate the six heuristics on the English 
lexical sample of SENSEVAL-2, in which each 
target word has been POS-tagged in the training 
part. With the absence of taxonomy of adjectives 
in WordNet we only extract all 29 nouns and all 
29 verbs from a total of 73 lexical targets, and 
then we subcategorize the test dataset into 1754 
noun instances and 1806 verb instances. Since 
the sample of SENSEVAL-2 is manually sense-
tagged with the sense number of WordNet 1.7 
and our metrics are based on its version 2.0, we 
translate the sample and answer format into 2.0 
in accordance with the system output format.  
Finally, we find that each noun target has 5.3 
senses on average and each verb target 16.4 
senses. Hence the baseline of random selection 
of senses is the reciprocal of each average sense 
number, i.e. separately 18.9 percent for nouns 
and 6 percent for verbs. 
In addition, SENSEVAL-2 provides a scoring 
software with 3 levels of schemes, i.e. fine-
grained, coarse-grained and mixed-grained to 
produce precision and recall rates to evaluate the 
participating systems. According to the SEN-
SEVAL scoring system, as we always give at 
least one answer, the precision is identical to the 
recall under the separate noun and verb datasets. 
So we just evaluate our systems in light of accu-
racy. We tested the heuristics with fine-grained 
precision, which required the exact match of the 
key to each instance. 
5.1 Context 
Without any knowledge of domain, frequency 
and pragmatics to guess, word context is the only 
way of labeling the real meaning of word. Basi-
cally a bag of context words (after morphological 
analyzing and filtering stop-words) or the fine-
grained ones (syntactic role, selection preference 
etc.) can provide cues for the target. We propose 
to merely use a bag of words to feed into each 
heuristic in case of losing any valuable informa-
tion in the disambiguation, and preventing from 
any interference of other clues except the seman-
tic hierarchy of WordNet. 
The size of the context is not a definitive fac-
tor in WSD, Yarowsky (1993) suggested the size 
of 3 or 4 words for the local ambiguity and 20/50 
words for topic ambiguity. He also employed 
Roget?s Thesaurus in 100 words of window to 
implement WSD (Yarowsky, 1992). To investi-
gate the role of local context and topic context 
we vary the size of window from one word dis-
tance away to the target (left and right) until 100 
words away in nouns or 60 in verbs, until there 
are no increases in the context of each instance.  
0.25
0.27
0.29
0.31
0.33
0.35
0.37
0.39
0.41
0.43
0.45
2 5 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
context
ac
cu
ra
cy
HSN
HSM
HSA
HSS
HWL
HSL
 
Figure 1: the result of noun disambiguation with 
different size of context in SENSEVAL 2 
0.05
0.07
0.09
0.11
0.13
0.15
0.17
0.19
0.21
0.23
0.25
0.27
0.29
0.31
0.33
0.35
0.37
1 2 3 4 5 10 20 30 40 50 60
context
a
c
c
u
ra
c
y
HSN
HSM
HSA
HSS
HWL
HSL
 
Figure 2: the result of verb disambiguation with 
different size of context in SENSEVAL 2 
Noun and verb disambiguation results are re-
spectively displayed in Figure 1 and 2. Since the 
performance curves of the heuristics turned into 
flat and stable (the average standard deviations 
of the six curves of nouns and verbs is around 
0.02 level before 60 and 20, after that approxi-
933
mately 0.001 level), optimal performance is 
reached at 60 context words for nouns and 20 
words for verbs. These values are used as pa-
rameters in subsequent experiments. 
5.2 Transformed context (EAT) 
0.25
0.27
0.29
0.31
0.33
0.35
0.37
0.39
0.41
0.43
0.45
0.47
context srandrs sr rs srorrs
different contexts
a
c
c
u
ra
c
y
HSN
HSM
HSA
HSS
HWL
HSL
 
Figure 3: the results of nouns disambiguation of 
SENSEVAL-2 in the transformed context spaces 
0.05
0.07
0.09
0.11
0.13
0.15
0.17
0.19
0.21
0.23
0.25
0.27
0.29
0.31
0.33
0.35
0.37
0.39
context srandrs sr rs srorrs
different contexts
a
c
c
u
ra
c
y
HSN
HSM
HSA
HSS
HWL
HSL
 
Figure 4: the results of verbs disambiguation 
of SENSEVAL-2 in the transformed context 
spaces 
Although our metrics can measure the similarity 
of nouns and verbs through the derived related 
form of verbs (not from the derived verbs of 
nouns as a consequence of the shallowness of 
verb taxonomy of WordNet), we still can?t com-
pletely rely on WordNet, which focuses on the 
paradigmatic relations of words, to fully cover 
the complexity of contextual happenings of 
words.  
Since the word association norm captures both 
syntagmatic and pragmatic relations in words, 
we transform the context words of the target into 
its associated words, which can be retrieved in 
the EAT, to augment the performance of the 
lexical hub. 
There are two word lists in the EAT: one list 
takes each head word as a stimulus word, and 
then collects and ranks all response words ac-
cording to their frequency of subject consensus; 
the other list is in the reverse order with the re-
sponse as a head word and followed by the elicit-
ing stimuli. We denote the stimulus/response set 
of word as SR, respond/stimulus as RS. Apart 
from that we symbolize SRANDRS as the 
intersection of SR and RS, along with SRORRS 
as the union set of SR and RS. Then for each 
context word we retrieve its corresponding words 
in each word list and calculate the similarity be-
tween the target and these words including the 
context words.  
As a result we transform the original context 
space of each target into an enriched context 
space under the function of SR, RS, SRANDRS 
or SRORRS.  
We take the respective 60 context words of 
nouns and 20 words of verbs as the reference 
points for the transferred context experiment, 
since after that the performance curves of the 
heuristics turned into flat and stable (the average 
standard deviations of the six curves of nouns 
and verbs is around 0.02 level before 60, after 
that approximately 0.001 level).  
After the transformations, the noun and verb 
results are respectively demonstrated in Figure 3 
and 4. 
6 Comparison with other techniques. 
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5
Baseline Random
Baseline Lesk
Baseline Lesk Def
J&C
P&L_vector
P&L_extend
HWL_Context
HSL_Context
UNED-LS-U
DIMAP
IIT 1
IIT 2
HWL_SRORRS
HSL_SRORRS
accuracy
noun
verb
 
Figure 5: comparisons of HWL and HSL with 
other unsupervised systems and similarity met-
rics 
 
Pedersen et al (2003) in the work of evaluating 
different similarity techniques based on Word-
Net, realized two variants of Lesk?s methods: 
extended gloss overlaps (P&L_extend) and gloss 
vector (P&L_vector), as well as evaluating them 
in the English lexical sample of SENSEVAL-2. 
The best edge-counting-based metric that they 
measured are from Jiang and Conrath (1997) 
(J&C). 
934
Accordingly, without the transformation of 
EAT, we compare our results of HWL and HSL 
(denoted as HWL_Context and HSL_Context) 
with the above methods (picking up their optimal 
values). The results are illustrated in Figure 5. At 
the same time we also list three baselines for un-
supervised systems (Kilgarriff and Rosenzweig, 
2000), which are Baseline Random (randomly 
selecting one sense of the target), Baseline Lesk 
(overlapping between the examples and defini-
tions of and unsupervised systems in SEN-
SEVAL-2 each sense of the target and context 
words), and its reduced version, i.e. Baseline 
Lesk Def (only definition). 
We further compare HWL and HSL with the 
intervention of SRORRS of EAT (denoted as 
HWL_SRORRS and HSL_ SRORRS) with other 
unsupervised systems that employ no training 
materials of SENSEVAL-2, which are respec-
tively:  
? IIT 1 and IIT 2: extended the WordNet gloss 
of each sense of the target, along with its su-
perordinate and subordinate node?s glosses, 
without back-off policies. 
? DIMAP: employed both WordNet and the 
New Oxford Dictionary of English. With the 
first sense as a back-off when tied scores oc-
curred. 
? UNED-LS-U: for each sense of the target, 
they enriched the sense describer through the 
first five hyponyms of it and a dictionary 
built from 3200 books from Project Guten-
berg. They adopted a back-off policy to the 
first sense and discarded the senses account-
ing for less than 10 percent of files in Sem-
Cor). 
7 Conclusion and discussion 
7.1 Local context and topic context  
On the analysis of standard deviation of preci-
sion on different stage in Figure 1 and 2 we can 
conclude that the optimum size for HSN to HSS 
was ?10 words for nouns, reflecting a sensitivity 
to only local context, whilst HWL and HSL re-
flected significant improvement up to ?60 re-
flecting a sensitivity to topical context. In the 
case of verbs HSA showed little significant con-
text sensitivity, HSN showed some positive sen-
sitivity to local context but increasing beyond ?5 
had a negative effect, HSM and HSS to HSL 
showed some sensitivity to broader topical con-
text but this plateaued around ?20 to 30.  
7.2 The analysis of different heuristics. 
HWL and HSL were clearly superior for both 
noun and verb tasks, with the superiority of HSL 
being significantly greater and more comparable 
between noun and verb tasks with the difference 
scarcely reaching significance. These observa-
tions remain true with the addition of the EAT 
information. After transformations with EAT for 
nouns, HSL and HWL no longer differ signifi-
cantly in performance, forming a single group 
with relatively higher precision, whilst the other 
heuristics clump together into another group with 
lower precision, reflecting a negative effect from 
EAT. In the verb case, HWL and HSL, HSM and 
HSS, and HSN and HSA form three significantly 
different groups with reference to their precision, 
reflecting poor performance of both normalized 
heuristics (HSN and HSA) and a significantly 
improved result of HWL from the EAT data.  
All of this implies that in the lexical hub for 
WSD, the correct meaning of a word should hold 
as many links as possible with a relatively large 
number of context words. These links can be in 
the level of word form (HWL) or word sense 
(HSL). HSL achieved the highest precision in 
both nouns and verbs.  
7.3 The interaction of EAT in WSD 
For the noun sense disambiguation, the paired 
two sample for mean of the t-Test showed us that 
RS and SRORRS transformations can signifi-
cantly improve the precision of disambiguation 
of HWL and HSL (P<0.05, at the confidence 
level of 95 percent). All four transformations 
using EAT for verb disambiguation are signifi-
cantly better than its straightforward context case 
on HWL and HSL (P<0.05, at the confidence 
level of 95 percent). 
It demonstrated that both the syntagmatic rela-
tion and other domain information in the EAT 
can help discriminate word sense. With the trans-
formation of context surroundings of the target, 
the similarity metrics can compare the likeness 
of nouns and verbs, although we can exploit the 
derived form of word in WordNet to facilitate the 
comparison. 
7.4 Comparison with other methods 
The lexical hub reached comparatively higher 
precision in both nouns (45.8%) and verbs 
(35.6%). This contrasted with other similarity 
based methods and the unsupervised systems in 
SENSEVAL-2. Note that we don?t adopt any 
935
back-off policy such as the commonest sense of 
word used by UNED-LS-U and DIMAP. 
Although the noun and verb similarity metrics 
in this paper are based on edge-counting without 
any aid of frequency information from corpora, 
they performed very well in the task of WSD in 
relation to other information based metrics and 
definition matching methods. Especially in the 
verb case, the metric significantly outperformed 
other metrics. 
8 Conclusion and future work 
In this paper we defined the lexical hub and pro-
posed its use for processing word sense disam-
biguation, achieving results that are compara-
tively better than most unsupervised systems of 
SENSEVAL-2 in the literature. Since WordNet 
only organizes the paradigmatic relations of 
words, unlike previous methods, which are only 
based on WordNet, we fed the syntagmatic rela-
tions of words from the EAT into the noun and 
verb similarity metrics, and significantly im-
proved the results of WSD, given that no back-
off was applied. Moreover, we only utilized the 
unordered raw context information without any 
pragmatic knowledge and syntactic information; 
there is still a lot of work to fuse them in the fu-
ture research. In terms of the heuristics evaluated, 
richness of sense or word connectivity is much 
more important than the strength of individual 
word or sense linkages. An interesting question 
is whether these results will be borne out in other 
datasets. In the forthcoming work we will inves-
tigate their validity in the lexical task of SEN-
SEVAL-3. 
References 
Barzilay, R. and M. Elhadad (1997). Using Lexical 
Chains for Text Summarization. In the Intelligent 
Scalable Text Summarization  Workshop (ISTS'97), 
ACL, Madrid, Spain. 
Chaffin, R., et al (1994). The Paradigmatic Organiza-
tion of Verbs in the Mental Lexicon. Trenton State 
College. 
Fellbaum, C. (1998). Wordnet: An Electronic Lexical 
Database. Cambridge MA, USA, The MIT Press. 
Halliday, M. A. K. and R. Hasan (1976). Cohesion in 
English. London, London:Longman. 
Hirst, G. and D. St-Onge (1997). Lexical Chains as 
Representations of Context for the Detection and 
Correction of Malapropisms. Wordnet. C. Fell-
baum. Cambridge, MA, The Mit Press. 
Ide, N. and J. V?ronis (1998). Word Sense Disam-
biguation: The State of the Art. Computational lin-
guistics 24(1). 
Jiang, J. and D. Conrath (1997). Semantic Similarity 
Based on Corpus Statistics and Lexical Taxonomy. 
In the 10th International Conference on Research 
in Computational Linguistics (ROCLING), Taiwan. 
Kilgarriff, A. and M. Palmer (2000). Introduction, 
Special Issue on Senseval: Evaluating Word Sense 
Disambiguation Programs. Computers and the 
Humanities 34(1-2): 1-13. 
Kilgarriff, A. and J. Rosenzweig (2000). Framework 
and Results for English Senseval. Computers and 
the Humanities 34(1-2): 15-48. 
Kiss, G. R., et al (1973). The Associative Thesaurus 
of English and Its Computer Analysis. Edinburgh, 
University Press. 
Lesk, M. (1986). Automatic Sense Disambiguation 
Using Machine Readable Dictionaries: How to Tell 
a Pine Code from an Ice Cream Cone. In the 5th 
annual international conference on systems docu-
mentation, ACM Press. 
Morris, J. and G. Hirst (1991). Lexical Cohesion 
Computed by Thesaural Relations as an Indicator 
of the Structure of Text. Computational linguistics 
17(1). 
Pedersen, T., et al (2003). Maximizing Semantic Re-
latedness to Perform Word Sense Disambiguation. 
Sinopalnikova, A. (2004). Word Association Thesau-
rus as a Resource for Building Wordnet. In GWC 
2004. 
Sussna, M. (1993). Word Sense Disambiguation for 
Free-Text Indexing Using a Massive Semantic 
Network. In CKIM'93. 
Yang, D. and D. M. W. Powers (2005). Measuring 
Semantic Similarity in the Taxonomy of Wordnet. 
In the Twenty-Eighth Australasian Computer Sci-
ence Conference (ACSC2005), Newcastle, Austra-
lia, ACS. 
Yang, D. and D. M. W. Powers (2006). Verb Similar-
ity on the Taxonomy of Wordnet. In the 3rd Inter-
national WordNet Conference (GWC-06), Jeju Is-
land, Korea. 
Yarowsky, D. (1992). Word Sense Disambiguation 
Using Statistical Models of Roget's Categories 
Trained on Large Corpora. In the 14th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics, Nates, 
France. 
Yarowsky, D. (1993). One Sense Per Collocation. In 
ARPA Human Language Technology Workshop, 
Princeton, New Jersey. 
  
936
