Proceedings of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th IJCNLP of the AFNLP, pages 629?637,
Suntec, Singapore, 2-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
The Chinese Aspect Generation Based on Aspect Selection Functions 
 
 
 
Guowen Yang   
The Institute of linguistics  
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences                             
5 Jianguomennei Dajie, 100732 Beijing 
P.R.China  
John A. Bateman 
FB10, Sprach und Literaturwissenschaften 
Bremen University  
28334 Germany  
bateman@uni-bremen.de 
kybeijing@yahoo.com 
 
 
Abstract 
 
 
This paper describes our system for generating 
Chinese aspect expressions. In the system, the 
semantics of different aspects is characterized 
by specific temporal and conceptual features. 
The semantic applicability conditions of each 
individual aspect are theoretically represented 
by an aspect selection function (ASF). The 
generation is realized by evaluating 
implemented inquiries which formally define 
the ASFs, traversing the grammatical network, 
and making aspect selections.   
1   Introduction 
 
Aspect is one of the most controversial topics 
among linguists and philosophers. Unlike the 
function of tense, which relates the time of 
situation to a deictic center, aspects are different 
ways of viewing the states of a situation with 
respect to the situation?s internal temporal 
constituency (Yang, 2007). This paper describes 
our system for generating Chinese aspect 
expressions. The aspect forms covered in the 
present research were derived from a corpus 
analysis. The main task of the aspect research 
from a computational perspective is to 
implement computationally both the semantic 
interpretations and the grammatical realizations 
of aspects as formulated in theoretical work. The 
theoretical principle of this is, to a large extent, 
based on Montague?s intensional logic 
(Montague, 1970; Dowty, 1979; Bestougeff and  
Ligozat, 1992, Portner and Partee, 2002). It is 
held that the goal of semantics is to present the 
truth conditions for each well formed sentence.  
In previous studies there are some fruitful 
experiments on computationally processing 
temporal information in Chinese, e.g. Lee and 
Hsu?s Chinese to English machine translation  
 
 
 
 
system (1990), Li, Wong, and Yuan?s temporal  
information-extraction system (2001), Xue?s 
machine learning system (2008), and Xue, Zhong 
& Chen?s tense annotation system (2008). 
However, a systematic investigation, including 
the implementation of the semantics of aspects, 
has rarely been carried out before and is one of 
the main contributions of the present research. 
Aspects are determined by both situation types, 
which build specific situation structures, and 
particular viewpoints that construct specific 
temporal relations between the viewing points 
and the internal temporal constituencies of 
situations. These two kinds of factors, which 
influence aspect selections, can be characterized 
by aspectual features. This makes it possible for 
us to use a function which takes relevant time 
points and concepts as its parameters and 
?calculates? the truth value of the semantic 
applicability conditions of a specific aspect in 
order to make a corresponding aspect selection in 
language generation. We term this function the 
Aspect Selection Function (ASF). The ASFs are 
used for the theoretical descriptions of the 
aspects and, at the same time, they are the basis 
for our computational implementation of the 
semantics of the aspects.   
Our system has been implemented as a 
grammar for the KPML multilingual generator 
(Bateman, 1997a, 1997b) which is equipped with 
a large systemic grammar and all the technical 
components required in generation, including an 
input component, a traversal component, a 
realization component, and so on. This brings 
direct benefits for us in both theoretical and 
implementational respects since we could then 
focus on the linguistic treatment of  the Chinese 
aspects. 
The paper is organized into five sections. In 
the next three sections the semantic features of 
the aspects, the aspect selection functions, and 
the detailed description of the generation of the 
629
aspects will be given. Finally in Section 5, we 
make a brief conclusion. 
 
2   The semantic features of the aspects 
 
One of the methods adopted in aspect studies is 
to use semantic features to characterize different 
situations (cf. Comrie, 1976; Smith, 1991, 1997; 
Olsen, 1997; and Dai, 1997). This is also taken 
as the basic principle in the present research. For 
the purpose of characterizing the semantics of an 
aspect, the features needed are not only those 
reflecting the properties of situation types, but 
also those reflecting the temporal relations 
between the viewing points and the internal 
temporal constituencies of the situations. When 
we establish a system of aspects, we say that the 
features used are necessary and sufficient if 
different aspects included can be distinguished 
from each other by means of these features. 
Consequently, the more aspect expressions are 
involved, the more aspectual features are needed.   
Two kinds of aspectual features are proposed 
in the present research. One kind of aspectual 
feature can be directly represented in terms of 
relations holding over time points. These are 
termed features of temporal relations (FTR). For 
example, the feature durative, which is used for 
situations extended in time, can be represented 
with the temporal relation t1<t2 where t1 and t2 
denote two time points bounding the situation. 
Similarly, the feature punctual (momentary), 
which is used for situations theoretically taking a 
moment, can be formally represented by the 
temporal relation t1=t2.  
There is then a further kind of aspectual 
feature which cannot be directly represented by 
temporal relations, although they may also 
concern temporal properties of situations. This 
kind of feature can only be represented by 
parameters which serve to provide a conceptual 
classification of the situations involved; therefore, 
they are termed features of conceptual type 
(FCP), such as dynamic and repeatable.  
In addition, there is a special kind of aspectual 
feature which reflects qualitative properties of 
temporal relations: far-precede and shortly-
precede. These two features indicate qualitative 
distances between time points; the former means 
that one time point is linearly much before 
another time point on the time axis; the latter 
means that one time point is only a little before 
another time point. In specific context, these 
kinds of qualitative properties are reflected 
relatively in comparative or inclusive relations 
between temporal and spatial scopes of situations.  
Aspectual features are the basic elements to be 
used for aspect descriptions. The range of 
aspectual features is not held to be cross-
linguistically valid. In the present research, the 
following aspectual features are used to describe 
Chinese aspects. The states of relational type 
formed by the verbs like ? (sh?, be), ?(y?u, 
have), ??(d?ngy?, equal) etc. are associated 
with relational processes   (Halliday, 1985) and 
therefore not included in the features listed. In 
the following feature definitions, ti refers to the 
initial time of a situation, tt the terminating time 
of a situation, and tr the reference time of an 
aspect. In the present research, we define the 
reference time as the time from which the state 
of a situation with respect to the situation?s 
internal temporal constituency is contextually 
examined. 
 
(1) durative (FTR): describes situations 
which take time. It is represented by the 
temporal relation ti<tt. 
(2) punctual (FTR): describes situations 
which theoretically take only a moment 
of time. It is formally represented by the 
temporal relation ti=tt. 
(3) realized (FTR): describes situations 
which have occurred, have existed, or 
have shown the property of reality by 
some specific time. It is represented by 
the temporal relation tt?tr.  
(4) dynamic-state (FCP): describes a 
durative changing situation. 
(5) stative-state (FCP): describes a durative 
unchanging situation associated with the 
activity meaning of an activity verb.  
(6) change-of-state (FCP): indicates either 
the inception or termination of a 
situation.  
(7) event (FCP): describes a dynamic 
situation viewed as a complete whole 
(Comrie, 1976, p.13) and is aspectually 
associated with the occurrence, taking 
place, or completion of the situation.  
(8) repeatable (FCP): describes situations 
which can occur repeatedly.  
(9) specific (FCP): when a time point is 
specific, it has a particular position on 
the time axis which can be determined 
from context. 
(10) unspecific (FCP): when a time point is   
unspecific, its position on the time axis 
is unknown. 
630
(11) far-precede (FCP): indicates a 
qualitative distance, one end point of 
which is linearly much before another 
end point.   
(12) shortly-precede (FCP): indicates a 
qualitative distance, one end point of 
which is linearly a little before another 
end point.  
(13) excluded (FCP): when one of the end 
points of a time interval has the feature 
excluded, the time interval is open at 
that point. 
(14) included (FCP): when one of the end 
points of a time interval has the feature 
included, the time interval is closed at 
that point.  
 
Concerning the opening and closure of a time 
interval at its end points, two principles are 
proposed by the present research. The opening 
and closure of a time interval at its end points 
can be determined according to the following 
principles, which we term exclusiveness 
principles (ELPs):  
 
ELP (1) For the initial time ti: when the 
initial time ti of the situation is specific, 
then the time interval at the initial time ti 
is considered closed; when the initial 
time ti of the situation is unspecific, then 
the time interval at the initial time ti is 
considered open.  
ELP (2) For the terminating time tt: 
when the situation does not hold at the 
terminating time tt, the time interval is 
considered closed at the terminating 
time; when the situation still holds at the 
terminating time tt, the time interval is 
considered open at the terminating time. 
As far as the temporal structures of 
aspects are concerned, there is an 
extreme case: when the terminating time 
tt precedes the reference time tr, in which 
case the time period of the situation is 
definitely closed at the terminating time 
tt.  
 
The semantic feature telicity indicating that the 
situation referred to has an internal end point (cf. 
Vendler, 1967; Comrie, 1976) is not used in the 
present research for the Chinese aspect 
descriptions. The feature telicity is not an 
effective feature for characterizing Chinese 
aspects from a language generation point of 
view because there is no single aspect of the 
present aspect system that absolutely requires 
that the situations expressed be telic or atelic. 
 
3  The aspect selection functions 
 
Specific features of temporal relations and the 
conceptual features together build semantic 
applicability conditions for each individual 
aspect. The semantic applicability conditions are 
represented by the aspect selection function 
(ASF) of the aspect. The ASF of a specific aspect 
assumed by the present research is, therefore, 
principally composed of two sets of predicates: 
one set of predicates for testing temporal 
relations (Allen, 1984; Yang & Bateman, 2002), 
another for testing the values, i.e. conceptual 
features, of parameters associated with the aspect. 
All the predicates are connected with 
conjunctions at the top level. At the lower levels, 
the logical relations among the predicates can be 
a conjunction and, a disjunction or and a 
negation not. To evaluate the truth condition of 
the ASF for a specific aspect, the values of all 
relevant temporal relations and parameters are 
evaluated. When all the predicates are true, i.e., 
all of the required conditions are met, the value 
of the ASF is true; otherwise, the value of the 
ASF is false. 
In the predicates of the ASFs, there are two 
kinds of parameters: temporal parameters 
associated with the time points involved in the 
temporal structures of the aspects and conceptual 
parameters associated with the specific 
conceptual features of the aspects. The 
conceptual features will be taken as values of the 
corresponding parameters and represented by 
EQUAL(p, c), in which ?p? refers to a parameter 
and ?c? refers to the conceptual feature associated 
with that parameter. Some of the parameters are 
given as follows: 
 
(1) STATE-ACTION-PROPERTYp (SAPp): 
this parameter indicates whether the 
property of the situation is dynamic-
state, stative-state, state, or event. The 
subscript p denotes Process.  
(2) CHANGEABILITYp (CBp): this 
parameter indicates whether the 
situation has the feature change-of-state. 
(3) REPEATABILITYp: this parameter 
indicates whether the situation is 
repeatable.      
(4) RETRIEVALt (RTt): this parameter 
indicates whether the time point t is 
specific or unspecific.  
631
(5) POSITIONt1-t2: this parameter indicates 
whether the time point t1, which 
precedes another time point t2, is much 
before (far-precede) or a little before 
(shortly-precede) time point t2.  
(6) EXCLUSIVENESSt (EXLt): this 
parameter indicates whether the time 
point t, which is one of the end points of 
a time interval, has the feature excluded 
or included. 
 
We now take the unmarked-realized (URE) 
aspect V+? (V+le) as an example to illustrate 
the structure of the ASF. The URE aspect V+? 
(V+le) is one of the perfective aspects, serving to 
indicate  that the occurrence, development, or 
change of the situation is realized (not 
necessarily complete) by some specific time. The 
temporal structure of the aspect is shown in 
Figure 1. 
 
 
                ti                               tt=tr   
Figure 1 The temporal structure of the URE 
aspect V+?(V+le): 
{ti, tt}, (ti<tt or ti=tt), tt=tr, RTtr=specific 
  
The temporal structure in Figure 1 is explained 
as follows: The situations expressed in the URE 
aspect can be either punctual, i.e. ti=tt, or 
durative, i.e. ti<tt. The time interval of the 
situation defined by ?{ti, tt}? is either closed or 
open at its ends.  The feature realized is 
represented by specifying that the terminating 
time equals the reference time, i.e. tt=tr, rather 
than that the terminating time either equals or 
precedes the reference time, i.e. tt?tr ? the latter 
is the general condition for all perfective aspects. 
In Figure 1, the case of a punctual situation, i.e. 
ti=tt, is theoretically taken as a very short time 
period and not explicitly represented. RTtr 
indicates that the reference time tr is a specific 
time point. 
In addition to the temporal relations explained 
above, the URE aspect V+ ?  (V+le) has 
prominently three characteristics associated with 
the situation properties. When the URE aspect 
V+?(V+le) expresses a durative situation, the 
situation can be either a state or an event. When 
the process is of relational type, a change of state 
should be emphasized. When a change of state is 
involved in the situation, the URE aspect V+?
(V+le) focuses on the realization of the event, 
rather than the resultative state, unless current 
relevance is indicated in context. These three 
characteristics can be respectively represented by 
corresponding conceptual features associated 
with the parameters SAPp, CBp, and PROCESS 
involved in the predicates of the ASF of the URE 
aspect as shown in Figure 2. The ASFs are used 
for the purpose of theoretical descriptions, but 
also, as we shall see in the next section, give the 
basis for the implementation of the semantics of 
the aspects. 
 
Fure(ti, tt, tr, RTtr, CBp, SAPp, PROCESS,  
        EXLti, EXLtt) ?  
 (AND(OR(SAME(ti, tt)) 
                   (PRECEDE(ti, tt))) 
            (SAME(tt, tr)) 
            (EQUAL(RTtr, specific)) 
            (OR(EQUAL(EXLti, included)) 
                   (EQUAL(EXLti, excluded))) 
            (OR(EQUAL(EXLtt, included)) 
                   (EQUAL(EXLtt, excluded)))       
            (AND(PRECEDE(ti, tt)) 
                      (OR(EQUAL(SAPp, state)) 
                             (EQUAL(SAPp, event)))) 
            (OR(NOT(EQUAL(PROCESS,  
                                            relational-process))) 
                   (AND(EQUAL(PROCESS,  
                                             relational-process))   
                             (EQUAL(CBp, change-of-  
                                             state)))) 
            (OR(EQUAL(CBp, not-change-of-state)) 
                   (AND(EQUAL(CBp, change-of- 
                                             state)) 
                             (EQUAL(SAPp, event))))) 
 
Figure 2 The ASF of the URE aspect  
V+?(V+le)  
 
4 The generation of the aspect expressions 
 
4.1  Inquiries, choosers, and the input  specifi- 
cations 
 
The present research uses the multilingual 
generator KPML as its implementation platform 
and takes Systemic Functional Grammar (SFG) 
as its theoretical basis. Fourteen primary simple 
aspects,  and twenty-six complex aspects are 
organized into a hierarchical system network. In 
a system network, grammatical units are 
constructed by corresponding traversals of that 
network. Each path through the network from the 
root to an end node corresponds to a specific 
language expression.  If we need to produce a 
specific expression, semantically appropriate 
choices need to be made so as to follow a path 
632
leading to the creation of that expression. The 
system is guided by the joint actions of the 
inquiries and choosers of the system (Fawcett, 
1987; Matthiessen and Bateman, 1991; Bateman, 
2000; Yang & Bateman, 2002). ?A chooser is 
straightforwardly represented as a ?decision tree? 
with a particular kind of inquiry, called a 
branching inquiry, forming the decision points? 
(Bateman 1997c, p.20). Inquiries are responsible 
for finding the answers required by choosers by 
accessing semantic information represented in 
input specifications, written in the form of the 
Sentence Plan Language (SPL) (Kasper, 1989; 
Bateman, 1997a), and in the knowledge base of 
the system.  
The semantics of an aspect associated with a 
sentence to be generated is represented in the 
input specification. The time points involved in 
the temporal structure of the aspect to be 
generated, i.e. the initial time, the terminating 
time, and the reference time(s), are presented 
with specific time values in the input 
specification. The speaking time has a default 
value corresponding to the present moment. All 
the parameters characterizing the conceptual 
features of the aspect to be generated are also 
included in the input specification.  
The implemented inquiries, written in LISP, 
play a crucial role in the generation of the aspect 
expressions. The implemented inquiries 
associated with different types of aspects 
formally define the semantic applicability 
conditions represented by the ASFs of the 
aspects. Each implemented inquiry has a set of 
parameters with specific values to represent 
temporal relations and conceptual features of a 
specific aspect. The inquiry is composed of a set 
of predicates which will have the value T when 
the conditions defined are satisfied. The truth 
condition of an inquiry will be met only when all 
the predicates involved have the value T. Hence, 
evaluating an implemented inquiry refers to the 
process of testing the truth conditions of all the 
predicates  involved in  the  inquiry according  to 
the semantic information represented in the 
corresponding input specification.  
In the implemented inquiries, two basic 
predicates PRECEDE(t1, t2) and SAME(t1, t2) are 
used to test temporal relations involved in the 
semantic applicability conditions of different 
aspects. In the generation, the parameters t1 and 
t2, are replaced with the values of the initial time 
ti, the terminating time tt, or the reference time tr, 
which are given in the input specifications. 
Logically, given a specific context, the 
precedence of two points can be determined in 
terms of concepts PAST, PRESENT, and 
FUTURE with reference to a relative deictic 
center. To evaluate the precedence between two 
time points,  nine different time values are 
defined on the time axis as shown in Figure 3. In 
Figure 3, the values at-past-present, at-present, 
and at-future-present correspond to three time 
points. The other six values correspond to 
specific intervals on the time axis. The time 
points within each interval are given a specific 
time value, as shown below, where ?-?? stands 
for the infinite past, and ?+?? stands for the 
infinite future: 
 
(-?, at-present) = at-past; 
(at-present, +?) = at-future; 
(-?, at-past-present) = at-past-past; 
(at-past-present, at-present) = at-past-future; 
(at-present, at-future-present) = at-future-past; 
(at-future-present, +?) = at-future-future. 
 
The nine qualitative time values defined above 
build a calculating system for time comparison in 
the present research. To generate a specific 
aspect, i.e., from semantics to the surface 
expression of the aspect, what we need to do is to 
distribute each time point involved in the 
temporal structure of the aspect with one of the 
qualitative time values and to establish 
appropriate temporal relations between them as 
to be illustrated in the next section.  
 
 
                                                    at-past                                at-future 
 
                      at-past-past            at-past-future             at-future-past            at-future-future 
 
 
                                    at-past-present              at-present             at-future-present 
 
Figure 3 Nine qualitative values of time on the time axis 
 
633
4.2 An example of generating the aspect 
expressions 
 
In this section we illustrate the generation 
process with an example. We focus on the 
generation of the aspect expressions and ignore 
the generation process for the other sentence 
constituents. Because of the limitation of input 
associated with relevant files in the 
implementation, we use numbers 1, 2, 3, and 4 to 
refer to the four tones of Chinese characters in all 
the realization statements. For instance, wang1, 
wang2, wang3, and wang4 refer to w?ng, w?ng, 
w?ng, and w?ng respectively. The neutral tone is 
not marked by numbers.  
In the present case, the semantics represented 
in the input specification is set for the situation 
that ?zhe4 sou1 chuan2 jin1tian1 zhuang1yun4 le 
yi1 liang4 you3 gu4zhang4 de ka3che1? (The 
ship loaded an inoperative truck today). The 
situation happened at a specific time today 
(jin1tian1) and was finished before the speaking 
time, i.e., the present moment. The situation 
refers to an event rather than a state. The process 
of loading the truck took a period of time; and 
the realization of the situation is focused. Our 
aim now is to generate an appropriate aspect 
expression for this particular loading situation by 
applying the semantic information represented in 
the input specification.  
The aspect-related semantic information in the 
input specification is as follows. Because the 
situation was finished before the present moment, 
we can consider that both the initial time ti and 
the terminating time tt precede the present 
moment. Because the situation took a period of 
time, the initial time ti is regarded as preceding 
the terminating time tt. Because the realization of 
the situation is focused, the reference time tr is 
considered as being located at the terminating 
time. Representing these temporal relations with 
our qualitative time values illustrated in Figure 3, 
we have the following: SPEAKINGTIME has 
the value at-present which is a default value. 
REFERENCETIME has the value at-past-future 
and is a specific time point. INITIALTIME, with 
respect to other relevant times, has the value at-
past-past, indicating the occurrence time of the 
situation. The value of TERMINATINGTIME 
equals that of REFERENCETIME, i.e. at-past-
future. This means that the state of the situation 
indicated by the aspect to be generated is viewed 
from the terminating time. Theoretically, the 
reference time of an aspect, i.e., the viewing 
point of the aspect, establishes specific temporal 
relations with the internal temporal constituency 
of the situation reflecting what the speaker 
focuses on when s/he views the state of a 
situation. In our present case, the reference time 
is placed at the terminating time of the situation, 
indicating that the speaker?s focus is on the 
termination or completion of the situation. If 
REFERENCE-TIME has other values, e.g., at-
present, which is after the terminating time, it 
indicates that the focus of the speaker is on either 
the recent past or experiential meaning of the 
situation, rather than on the termination  or 
completion of the situation. Correspondingly, 
they show temporal structures of different 
aspects. 
In the input specification, several parameters 
are also used to represent the conceptual features 
of the aspect. The conceptual features and the 
corresponding parameters define the space of 
possible aspect-related semantic variation: this 
shows precisely which facets of aspectual 
semantics are grammaticised in the language; the 
particular grammatical consequences are then 
distributed over the grammatical choice points 
defined in the grammatical component. When 
using this for generation, any given situation to 
be expressed must be ?re-conceptualized? in 
terms of parameters provided. This should be 
done by the user interested in investigating the 
grammatical realizations of distinct temporal 
relations. The parameter CHANGEABLITY has 
the value change-of-state, indicating the 
completion of  the situation. The value of the 
parameter STATE-ACTION-PROPERTY is 
event, indicating that the situation is not of type 
state and can be viewed as a whole. Both the 
parameter EXCLUSIVENESS-TI and the 
parameter EXCLUSIVENESS-TT have the value 
included, indicating that the time interval over 
which the situation holds is closed at its two end 
points. This means that the situation occurred at 
some specific time and finished. The parameter 
REPEATABILITY has the value irrelevant, 
indicating not being related to any particular 
conceptual feature. 
Referring to the semantics above, we follow 
the system traversal to generate an aspect 
expression by evaluating the relevant inquiries. 
The traversal starts from the system of WITH-
ASPECT-MARKER-TYPE and needs to make a 
choice among its three options: imperfective, 
perfective, and imminent. Corresponding to the 
definition of aspect in the present research, 
perfective, imperfective, and imminent aspects 
are interpreted in the following ways: perfective 
634
is the way of viewing the states of a situation 
with respect to its internal temporal constituency 
from outside the situation structure: the viewing 
point of the aspect is after or equal to the 
terminating time, i.e., tt?tr; imperfective is the 
way of viewing the states of a situation with 
respect to its internal temporal constituency 
inside the situation structure: the viewing point 
of the aspect ranges from the initial time, 
including the initial time, to the terminating time 
of the situation, i.e., ti?tr<tt; imminent is the way 
of viewing the occurrence of a situation from 
outside the situation structure and with the 
viewing point shortly before the initial time of 
the situation, i.e., tr<ti and Ptr-ti=shortly-precede. 
The temporal relations of the perfective,  
imperfective, and imminent aspects are captured 
by specifying appropriate values for the inquiries 
named perfective-q-code, imperfective-q-code, 
and imminent-q-code respectively. When 
operating within the context of a full generation 
system, these values would generally be 
provided via the results of text planning in the 
usual manner.  
The with-aspect-marker-type chooser, 
which takes the form of a decision tree as 
described in section 4.1, is in charge of 
making the selection by asking relevant 
inquiries to see what type of aspect has the 
semantic applicability conditions which 
match the semantic inputs represented in the 
input specification. The fine classification 
and distinct semantic descriptions of 
different aspects are sufficient to constrain 
choice regardless of their particular order of 
application. Therefore, alternative 
implementations of the choosers, such as 
specifications of feature vectors, could be 
envisioned. Possible consequences of such 
changes for the other components of the 
generation architecture would then need to 
be considered, however. Because in the 
present case both the terminating time tt and 
the reference time tr have the value at-past-
future that meets the temporal condition 
required by the perfective aspects, the option 
perfective is chosen and the system of 
PERFECTIVE-PRIMARY-TYPE is entered. 
After entering the system of PERFECTIVE-
PRIMARY-TYPE, a selection among three 
options recent-past (the REP aspect 
V+(NP)+lai2zhe), experiential (the unmarked-
experiential aspect V+guo and the marked-
experiential aspect ceng2jing1+V+(guo)), and 
realized (the URE aspect V+le and the perfect 
aspect yi3jing+V+(le)) has to be made. The 
perfective-primary-type chooser is responsible 
for making this choice. Accordingly, the chooser 
firstly evaluates the inquiries named recent-past-
q-code and experiential-q-code respectively. The 
recent-past (REP) aspect V+(NP)+lai2zhe serves 
to indicate that a durative situation existed not 
long ago. The semantic applicability conditions 
represented by the ASF of the REP aspect 
V+(NP)+lai2zhe include the following: the 
situation expressed by the aspect shows the 
feature durative which can be represented in the 
temporal relation ti<tt; the terminating time of the 
situation precedes the reference time, i.e., tt<tr; 
and the reference time tr is a specific time point. 
A further condition required is represented by the 
parameter Ptt-tr with the value shortly-precede, 
indicating the qualitative distance from tt to tr. 
The parameter EXL has the value excluded and 
included for the initial time ti and the terminating 
time tt respectively.  
After evaluating the inquiry of recent-past-q-
code, the perfective-primary-type chooser gives a 
negative result, indicating that the semantics 
presented by the input specification does not 
match the semantic applicability conditions of 
the REP aspect. One obvious mismatch is 
reflected in the temporal relation between the 
terminating time tt and the reference time tr. The 
condition given by the input specification is tt=tr, 
while the condition required by the REP aspect is 
tt<tr.   
After failing to select the REP aspect, the 
perfective-primary-type chooser continues to 
evaluate the inquiry associated with the 
experiential aspects. The experiential aspects 
include the unmarked-experiential (UEX) aspect 
V+guo and the marked-experiential (MEX) 
aspect ceng2jing1+V+(guo). Although the two 
experiential aspects have some differences in 
usage (cf. Yang, 2007), they have the same 
aspectual function to indicate that a situation 
existed at least once in the past and was over, not 
having current relevance. The semantic 
applicability conditions shared by the two 
experiential aspects are: the terminating time tt 
precedes the reference time tr; the situation 
referred to has the feature repeatable; the 
parameter EXLti has the value either excluded or 
included;  the parameter EXLtt has the value 
included.  
Similarly to the failure of selecting the REP 
aspect elaborated above, the evaluation of the 
635
inquiry of experiential-q-code will also fail 
because the semantic applicability conditions of 
the experiential aspects do not meet the semantic 
information shown in the input specification. 
Except for the mismatch of the temporal 
relations, the conceptual feature repeatable 
required by the experiential aspects is also absent 
in the input specification.  
When both the REP aspect and the 
experiential aspects have been excluded, the 
perfective-primary-type chooser selects aspects 
of realized type, and then the traversal enters the 
system of REALIZED-TYE, then a further 
selection between the URE aspect V+le and the 
PEF aspect yi3jing+V+(le) has to be made. The 
realized-type chooser is responsible for making 
this selection. To make the selection, the 
realized-type chooser firstly evaluates the inquiry 
unmarked-realized-q-code to check whether the 
semantic applicability conditions of the URE 
aspect V+le can be met. The inquiry unmarked-
realized-q-code is defined according to the ASF 
of the URE aspect as shown in Figure 2. The 
realized-type chooser evaluates the inquiry 
unmarked-realized-q-code by comparing the 
input semantics with the semantic applicability 
conditions of the URE aspect. The evaluation of 
the unmarked-realized inquiry succeeds because 
all the predicates of the unmarked-realized-q-
code give the value T (Due to the space limit, we 
will not describe the whole process of evaluation 
in detail here). Hence, according to the algorithm 
of the realized-type chooser, the URE aspect 
V+le should be chosen and the perfect-q-code 
does not need to be evaluated. The generated 
sentence, marked up to show its constituency, is 
then as follows: 
 
((zhe4/?)(sou1/?)(chuan2/?)) ((jin1tian1/??)) 
      this           CL           ship                  today                
(zhuang1yun4/??) (le/?) ((yi1/?) (liang4/?) 
              load              URE        one           CL         
((you3 gu4zhang4/???)(de/?)) 
          have    problem             of        
(ka3che1/??.))    
         truck 
(The ship loaded an inoperative truck today.) 
 
5  Conclusion 
 
With the method elaborated above, a test-bed of 
forty aspect expressions of the Chinese aspect 
system has been correctly generated in the forms 
of both Chinese phonetic alphabet and characters. 
In the present research the application of the 
ASFs provides a formal way to represent 
semantic applicability conditions of the aspects; 
the grammatical network built on the basis of 
systemic functional grammar systematically 
organizes and distinguishes semantic functions 
of different aspects. The computational 
implementation verifies both grammatical 
organization and semantic descriptions of the 
Chinese aspects. The complete system files  and 
the sentences generated are available on the 
website: ?http://www.fb10.uni- 
bremen.de/anglistik/langpro/kpml/
genbank/chinese.htm?. 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
We thank Peter Lang Publisher for allowing us to 
use the relevant contents of the book (Yang, 
2007) in this article. We also thank the 
anonymous reviewers for their valuable 
comments and revision suggestions for the 
manuscript. 
                  
References 
 
Allen, J.F. (1984) Towards a General Theory of 
Action and Time, Artificial Intelligence, 1984, 23, 
p.123-154 
Bateman, J.A. 1997a. Enabling technology for 
multilingual natural language generation: the 
KPML development. Natural Language 
Engineering, 3(1), pp.15-55.  
Bateman, J.A. 1997b. KPML Development 
Environment: multilingual linguistic resource  
development and sentence generation. (Release 
1.1). GMD-Studie Number 304. German National 
Center for Information Technology (GMD), Sankt 
Augustin, Germany. 
Bateman, J.A. 1997c. Sentence generation and 
systemic grammar: an introduction. English draft 
written for: Iwanami Lecture Series: Language 
Sciences, Volume 8. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten 
Publisher (in Japanese). 
Bateman, J.A. 2000. Multilinguality and 
multifunctionality in linguistic description and 
some possible applications. Sprachtypol. Univ. 
Forsch. (STUF), Berlin 53 (2000) 2, pp.131-154. 
Bestougeff, H. and G. Ligozat. Translator: I.D. 
Alexander-Craig. 1992. Logical Tools for 
Temporal Knowledge Representation. Ellis 
Horwood Limited. England. 
Comrie, Bernard. 1976. Aspect.  Cambridge, England: 
Cambridge University Press. 
636
Dai, Yaojing. 1997. ?????????? (The 
Study of Chinese Aspect). Zhejiang Education 
Press. 
Dowty, David R. 1979. Word Meaning and Montague 
Grammar. Dordrecht: Reidel.  
Fawcett, R.P. 1987. System networks in the lexical-
grammar. In Halliday, M.A.K., and Fawcett, R.P. 
(eds.) New developments in systemic linguistics Vol 
1: Theory and description. London: Pinter.   
Halliday, M.A.K. 1994 (second edition of 1985). An 
Introduction to Functional Grammar (second 
edition). London: Edward Arnold.  
Kasper, Robert T. 1989. A flexible interface for 
linking applications to PENMAN?s sentence 
generator. In Proceedings of the DARPA Workshop 
on Speech and Natural Languages. Available from 
USC/Information Sciences Institute, Marina del 
Rey, CA.  
Lee, Hsi-Jian and Hsu, Ren-Rong. 1990. An ERS 
model for tense and aspect information in Chinese 
sentences. In Proceedings of ROCLING III, R.O.C. 
Computational Linguistics Conference III. Taipei: 
Tsing Hua University. pp.213-234. 
Li, Wenjie, Kam-Fai Wong, and Chunfa Yuan. 2001. 
A model for processing temporal references in 
Chinese. In Proceedings of ACL?2001 Workshop 
on Temporal and Spatial  Information Processing, 
Toulouse, France. pp.33-40. 
Matthiessen, M.I.M. and Bateman, J.A. 1991. Text 
generation and Systemic-Functional Linguistics, 
Experiences from English and Japanese. Pinter 
Publishers, London. 
Montague, R. 1970. English as a formal language. In 
Richmond H. Thomason (ed.) 1974. Formal 
Philosophy, Selected Paper of Richard Montague. 
Yale University Press. New Haven and London. 
pp.188-221. 
Olsen, Mari B. 1997. A Semantic and Pragmatic 
Model of Lexical and Grammatical Aspect. 
Garland Publishing, Inc. 
Portner, P. and B.H. Partee. 2002. Formal Semantics. 
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 
Smith, C.S. 1997 (second edition of 1991). The 
Parameter of Aspect. Kluwer Academic Publishers.  
Vendler, Zeno. 1967. Linguistics in Philosophy. 
Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
Xue, Nianwen. 2008. Automatic inference of the 
temporal location of situations in Chinese text. In 
Proceedings of EMNLP-2008. Waikiki, Honolulu, 
Hawaii. 
Xue, Nianwen, Hua Zhong, and Kai-Yun Chen. 2008. 
Annotating ?tense? in a tense-less language. In 
Proceedings of LREC 2008. Marrakesh. Morocco.  
Yang, Guowen and J.A. Bateman. 2002. The Chinese 
aspect system and its semantic interpretation. In 
Shu-Chuan Tseng (ed.) Proceedings of the 19th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING-2002). August 26-30, Taipei. 
ISBN 1-55860-894-X, Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers, Vol. 2, pp. 1128-1134. 
Yang, Guowen 2007 The Semantics of Chinese 
Aspects ? Theoretical Descriptions and a 
Computational  Implementation. Peter Lang. 
Frankfurt am Main. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
637
The Chinese Aspect System and its Semantic Interpretation  
Guowen Yang and  John A. Bateman 
FB10, Sprach und Literaturwissenschaften 
Bremen University, 28334 Germany 
gwyang@uni-bremen.de  bateman@uni-bremen.de 
 
Abstract: Motivated by a systematic 
representation of the Chinese aspect forms 
that explores their intrinsic semantics and 
temporal logical relations, we are constructing 
a Chinese aspect system network based on 
systemic functional grammar and 
implemented using the multilingual generator 
KPML. In this paper, we introduce the basic 
simple primary aspect forms and a set of 
secondary types of the unmarked-durative 
aspect in our Chinese aspect system, describe 
the semantic temporal relations of complex 
aspect in terms of temporal logic theories, and 
propose principled semantic conditions for 
aspect combination. Finally, we give a brief 
explanation of the system implementation.  
1.  Motivation 
Chinese aspect is a traditional area of research 
that has always brought up questions and 
confusion for both theoretical and 
computational linguists. Our own practical 
motivation for  exploring  this area addresses 
two concerns. First, most existing research 
achievements in Chinese aspect have 
interpreted the semantics of Chinese aspect in 
intuitive and general terms rather than in 
terms of temporal logic theories1; the latter is 
however crucial for computational imple-
mentation. Second, Chinese linguists 
traditionally focus their attention on simple 
primary aspect (simple aspect) forms, but 
make no efforts either theoretically or 
computationally to deal with the large variety 
of complex aspects. Although the frequency 
of appearance of complex aspects is not as 
high as that of simple primary aspect types, 
they nevertheless play an important role in the 
Chinese aspect system and cannot be ignored. 
To meet these problems, we are constructing 
a  complete  Chinese  aspect  system in which  
                                                 
1 Exception to this are Smith (1991) and Dai Y-J 
(1997) who have investigated Chinese aspect in 
terms of temporal logic theories. Their studies 
have focused particularly on simple aspect forms 
however. 
all aspect expressions, including both simple 
primary aspect forms and complex aspect 
forms,  are systematically organized. We are 
implementing the system using the KPML 
multilingual generator (Bateman, 1997), 
interpreting the intrinsic semantics of each 
aspect  form   in  terms  of  existing   temporal 
logic  theories. In  this  paper  we  focus on 
the generation of complex aspect.  
2.  The overview of Chinese  
complex aspect 
Both Chinese and English have complex 
aspect forms. Halliday (1976) describes forty 
eight possible forms of English tense and 
elaborates the ways in which the complex 
tense forms are combined. In Halliday?s tense 
theory, the complex tense forms of English 
are recursively built up from primary tense to 
secondary tense, to tertiary tense, etc. 
Compared with English, the Chinese aspect 
system 2  is rather different. In the Chinese 
aspect system, the combination of individual 
aspects is much more semantically restricted 
and much less grammatically regular than that 
in English.  As a consequence, it gives rise to 
more difficulties in both theoretical 
explanation and practical implementation.   
We look into the details of this below. 
We propose that the Chinese aspect system 
has basically seventeen simple primary aspect 
forms3. They are shown diagrammatically in 
Figure 1. 
                                                 
2  Chinese has no morphological tense markers. 
Tense in Chinese is realized lexically. 
3 It is our opinion that the Chinese aspect system 
is actually composed of both aspect morphemes   
(-le, -zhe, -guo4, etc.) and aspect adverbials (Yang, 
1999, 2001). 
 
              name              form               name               form 
unmarked-perfect ??(yi3jing1)+V+?(le) unmarked-realized V+?(le) 
marked-perfect ??(yi3jing1)+V 
unmarked-remote-
experiential 
??(ceng2jing1)+V+?(guo) unmarked-
experiential 
V+?(guo) 
marked-remote-
experiential  
??(ceng2jing1)+V 
recent-past-existing V+ (N) + ??
(lai2zhe) 
unmarked-durative V+?(zhe) 
activity-durative ?(zai4)+V long-durative ??(yi1zhi2)+V 
activity-progressive ??(zheng4zai4)+V unmarked-
progressive 
?(zheng4)+V 
start-and-continue V+??(qi3lai2) continue-to-future V+??(xia4qu4) 
written-imminent-
future-existing 
??/??
(jiang1yao4/ji2jiang1) 
+V 
unmarked-future-
existing 
?(jiang1)+V 
spoken-imminent-
future-existing 
??/?(jiu4yao4/kuai4)+V 
Figure 1. The simple primary aspect forms 
 
                         name & form                                example 
long-and-unmarked-durative 
??(yi1zhi2)+V+?(zhe) 
?????????? 
nuo4ke4si1 hao4 yi1zhi2 hang2xing2 zhe 
(The Knox has been sailing all along.) 
marked-remote-experiential-unmarked-
durative 
??(ceng2jing1)+V+?(zhe) 
??????????? 
na4 fu2 hua4 ceng2jing1 zai4 zhe4er gua4 zhe 
(That picture was once hanging here.) 
recent-past-existing-unmarked-durative 
V+?(zhe)+??(lai2zhe) 
????????????? 
na4 fu2 hu4 gang1cai2 zai4 zhe4er gua4 zhe lai2zhe   
(That picture was hanging here just now.) 
unmarked-realized-unmarked-durative 
V+?(zhe)+?(le) 
????????????? 
ming2tian1 na4 fu2 hua4 jiu4 zai4 zhe4er gua4 zhe le  
(That picture  will be hanging here from tomorrow.) 
unmarked-perfect-unmarked-durative 
??(yi3jing1)+V+?(zhe)+?(le) 
?????????????? 
na4 fu2 hua4 xian4zai4 yi3jing1 zai4 zhe4er gua4 zhe le 
(That picture is already hanging here now.) 
unmarked-future-existing-unmarked-durative 
?(jiang1)+V+?(zhe) 
???????????? 
ming2tian1 na4 fu2 hua4 jiang1 zai4 zhe4er gua4 zhe  
(That picture will be hanging here tomorrow.) 
unmarked-progressive-unmarked-durative 
?(zheng4)+V+?(zhe) 
???????????? 
na4 fu2 hua4 xian4zai4 zheng4 zai4 zhe4er gua4 zhe  
(That picture is hanging here now.) 
Figure 2. The secondary types of unmarked-durative aspect 
The ?V? in the aspect forms denotes ?verb?; 
the ?/? shows disjunction; the name of each 
individual aspect was  chosen based on its 
intuitive semantic function. The unmarked-
perfect aspect ??+V+? (yi3jing1+V+le) is 
regarded as a simple aspect because it has the 
same function as the marked-perfect aspect  
? ? +V (yi3jing1+V). They differ only 
lexically. The situation is the same for the 
unmarked-remote-experiential aspect ? ?
+V+? (ceng2jing1+V+guo) and the marked-
remote-experiential aspect ?? +V (ceng2 
 jing1+V). The seventeen simple primary 
aspect forms belong to the three subsystems 
of perfective, imperfective (Comrie, 1976) or 
future-existing 4  according to the semantic 
properties in individual cases. Some simple 
primary aspect forms can combine to form 
various kinds of complex aspect. We call a 
combination involving two types of simple 
primary aspect an aspect of secondary type; 
the combination with three types of simple 
primary aspect  is an aspect of tertiary type. 
By analogy, we also have an aspect of 
quaternary type; this is the maximum 
possibility: no further types are attested (Yang, 
1999, 2001). The combination capacities of 
different simple primary aspect forms differ. 
For example, the simple primary aspect 
unmarked-durative V+ ?  (V+zhe), which 
belongs to the subsystem of  imperfective, 
combines with several other types of simple 
primary aspect to construct complex  aspect 
forms as shown in Figure 2. Some simple 
primary aspect forms, e.g. the simple primary 
aspect unmarked-experiential V+? (V+guo), 
have a very restricted capacity to combine 
with other simple aspect forms  to build 
complex aspect forms. 
 
3.  The semantic interpretation of 
Chinese complex aspect 
We briefly look into the profile of tense, 
aspect, and situation type, before examining 
closely the semantic temporal relations of 
complex aspect forms. We adopt Comrie?s 
theoretical framework of tense and aspect.   
?As far as tense is concerned, then, the 
reference point is typically the present 
moment, and tenses locate situations either at 
the same time as the present moment, or prior 
to the present moment, or subsequent to the 
present moment?? (Comrie, 1985, p.14). 
?Aspects are different ways of viewing the 
                                                 
4 It is controversial whether to include ?futurity? 
within the aspect category. We favor Halliday?s 
tense theory (Halliday, 1976). We also agree with 
Bache?s viewpoint ?it seems to me not only 
convenient but also legitimate to accept future 
TEMPORALITY as a genuine member of the 
metacategory of tense? (Bache, 1995, p. 266). 
Compatible claims are also made by Dahl (Dahl, 
1985, p.102-112). Also see Gong Q-Y (1995). 
 
internal temporal constituency of a situation?. 
(Comrie, 1976, p.3) Aspect is determined by 
the type of process 5  (in terms of systemic 
linguistics), the type of object, and the 
specific allocation of event initial time, 
speaking time and  reference time. The 
aspectual properties of different kinds of 
event may be generalized in terms of 
Vendler?s four situation types: states, 
activities, accomplishments, and achieve-
ments (Vendler, 1967). Situation types have 
nothing to do with the referential time of the 
event and are influenced only by process, 
object, and the time point or time interval 
over which the event holds. 
We define several predicates to be used to 
express temporal relations based on and 
slightly altering those of Allen (1984). The 
important ones are: 
PRECEDE(t1, t2) ? (t1<t2) 
SAME(t1, t2) ? (t1=t2) 
FAR-PRECEDE(t1, t2) ? (t1?t2) 
SHORTLY-PRECEDE(t1, t2) ? (t1^t2) 
NEARLY-EQUAL(t1, t2) ? (t1?t2) 
The predicates PRECEDE(t1, t2) and 
SAME(t1, t2) correspond to Allen?s predicates 
BEFORE(t1, t2) and EQUAL(t1, t2) respec-
tively. The difference between Allen?s predi-
cates and ours is that we use time points for 
definitions rather than time intervals.  The 
reason for this slight change is that when the 
system is going to generate an aspect 
expression, either a simple aspect or a 
complex aspect, the breakdown into the 
relevant time points is often needed.  
The predicate PRECEDE(t1, t2) indicates that 
the time point t1 precedes the time point t2 on 
the time axis. The predicate SAME(t1, t2) 
indicates that the time point t1 equals the time 
point t2 on the time axis. Three additional 
predicates are defined to meet the particular 
needs of expressing the temporal relations 
entailed by Chinese aspects. The predicate 
FAR-PRECEDE(t1, t2) indicates that the time 
point t1 precedes the time point t2 con-
siderably on the time axis. The predicate 
SHORTLY-PRECEDE(t1, t2) indicates that 
                                                 
5  ?A process consists potentially of three 
components: (i) the process itself; (ii) participants 
in the process; (iii) circumstances associated with 
the process.? (Halliday, 1985, p.101) 
 the time point t1 only shortly precedes the 
time point t2. The predicate NEARLY-
EQUAL(t1, t2) indicates that the time point t1 
lies close to the time point t2. We define ti, tf6, 
tr, and ts as the event initial time, the event 
finishing time, the reference time, and the 
speaking time respectively. 
From a theoretical point of view, to generate 
complex aspect forms not only must the 
temporal relations of individual  aspect forms 
and the complex aspect forms be correctly 
represented, but the semantic requirements for 
the combination must also be met. What 
determines the combining possibility between 
different  aspect forms is their  own intrinsic 
logical temporal attributes. When the intrinsic 
logical temporal attributes of each aspect type 
are in harmony, the two aspect forms can 
combine; otherwise they cannot. We have 
observed the following principled conditions 
for this. First, it is feasible to express the 
process in each individual aspect form before 
the combination is made. Second, each 
individual aspect form has its own semantic 
function which is different from that of others. 
Third, in a specific situation, when two 
different aspect forms combine, the reference 
time points of each aspect type may move 
according to the temporal attributes of the 
combined aspect?however, no matter how 
reference time points change, the event initial 
time must remain unique, i.e. there must only 
be a single event initial time to which the 
complex aspect refers. If there is any conflict 
over this, the two aspects are incompatible 
with each other  and the combination cannot 
be made. Finally, the combination must be in 
a proper order. This means that the selection 
of the aspect which is to serve as primary 
aspect has important consequences. We take 
two complex aspect forms as examples to 
illustrate these points. 
The first example is the secondary aspect  
long-and-unmarked-durative ? ? +V+ ?
(yi1zhi2+V+zhe). The combination is com-
posed of two simple primary aspect forms: 
the unmarked-durative aspect V+?(V+zhe) 
                                                 
6 The tf here not only refers to the event intrinsic 
terminating point, which  an event of accomplish-
ment situation type usually has, but it also refers to 
the time point at which an event of other situation 
types  is terminated by some kind of outside force. 
(UDR) and the long-durative aspect ??+V 
(yi1zhi2+V) (LDR). Examples 1, 2 and 3 
illustrate the two simple primary aspect forms 
and the complex aspect respectively.                                      
1 ??? ? ?? ? 
 nuo4ke4si1 hao4 hang2xin2 zhe 
 the Knox number sail UDR 
     (The Knox is sailing.) 
The simple primary aspect of unmarked-
durative is realized lexically by the marker 
? ? (zhe)?. The unmarked-durative aspect 
indicates either a dynamic or static durative 
state of the situation; it means that the 
situation begins before the reference time and  
is continuing at the reference time point. The 
temporal relations of the unmarked-durative 
aspect V+? (V+zhe) are: ti<tr and tr<tf. We 
presume further  here, for present purpose, 
that tr=ts. Both ti and tf are unspecific time 
points: ti can be any time point before tr, and tf 
can be any time point after tr. This is 
represented graphically in Figure 3. 
 
               ti                   tr=ts,             tf 
Figure 3. The temporal relations of the unmarked-
durative aspect V+? (V+zhe) 
 
2  ??? ? ?? ?? 
 nuo4ke4si1 hao4 yi1zhi2 hang2xing2 
 the Knox number LDR sail 
 (The Knox kept sailing until now.) 
The simple primary aspect long-durative, 
which is realized lexically by the marker ??
? (yi1zhi2)?, indicates a relatively long 
durative state of the situation; it means that 
the process holds over a relatively long time 
duration from the event initial time to the 
event finishing time and that the event 
finishing time equals the reference time. The 
temporal relations of the long-durative aspect 
??+V (yi1zhi2+V) are: ti?tf, and tr=tf=ts.  
This is represented graphically in Figure 4. 
The dotted line denotes the long duration. 
 
 
 
  
          ti                                                 tr=ts=tf                                                     
Figure 4. The temporal relations of the long-
durative aspect ??+V (yi1zhi2+V) 
3  ??? ? ?? 
 nuo4ke4si1 hao4 yi1zhi2 
 the Knox number LDR 
 ?? ?  
 hang2xing2 zhe  
 sail UDR  
    (The Knox has been sailing all along.)
In example 3, because the event initial time ti 
of the unmarked-durative aspect V+? (V+ 
zhe) precedes the reference time point and it 
is an unfixed time point which can at any 
point precede the reference time, it can also 
be identical to the event initial time of the 
long-durative aspect ?? +V (yi1zhi2+V). 
The two individual aspect forms can share a 
unique event initial time so that a specific 
framework of temporal relations for the 
complex aspect can be established. In this 
case, we say that the two individual aspect 
forms are compatible; the combination can be 
made. The complex aspect indicates a long 
existing and continuing state of affairs with 
respect to the reference time. The temporal 
relations of the long-and-unmarked-durative 
??+V+? (yi1zhi2+V+zhe) are then: ti?tr, 
tr=ts and tr<tf. This is represented graphically 
in Figure 5. 
 
 
        ti                           tr=ts               tf   
Figure 5. The temporal relations of the complex 
aspect long-and-unmarked-durative ??+V+? 
Comparing Figure 5 with Figure 3 and Figure 
4, we can see that for the unmarked-durative 
aspect V+? (V+zhe), the event initial time 
after the combination  comes to ?far precede? 
the reference time. For the long-durative 
aspect ? ? +V (yi1zhi2+V), the event 
finishing time does not equal the reference 
time any more, which means that the situation 
is continuing.  
The simple aspect forms differ in terms of 
how restricted they are in their usage with 
particular situation types or process types. In 
the design of the system network, it is 
necessary to arrange the logical dependencies 
such that less restricted aspect forms are made 
dependent on more restricted aspect forms. 
This avoids potentially incompatible logical 
conditions being required. For example, 
compared with other simple primary aspect 
forms, the unmarked-durative aspect V+? 
(V+zhe) (Figure 3) has more restricted 
requirements in its usage, therefore, it should 
be selected first; then it combines with the 
long-durative aspect ??+V (yi1zhi2+V) to 
form the complex aspect long-and-unmarked-
durative ??+V+? (yi1zhi2+V+zhe). 
The secondary aspect long-and-unmarked-
durative ?? +V+? (yi1zhi2+V+zhe) can 
further combine with another primary aspect, 
e.g. the unmarked-future-existing aspect 
(UFT) which is realized lexically by ?
(jiang1), to form a tertiary aspect type: ?+?
?+V+? (jiang1+yi1zhi2+V+zhe). We take 
this as another example to illustrate the aspect 
combining conditions; see  example 4 below.   
4.   ???            ?          ?          ?? 
    nuo4ke4si1      hao4      jiang1    yi4zhi2      
     the Knox       number   UFT         LDR      
         ??                    ? 
      hang2xing2           zhe 
           sail                  UDR 
    (The Knox will keep sailing all along.) 
The unmarked-future-existing aspect ? +V 
(jiang1+V) means that the process will hold 
sometime in the future. The temporal 
relations of the unmarked-future-existing 
aspect are: tr<ti, (ti<tf or ti?tf). In example 4, 
the temporal relation between ti and tf is ti<tf 
but not ti?tf which corresponds to an 
achievement situation. This is represented 
graphically in Figure 6. 
 
 
             tr=ts          ti                                tf 
Figure 6. The temporal relations of the unmarked-
future-existing aspect ?+V (jiang1+V) 
When any aspect form combines with the 
unmarked-future-existing aspect, its own 
internal temporal relations as a whole will not 
be modified. The only change is that the event 
initial time may move. So when the long-and-
unmarked-durative aspect ??+V+?  (yi1 
 zhi2+V+zhe) combines with the unmarked-
future-existing aspect ?+V (jiang1+V), the 
temporal relations of the long-and-unmarked-
durative aspect ??+V+? (yi1zhi2+V+zhe) 
(Figure 5) become:  ts<ti,  ti?tr, and tr<tf. This 
is represented graphically in Figure 7.  
 
 
           ts             ti                     tr                tf 
Figure 7. The temporal relations of the long-and-
unmarked-durative aspect 
Compared with Figure 5, we can see that the 
reference time of the long-durative-
unmarked-durative aspect ?? +V+? (yi1 
zhi2+V+zhe) has moved, from tr=ts to ts<tr,  
and the event initial time correspondingly 
changes from ti<ts to   ts<ti.  
Because the event initial time ti, which is 
inherited from the long-and-unmarked-
durative aspect ??+V+? (yi1zhi2+V+zhe), 
is unique, and the reference time tr equals the 
speaking time ts, the tertiary aspect ?+??
+V+ ? (jiang1+yi1zhi2+V+zhe) has the 
following temporal relations:  ti?tf and tr<ti 
and tr=ts. This is represented graphically in 
Figure 8.                                                     
 
             tr=ts       ti                                    tf                                                             
Figure 8. The temporal relations of the tertiary 
aspect unmarked-future-existing-long-durative-
unmarked-durative ?+??+V+? 
(jiang1+yi1zhi2+V+zhe) 
We can see from Figure 8 that although the 
viewpoint of the situation changes after the 
combination,  a unique event initial time can 
nevertheless be established. The event initial 
time of the long-and-unmarked-durative 
aspect  ??+V+?  (yi1zhi2+V+zhe) still 
functions in the complex aspect. 
Now let us look into one further example to 
see the situation when two aspect forms 
cannot combine. The simple primary aspect 
long-durative ??+V (yi1zhi2+V) and the 
simple primary aspect activity-progressive 
(APG), which is lexically realized by the 
marker ??(zheng4zai4), are not compatible. 
The two aspect forms cannot combine. 
Example 5 is unacceptable.  
5.  * ???             ?          ?? 
      nuo4ke4si1       hao4      yi1zhi2 
      the Knox       number    LDR 
           ??                       ?? 
        zheng4zai4            hang2xing2 
           APG                        sail 
    (* The Knox has been being sailing all   
along.) 
The activity-progressive aspect ? ? +V 
(zheng4zai4+V) indicates a dynamic pro-
gressive state of the situation holding since a 
specific time point (event initial time ti). Its 
temporal relations are: ti=tr and ti<tf. This is 
represented graphically in Figure 9. 
 
              ti=tr=ts                          tf                                                     
Figure 9. The temporal relations of  the unmarked-
progressive aspect ??+V (zheng4zai4+V) 
Comparing the temporal relations of the long-
durative aspect ? ? +V (yi1zhi2+V) in 
Figure 4 with the temporal relations of 
activity-progressive aspect ??+V (zheng4 
zai4+V) in Figure 9, we can see that the two 
aspect forms have obviously different event 
initial time points. One has an event initial 
time which precedes the reference time;  
another has an event initial time which equals 
the reference time. A unique event initial time 
cannot be found. Therefore the two types of 
aspect  are incompatible and cannot combine.  
4. The implementation of the system 
To generate a specific aspect expression, 
temporal relations as described in the last 
section must be taken. Semantic inputs 
representing the temporal relations are a set of 
time points ti, tf, tr, and ts. Each of the time 
points is expressed in a specific concept, 
which could correspond to a specific time 
value,  showing its relative position on the 
time axis; e.g. at-past, at-present, or at-future. 
The semantic inputs are represented in the 
form of a set of examples making up a test-
suite. Using the predicates described in 
section 3, appropriate temporal relations can 
be automatically built by the system. Then the 
system traverses a grammar network and 
chooses appropriate grammatical features by 
use of relevant inquiries and choosers  
(Matthiessen & Bateman, 1991, Teich & 
 Henschel, 1991). The main function of 
choosers is to guide traversal of the grammar 
and choose grammatical features by asking 
the relevant inquiries and testing all the 
required conditions  that they give. An inquiry 
contains a set of conditions to test whether the 
given inputs meet some set of semantic 
requirements. For example, the inquiry used 
to test the unmarked-durative aspect V+? 
(V+zhe) contains the following conditions: ti 
precedes tr, tr precedes tf, tr same as ts, the 
process is not of intensive-relational type with 
verbs like ?  (shi4, be) or adjectives 
describing properties, and not of possessive 
type with verb  ?  (you3, have). Once a 
feature is chosen, realization rules attached to 
the feature place constraints on lexical 
selection and syntactic structure. Following 
traversal of the grammar the combined lexical 
and grammatical constraints are resolved in 
order to give the final lexicalized grammatical 
structure.  
                        5. Conclusion 
In this paper, we have introduced the basic 
simple primary aspect forms and a set of 
secondary types of the unmarked-durative 
aspect V+? (V+zhe) in our Chinese aspect 
system, described the semantic temporal 
relations of complex aspect forms in terms of 
temporal logic theories, and proposed 
principled semantic conditions required for 
aspect combination. In respect of aspect, 
English and Chinese are semantically rather 
different. As future work we are now 
investigating potential applications of our 
description in several areas. In addition to the 
generation of Chinese texts per se, we are also 
considering the use of multilingual generation 
in, for example, contrastive reference 
grammars, and language teaching. 
                                References 
Allen, J.F. (1984) Towards a General Theory of 
Action and Time, Artificial Intelligence, 1984, 
23, p.123-154 
Bache, C. (1995) The Study of Aspect, Tense and 
Action: Towards a Theory of the Semantics of 
Grammatical Categories.  Frankfurt/M.: Lang. 
Bateman, J.A. (1997) Enabling technology for 
multilingual natural language generation: the 
KPML development environment, Natural 
Language Engineering, 3(1), p.15-55      
Comrie, B. (1976) Aspect, Cambridge, England: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Comrie, B. (1985) Tense, Cambridge, England: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Dahl, ?. (1985) Tense and Aspect Systems, Oxford: 
Blackwell. 
Dai, Y-J. (1997) ???????? (A Study of 
Chinese Aspect), Zhejiang Education Publisher.  
Gong, Q-Y. (1995) ??????????? 
(Phase, Tense and Aspect in Chinese), Beijing: 
Commercial Press. 
Halliday, M.A.K. (1976) System and Function in 
Language, Oxford University press. 
Halliday, M.A.K. (1985, first edition) (1994, 
second adition) An Introduction to Functional 
Grammar, Edward Arnold, London. 
Matthiessen, M.I.M. & Bateman, John A. (1991) 
Text Generation and Systemic-Functional 
Linguistics, Pinter Publishers, London 
Smith, C.S. (1991) The Parameter of Aspect, 
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic. 
Teich, E. & Henschel, R. (1991) Aspect choice in 
a fragment of a systemic grammar of Russian, 
GMD-IPSI, Germany. 
Vendler, Z. (1967) Linguistics in Philosophy, 
Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
Yang, G-W. (1999) ????????????
?????????? (The semantic relation 
types of complex aspect and the directional 
requirements in  generation), in Proceedings of 
the 5th Chinese Conference on Computational 
Linguistics, Tsinghua University Press, Beijing, 
p.21-26 
Yang, G-W. (2001) ????????????
?   (The Generation of Chinese Complex 
Aspect), Zhong1Guo2 Yu3Wen2, 2001 No 5, 
p.418-427 
