Visualizing Spoken Discourse:
Prosodic Form and Discourse Functions of Interruptions
Li-chiung Yang
Abstract
In this paper we show that interruptions are
important elements in the interactive character
of discourse and in the resolution of issues of
cognitive uncertainty and planning. By
representing discourse graphically, we also
show that interruptions are part of the local and
global coherence that is brought about through
the systematic phrase-to-phrase prosodic
patterns of discourse. The specific pitch height
of the interruption varies with the expression of
emotion, signals of attention-getting, and signals
of competitiveness. These prosodic forms are
potentially usable in spoken dialogue systems to
provide intelligent responding systems that are
responsive to human motivations in dialogues.
1 Introduction: Interruptions and Dialogue
One characteristic of human conversation is that
it?s highly interactive, spontaneous and mutual
information building, and the demands of the
ongoing mutual negotiation process often cause
imbalances in informational adequacy and
desired topic direction. Interruptions play a key
role in signaling and resolving these imbalances
and in bringing about a mutually satisfactory
accommodation of the interests and knowledge
states of participants.
Because interruptions act to mediate the
content and redirection of a conversational
exchange, and are informationally packed with
respect to these communicative pivot points, it is
important to understand how interruptions are
used in human communication, and determine
which elements of interruptions can be
accommodated in building a more flexible, more
efficient spoken dialogue system.
1 Research Goals and Procedures
In this study, our goal is to look at the
distribution of interruptive occurrences in
natural speech, and investigate their respective
functions and characteristics. Several questions
that we address are the following: What are the
different types of interruptions present in
dialogues, and to what extent are prosodic-
acoustic features significant in distinguishing
between these different types of interruptions?
What are some of the underlying factors that
cause interruptions to occur, and how can such
information on the prosodic features be utilized
in spoken language systems in detecting
interruptions and in constructing appropriate
response strategies in human-computer
interactions?
Our data for this research consists of fifteen
dialogue segments extracted from a corpus of 2
hours of spontaneous conversation. The speech
data were digitized and annotated for discourse
relations, topic structure, interruptions, and
speaker turns. The acoustic measurements of f0,
amplitude and duration were correlated with the
specific characteristics of the interruptions in the
data. In this paper we concentrate mostly on
pitch, but make reference to amplitude and
duration where appropriate.
In our analysis we take a multi-level approach.
In order to capture the different domains at
which prosodic patterns are manifested, we
analyzed the data at the within-phrase as well as
the inter-phrase level. An additional level of our
analysis focuses on how discourse evolves over
extended stretches of conversation. As a way of
representing the prosodic structures in spoken
dialogue, we plotted the highest pitch points of
600 continuous utterances, about 20 minutes
conversation, for each speaker and color-coded
the interruptions by speaker and type. This
CREST, Japan Science and Technology & Information Sciences Division, ATR
Seika-cho Soraku-gun, Kyoto, Japan 619-0288
yang@isd.atr.co.jp
technique allows us to visualize and track
important discourse events and points of interest
easily, and allows us to form more appropriate
generalizations accordingly.
2 Prosodic Characteristics of Interruptions
2.1 Types of Interruptions
What constitutes an interruption? Interruptions
can be seen as situations in which one person
intends to continue speaking, but is forced by the
other person to stop speaking, at least
temporarily, or the continuity or regularity of
that person's speech is disrupted. This can
happen when the interruption causes the main
speaker to become hesitant in speech, even while
continuing on the intended path or when the
speaker continues speaking, but the interruption
causes the speaker's topic direction to be
modified. Interruptions, therefore, can be seen as
consisting of three essential ingredients:
intention of the main speaker to continue,
entrance of the other person into the
conversation, and disruption or stopping of the
main speaker, at least temporarily.
In general, interruptions can be of two types:
competitive vs. cooperative. Competitive
interruptions occur when one speaker attempts to
take the floor by making his or her own remarks
a higher priority over the main speaker's speech
when the main speaker intends to continue. This
competitiveness can be on two different levels.
Speakers can compete for speech space and they
can also compete for topic or idea. In either of
these competitive cases, interruption acts to take
the attention away from the main speaker, at
least temporarily, and focus it on the interrupter's
speech.
Cooperative interruptions occur when one
speaker wants to support or reinforce the main
speaker's point without disrupting the main
speaker's continuation. These types of supportive
remarks are often in the form of short
commentaries or clarifying questions. Such
clarifying questions often support the continuing
flow of the main speaker by keeping both
speakers in synchrony on the topic development.
Both types of interruptions may or may not
involve overlapping speech, since overlapping
speech is not necessarily an indication that
speakers are in conflict over which speaker has
the right to the floor at that moment. For
example, in conversation, speaker's feedback
utterances or back channel signals such umhum
or yeah often overlap with the main speaker's
speech, but they are not interruptions as they do
not interrupt the main speaker's flow. In fact,
they often contribute to the smooth flow of the
main topic because of their supportive nature.
Conversely, competitive interruptions can happen
even when there is no overt overlapping in
speakers' speech. This can occur when one
speaker is not completely finished and intends to
go on, but is at the end of an episode or a possible
turn completion point. The other speaker may not
be aware of the main speaker's plan, and may
think the current speaker is completely finished,
so starts to take the floor and creates an
unintentional interruption, i.e. mistiming.
Therefore, it is the degree of disruption to the
intended continuation of the main speaker which
is the critical element, and the degree of
competitiveness or cooperation is determined by
the actions and intentions of both speakers.
2.2 Competitive Interruptions
Analysis of our discourse corpus shows that
competitive interruptions are typically high in
pitch and amplitude. In spontaneous discourse,
speakers often compete to gain control and
dominance in the conversation. In competitive
situations participants need a strong immediate
signal to attract the attention away from the
ongoing speech. In general, the more audible the
signal is, the more forceful and effective it will
be in overcoming the current focus and
successfully taking the floor. Prosodically, this
competitiveness and need for a strong signal are
iconically reflected in the vocal cues of high
pitch and high amplitude.
Competitive interruptions are often closely tied
to topic development and reflect relevance,
urgency, degree of importance, and interest in the
current topic. In conversation, speakers often feel
the need to express something which is
emotionally significant to them. Speakers often
encounter moments of uncertainty and have an
urgent demand for information and immediate
attention at a critical moment. This urgency and
immediacy are a key characteristic of
interruptions and are directly related to the
relevance of the current topic. Speakers often grab
the opportunity while the current topic is hot to
clarify something, add a pertinent fact, or express
Figure 1: A competitive interruption of Speaker A
for demanding new information at phrase unit 14.
Circles mark Speaker A?s utterances whereas
filled dots mark Speaker B?s utterances.
an immediate opinion. Often the high pitch and
loud amplitude in competitive interruptions are
caused by the emotions motivating these
situations.
2.1.1 Demand for new information or
clarification
The first example illustrates a typical case of
competitive interruptions: (interruptions are
indicated by an arrow in the transcript)
(1)
13 A: So this one's better then
B: Umhum
14 It's better than the regular ones.
? A: | What brand is this?
15 B: This one?s -
it's called - Marantz
16 A: Oh.
B: Marantz.
Umhum.
17 A: Five hundred?.
B: Close to five hundred.
In this example the interrupter (A) comes in
when the main speaker is at a slight pause in the
middle of a response and at a low pitch level.
The interrupter interrupts with a direct question
`What brand is this?' at U14 (utterance 14) using
high pitch, loud amplitude and at a fast speed
(see Figure 1). These prosodic features are direct
results of the immediacy and urgency of the
interrupter's demand for additional information
for her interest.
Figure 2: A case of an interruption of Speaker B
at phrase unit 151 expressing an important point
at a critical moment.
2.2.2 Expressing Strong Opinions
(2)
149 A: It's just - hmmm
150 It's just to say that the one who speaks
151 it's just that you - you - (pause)
? B: But you have to speak slowly, right?
152 It has to be very clear.
A: Be | cause every -
153 A: Right.
154 Because everyone's pronunciation is
different
B: Umhum Right
Competitive interruptions within an ongoing
topic also occur when a speaker wishes to
express a strong opinion or disagreement. In the
beginning section of this fragment shown in
example 2, the main speaker (speaker A) is
talking and speaker B mainly provides feedback.
Speaker B's interruption at U151 occurs at a
point where the main speaker is hesitant and
pausing. Anticipating the main speaker's point,
speaker B takes this opportunity to express her
strong opinion on that point, and the forcefulness
of her disagreement is reflected in the high
amplitude and high pitch of the interruption.
Comparing with the peak points for the
utterances in this section (see Figure 2), we can
clearly see that this interruption has a sudden
pitch jump to 360Hz, and is an abrupt isolated
point by comparison to the rest of the pitch
points in this area, about 50Hz higher than the
other points in this region. Note that the intention
of the interrupter here is not to take the floor for
the long term, but to make an important point at
Figure 3: A very high-pitched interruption of
Speaker B at U296 to shift topic.
a critical moment, and this intention is indicated
by the brevity of her remark and her supportive
feedback thereafter.
2.2.3 Shifting Topic
The critical moment urgency of many
interruptions is shown in the above example.
Interruptions often occur in the normal give-and-
take of conversation as participants negotiate
their own interests in the conversations.
Therefore one key motivation for competitive
interruptions is to change topic direction. This
can happen when one speaker has a topic of
greater interest, wants to avoid a topic, or wants
to return to an old topic. Such interruptions often
occur in the form of questions, as questions
obviously are a natural way to attract attention,
to demand information, and to direct or guide a
speaker's speech and the direction of discourse.
(3)
287 A: Then it?s just - it's just teamwork
288 it's not just
B: | Right Umhum
289 A: just they are doing the work
290 B: Umhum umhum umhum
291 A: They are also doing teamwork.
B: Umhum
292 A: Some people are responsible for the
linguistic analysis,
B: Umhum
293 A: some people are responsible for the
software design.
B: Umhum umhum umhum.
Figure 4: Pitch track of U296 with preceding
and following utterances.
294 A: It's just - it's just teamwork.
B: Umhum
295 A: It also needs to be done like this,
B: Umhum
A: in order to do a good job.
296 ? B: | Then then then the conference at
Central Research Institute, was that
good?
A: Cen - tral - Re - search - Insti - tute -
B: Umhum
297 A: Be cause that -
? B: | Do you remember? M.
In example 3, the main speaker (Speaker A) is
finishing up her topic, and her intention to
conclude can be inferred by her repetition of the
phrase `It's just - it's just teamwork.' in U294 to
tie the topic back to her beginning statement at
U287. Her pitch level is getting low here.
Anticipating Speaker A's completion, Speaker B
comes in to shift the topic back to a previous
topic. Her pitch level for this utterance (U296) is
very high at 420Hz as seen in Figure 3 and
Figure 4, in fact, it is one of the highest points
for this speaker in the discourse. We can see that
there is a dramatic and abrupt rise in pitch level.
This is clearly indicated by the sharp increase of
approximately 190Hz from Speaker B's previous
utterance at 230Hz. Her amplitude is also loud
and forceful. This interruption is followed by
another lower-pitched and soft prompting
interruptive question `Do you remember?' to
reinforce the intended turn in topic direction.
2.2.4 Degree of Topic Relatedness
Figure 5: A high-pitched competitive interrup-
tion of Speaker B at U376 to shift to a related
topic.
(4)
371 A: Later that Computational Linguistics
Conference
B: Umhum
372 A: that one's pretty good, too
373 that one's also pretty good.
B: Umhum
374 A: That one's just -
Oh, it's just the emphasis is more on
computational linguistics,
B: Umhum
375 A: It's just the scope was narrower.
376 ? B: | Does that have anything
to do with what you are working on?
A: Ah...partially.
The pitch height of an interruption is closely
related to the abruptness of topic shift and the
intensity of expression. By contrast, for a later
interruption in example 4 at U376, speaker B's
pitch level is high at about 380Hz (Figure 5), but
is about 40Hz lower than the interruption to shift
the topic in the previous example of U296. The
reason for the higher pitch level of the previous
interruption may be explained on two grounds.
One is that the interest level involved, i.e. the
intensity of the emotion of the speaker, is
different. In the previous interruption, the
speaker is bringing in a topic in which she has
great interest, whereas in the current case, the
interruption is just a leading question to provide
an opportunity for a further topic. The second
reason concerns the degree of relatedness of
topics. A greater cognitive effort is involved has
not been present or active for some time, when a
shift is made to return to a topic which therefore
requiring a stronger prosodic signal to flip back
to the previous topic world, and to bring it back
into the current memory of participants. In the
example here, the topic shift is just one step
away from the current topic which is in the
participants' active memory, and thus this
requires less cognitive effort, hence a less strong
intonational signal.
2.2.5 Resistance to Topic Shift
Interruptions are an important element in the
interactive character of discourse. This
interaction comes about because of the mutual
negotiating to satisfy each participant's needs in
the conversation. In the above examples, topic
shifts were viewed from the perspective of the
interrupter, but the perspective of the main
speaker also needs to be considered. When
encountering interruption, a speaker may
respond by yielding, by ignoring the interruption,
or by continuing through forceful prosodic
counter-measures. The particular response used
is determined to a large degree by the existing
balance of floor rights at that point in the
conversation.
Whether a main speaker yields or not is decided
by the degree of competitiveness and urgency of
the interrupter, and how related the interruption
is to the ongoing topic. In resisting interruptions,
the main speaker often reacts by using both loud
amplitude and a high pitch level, the principle
being to first grab back the floor, then proceed
with content. The prosodic give-and-take of
interruptions really expresses the interactively
established understanding of current floor rights
and participants? intensity.
(5)
75 B: Then then at the next step
76 it's already digitized,
A: Umhum
77 B: It's already stored on the computer.
A: Umhum
78 ? A: This time when I went back ---
B: | Then
then you just -
79 A: m m
B: you can just do ---
80 you just have your own file, huh,
81 A: Umhum
B: then at that point you can just look at-
Figure 6: A case of a competitive interruption of
Speaker A and Speaker B?s resistance response.
82 all of the words from beginning to
end
A: Umhum
In this example, as the main speaker (speaker
B) is coming down to the end of a subsection as
signalled by the descending pitch level to a low
pitch level at U77, speaker A comes in to initiate
a topic of her own with a high pitch level of
310Hz. Speaker B immediately counters this
interruption with a high pitch and loud amplitude.
Once the threat to the floor rights is over
however, speaker B immediately returns to a
more normal pitch and amplitude level to resume
her topic, as we can see by the dropoff in pitch
and amp here. The raised pitch and differential in
pitch level may be in proportion to the degree of
competitiveness involved.
2.3 Cooperative Interruptions
The examples presented so far have mostly
illustrated the discourse reasoning and the
prosodic characteristics of competitive
interruptions. In general, competitive
interruptions are marked by a high pitch level,
and a loud amplitude, expressing the
participants' competition for the focus of
attention. By contrast, cooperative interruptions
are more supportive of the main speaker's floor
rights, and the intention is to keep the attention
on the main speaker's point. This difference in
cooperativeness has a corresponding influence
on the prosodic patterns of such supportive
interruptions. Because of their non-disruptive
nature, they often occur at low or medium pitch
levels, and even when they are high for
emotional reasons, they are generally lower in
pitch than competitive interruptions. The
amplitude of cooperative interruptions can vary.
In our data, the amplitude is generally low in
cases of acknowledging and prompting, but often
high when an interruption is used to express
strong opinion or emphasis. These characteristics
can be seen in the following examples:
2.3.1 Expressing Supportive Agreement
(6)
398 A: Then there are some Taiwanese
399 graduate students
B: Uhhuh
399 A: they also had -
400 Some of them also presented their
papers, right?
401 They also went up there on the stage
to present
B: Umhum
402 A: They also presented in English.
B: Umhum umhum umhum
403 A: I really think that they did a great job.
B: Umhum umhum
404 A: They did really well.
B: Umm
405 A: So I looked at them and say ....(laugh)
406 these Taiwanese graduate students
407 they are really good
at this International Conference they
408 ? B: | They
did really well
409 A: Emm B: Umhum
410 A: They did really well. (laugh)
The non-disruptive nature of cooperative
interruption can be seen in this example. From
the pitch plot (Figure 7) we can see that speaker
A is very excited in this segment, and is
speaking at a very high pitch in her range. The
very excited and involved state of speaker A is
clearly evidenced in the fact that her pitch level
is the highest point in the entire conversation,
among all her utterances. This excited state is
also indicated by the abrupt 105Hz pitch
elevation from her previous utterance in U406 at
325Hz. By contrast, speaker B's supportive and
agreeing interruption comment at U408 is said at
a relatively low pitch level of about 260Hz and
at a moderately low amplitude, in agreement
with the implicit goal of avoiding disruption to
the main speaker?s progress.
Figure 7: Three cases of low-pitched supportive
interruptions at U408, U417, and U420.
2.3.2 Completing An Anticipated Point
Cooperative interruptions frequently occur when
the main speaker is in the middle of completing a
point and the other speaker already anticipates
that point and is in agreement with the main
speaker. In such cases, the other speaker often
comes in to finish that point for the main speaker,
presenting the interruption as a prompt. In our
data, these instances typically occur at relatively
low pitch levels, because of the certainty and
confidence of the interrupter, and at a relatively
high amplitude, reflecting increased emphasis.
(7)
413 A: Take a look at what other people are
doing, right?
414 um
B: Right right right right. Umhum
414 B: Now at this stage it becomes very
important, I feel
A: That's right.
416 B: Because the things we learn at school
417 I mean when you get to a certain level
? A: | There's a limit
418 B: Right.
A: Mm.
419 B: It's just that you need to know more
about the outside world.
A: Right.
420 B: At the same time, it's also --- (pause)
? A: | different,
421 differ - ent -
422 at different places, huh, B: Umhum
423 A: what types of things they?re working
on
B: Umhum umhum umhum umhum
Figure 8: A high-pitched cooperative
interruption  at U270 for expressing strong
agreement.
In this example, speaker A interrupts at U417 to
finish for speaker B, expressing the point in an
emphatic way: `There's a limit'. Speaker A's pitch
is at a relatively low level of 220Hz, and that
reinforces the expression of unanimity or
agreement with the main speaker. The loud
amplitude on this phrase signals the strong
opinion and emphasis that speaker A is expressing
(Figure 7). At U420, speaker A again anticipates
speaker B and comes in to cooperatively develop
B's point at a moderate pitch level of 270Hz and a
loud amplitude, signaling the joint cooperative
nature of these interruptions.
2.3.3 Variations in Intensity
One complication is that cooperative
interruptions are also affected by the intensity of
the accompanying emotion, and therefore may
also occur at high pitch levels, as seen in the
following two examples:
(8)
268 A: If both sides can cooperate
B: Umhum right
269 A: that will be really good.
270 ? B: | That's exactly right! You just
have to cooperate. Right!
A: Mm.
(9)
298 A: That one?s an int?l conference,
B: Uhhuh
299 A: The conference location was at the
Central Research Institute,
300 but | the people who came to present
B: (pause)| Uhhuh
Figure 9: A supportive high-pitched interruption
with salient new information at U302.
301 A: these speakers were from all over the
world.
302 ? B: Uhhuh uhhuh | Lots of famous
people.
303 A: Right. Lots - lots of famous people.
B: Right umhum umhum
305 A: Lots of famous people.
B: Umhum
In the first example, example (8), the interrupter
is giving a strong expression of support and
enthusiastic agreement, and this is evident in the
semantic content `That's exactly right. You just
have to cooperate. Right'. Because of the strong
emotion involved, speaker B's pitch level here is
very high at 385Hz, as seen in Figure 8, and the
amplitude is also loud. The interruption in
example (9) is also a strong interruption to
support the main speaker, but adds new salient
information to the ongoing topic by explicitly
bringing up a notable fact 'lots of famous people'.
The pitch level of this phrase (Figure 9) is high at
about 380Hz and the amplitude is also great. The
supportive intention of this cooperative
interruption is further indicated by the continuing
feedback speaker B provides, and this intention is
recognized and appreciated greatly by the main
speaker, as shown by her repeated echoing of
speaker B's remark in U303 and U305.
2.4 Interruptions & the Resolution of Uncertainty
2.4.1 The Integration of Discourse Elements
and the Variations of Pitch Height
Our data show that the complexity of
interruptions increases with the complexity of
the discourse relationships. Interruptions are
complex discourse phenomena. They are
informationally packed, as they mediate the
differing interests and knowledge states of
participants in a conversation. The specific
nature of each interruption is a reflection of the
underlying motivation of the interrupter. The
content and timing of interruptions are directly
linked to the interrupter's urgent and intense
emotional need for an immediate resolution.
That is, it is the urgency of the emotion that is
causing the interrupter to express the need to
address a particular salient topic immediately at
this particular time.
Another factor that contributes to this
complexity is that competitiveness and
cooperativeness are not polar opposite
characteristics of interruptions, but occur as a
gradient process. The degree of competitiveness
arises from the intensity of the emotions
underlying the interruption. Speaker intensity is
also closely linked to the degree of certainty and
uncertainty inherent in the ongoing topic
progression. The forcefulness of the expression
also affects how the main speaker responds. An
intense expression often creates a critical need
for an immediate response, and speakers are
more prone to stop and address the issue raised
by the interrupter, hence such interruptions are
more competitive.
The degree of competitiveness or
cooperativeness is also influenced by how
related the interruption is to the ongoing topic,
i.e. the degree of relatedness of topic, and the
knowledge states of the participants, and by how
long the interrupter intends to take the floor for.
A short interruption for a clarification on the
current topic is more cooperative than an
interruption to change both the topic and the
floor. The specific strength of signal needed to
adequately overcome the ongoing topic may
vary by the changing interruptability or
resistance level of the topic. Because of the
intentions of participants, in spontaneous
discourse interruptions occur to varying degrees
of intensity and varying degrees of
competitiveness and cooperativeness.
Interruptions thus are a complex combination of
expressions of emotion, signals of attention-
getting, and signals of competitiveness, and their
prosodic manifestations are directly linked to
these motivations. Our data show that the pitch
level of interruptions can occur at varying heights;
Figure 10: Gradual resolution of uncertainty of speaker B
expressed in descending increments of pitch heights.
Figure 11: Interruptions in context of matching rise-fall
phrase patterns of both speakers over a 100-phrase dialogue
section.
the higher the intensity, the higher the pitch level.
The specific pitch height of the interruption is
determined jointly by the need to attract attention,
the intensity of the emotion present, and the
strength of signal needed to overcome the
attention and focus on the current topic.
2.4.2 Extended Episodes
Example 1
The prosodic patterns for this segment of 100
utterances (see Figure 10) are very revealing of
the complex emotional and discourse forces at
work, and also illustrate the point that intensity
and degree of uncertainty and certainty are
significant determinants of topic direction and
prosodic structure. In this part of the
conversation, speaker A is talking about a
conference she attended previously and Speaker
Figure 12: Speaker involvement patterns with
intensification and resolution in a topic over an extended
episode.
B mistook it to be the conference that she was
interested in, so she initiates a series of short
questions (in the form of interruptions) to
confirm and clarify the information. The general
cognitive pattern seen here is that the interrupter
encounters an initial high unsettled state of
uncertainty and gradually progresses to a more
settled and certain state. This is clearly expressed
in the overall downward trend in the pitch level
for these utterances in the peak pitch chart. The
pattern of alternating doubt and certainty is very
revealing itself. At each interruption that
expresses doubt and a need for clarification, there
is a local rise in pitch. Those interruptions which
express acknowledgement and certainty are
locally lower in pitch. The specific strength of
signal needed varies systematically with the
resolution of the differing interests and
knowledge states of participants.
The overall prosodic structure of this example
also provides a vivid illustration of the
importance of the process of intensification and
normalization in discourse. The very high pitch
at U93 reflects the abrupt climax of emotional
intensity and uncertainty, and as this emotional
uncertainty is expressed and cognitively resolved
through the sequence of interruptions,
normalization in the intensity of the cognitive
state and the pitch level is then achieved.
Example 2
Taking a more extended view of our data shows
that pitch movements of interruptions also vary
according to overall patterns of topic
development and intensity of speaker
involvement. Analysis of the discourse text
shows that the rise-fall arc seen in Figure 11 also
coincides with the development of a major
subtopic that both speakers actively contribute to.
This involvement is signaled by the large amount
of dots at varying heights of both speakers. Both
speakers' involvement reaches a peak of
excitement roughly at the U320-U330 section,
and then gradually descends as speaker A gives
more specific details in concluding the topic. As
shown, the pitch levels of the interruptions of
both speakers also converge and follow the same
rise-fall pattern as interest in the topic increases
and then is resolved. This supports the view that
interruptions are a part of an overall systematic
prosodic structure that integrates topic
progression and speaker involvement through a
process of climax and resolution.
Example 3
What is happening in the conversation in Figure
12 is that one speaker (speaker B) begins to
develop a topic that she is interested in but that
had not been successfully communicated, and
the interest level and the speaker?s involvement
are intensified as she attempts to overcome the
mismatch as indicated by many very abrupt high
pitched interruption points, whereas speaker A?s
pitch movements are expressed in more uniform
overall descending pattern. The descending part
of the curve also coincides with the resolution of
an issue that speaker B had been very uncertain
about throughout that section of dialogue. This
reinforces our conclusion that at each level of
analysis, prosody links speaker interaction, topic
progression and expression of cognitive state.
4 Implications for Dialogue Systems
How can we use the above information to help
build an intelligent spoken dialogue system? We
can focus on 2 related aspects: Detection and
Response. For example, a high pitch and
amplitude would be detected as a competitive
interruption of higher urgency and indicate a
possible mismatch of the current state with the
user?s desired state. The system would respond
by searching the possible topic space, adding the
lexical-semantic content of the interruption to
prior information to aid in the search.
Ongoing monitoring of the prosody can also
provide important information on the direction
the dialogue is taking. For example, if user
responses or interruptions follow an increasing
pitch pattern, then the system can interpret this
as increasing uncertainty, and modify the topic
search direction. Conversely, decreasing pitch
pattern can indicate that the user?s certainty and
progress toward a desired goal are increasing in
a satisfactory way.
As spoken dialogue systems become more
receptive to natural human speech, the
disfluencies and prosody of human speech can
provide critical information to guide progress
along interactively developed system paths,
mirroring aspects of human-human
conversational speech. Further work on adapting
prosody detection to dialogue systems provides a
foundation for systems which are truly
interactive, taking advantage of active inputs by
the user, adapting to the knowledge base of users,
and providing clarifications according to search
strategies that account for information presented
in more natural ways, and ultimately making
systems more intelligent by adapting to human
motivation.
Conclusion
In this paper we have shown that interruptions
are important elements in the interactive
character of discourse and in the resolution of
issues of cognitive uncertainty and planning. We
have also shown that interruptions are part of the
local and global coherence that is brought about
through the systematic phrase-to-phrase prosodic
patterns of discourse, and are an important
component for speech understanding and
intelligent dialogue systems.
References
Peter Heeman and James Allen (1999) Speech
Repairs, Intonational Phrases, Discourse Markers:
Modeling Speaker?s Utterances in Spoken
Dialogue. Computational Linguistics, Vol. 25-4.
Barbara Grosz and Candace Sidner (1986) Attention,
Intentions, and the Structure of Discourse.
Computational Linguistics, 12(3):175-204.
Marilyn Walker and John D. Moore (1997) Empirical
Studies in Discourse. Computational Linguistics,
23(1):1-12.
Li-chiung Yang (1995) Intonational Structures of
Mandarin Discourse. Ph.D. dissertation,
Georgetown University.
