41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
Towards Deeper Understanding and Personalisation in CALL 
Galia Angelova, Albena Strupchanska, Ognyan Kalaydjiev, Milena Yankova 
Institute for Parallel Processing, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria 
{galia, albena, ogi, myankova}@lml.bas.bg 
Svetla Boytcheva, Irena Vitanova 
Sofia University ?St. Kliment Ohridski?, Sofia, Bulgaria 
svetla@fmi.uni-sofia.bg, itv@gmx.co.uk 
Preslav Nakov 
University of California at Berkeley, USA, nakov@eecs.berkeley.edu 
 
Abstract 
We consider in depth the semantic analysis in 
learning systems as well as some information 
retrieval techniques applied for measuring the 
document similarity in eLearning. These 
results are obtained in a CALL project, which 
ended by extensive user evaluation. After 
several years spent in the development of 
CALL modules and prototypes, we think that 
much closer cooperation with real teaching 
experts is necessary, to find the proper 
learning niches and suitable wrappings of the 
language technologies, which could give birth 
to useful eLearning solutions. 
1 Introduction 
The tendency to develop natural interfaces for all 
users implies man-machine interaction in a natural 
way, including natural language too, both as 
speech and as free text. Many recent eLearning 
research prototypes try to cope with the 
unrestricted text input as it is considered old-
fashioned and even obsolete to offer interfaces 
based on menu-buttons and mouse-clicking 
communication only. On the other hand, the 
available eLearning platforms such as WebCT [1], 
CISCO [2], and the freeware HotPotatoes [3], are 
far from the application of advanced language 
technologies that might provide interfaces based on 
speech and language processing. They represent 
complex communication environments and/or 
empty shells where the teacher uploads training 
materials, drills, etc. using specialised authoring 
tools. Recently on-line voice communication 
between teachers and students has been made 
available as well, via fast Internet in virtual 
classrooms, but no speech or language processing 
has been considered. So there is a deep, principle 
gap between the advanced research on tutoring 
systems and the typical market eLearning 
environments addressing primarily the 
communication needs of the mass user. 
In what follows we will concentrate on research 
prototypes integrating language technologies in 
eLearning environments. In general, such 
prototypes might be called Intelligent Tutoring 
Systems (ITS) and we will stick to this notion here. 
Most of the systems discussed below address 
Computer-Aided Language Learning (CALL) but 
language technologies are applied for automatic 
analysis of user utterances in other domains too. A 
review of forty Intelligent CALL systems (Gam-
per, 2002) summarises the current trends to embed 
?intelligence? in CALL. What we developed (and 
report here) might be considered intelligent 
because of the integration of reasoning and the 
orientation to adaptivity and personalisation. 
This paper is structured as follows. In section 2 
we consider the task of semantic analysis of the 
learner's input, which is an obligatory element 
when the student is given the opportunity to type in 
freely in response to ITS's questions and/or drills. 
Section 3 deals with Information Retrieval (IR) 
approaches for measuring document similarity, 
which are integrated in ITS as techniques for e.g. 
assessing the content of student essays or choosing 
the most relevant text to be shown to the learner. 
Section 4 discusses how the language technologies 
in question can provide some adaptivity of the ITS, 
as a step towards personalisation. In section 5 we 
summarise the current results regarding the 
evaluation of our prototypes with real users. 
Section 6 contains the conclusion. 
2 Semantic Analysis in ITS 
Although the automatic analysis of user 
utterances is a hot research topic, it achieved only 
partial success so far. The review (Nerbonne, 
2002) shows that Natural Language Processing 
(NLP) is often integrated in CALL, as the domain 
of language learning is the first ?candidate? for the 
application of computational linguistics tools. 
Different language technologies are applied in 
?programs designed to help people learn foreign 
languages?: morphology and lemmatisation, 
syntax, corpus-based language acquisition, speech 
processing, etc. Attempts to implement automatic 
semantic analysis of free text input are relatively 
rare, due to the sophisticated paradigm and the 
default assumption that it will have a very limited 
success (i.e. will be the next failure). 
The famous collection of papers (Holland, 1995) 
presents several systems, which integrate NLP 
modules in different ways. The most advanced one 
regarding semantic analysis is MILT (Dorr, 1995), 
where the correctness as well as the 
appropriateness of the student?s answer are 
checked by matching them against expectations. 
This is performed in the context of a question-
answering session, where expected answers are 
predefined by the foreign language tutor. The 
language-independent internal semantic 
representation is based on lexical conceptual 
structures, which (following Jackendoff) have 
types, with primitives and propositional 
descriptions along different dimensions and fields 
etc. Consider as an example that the teacher has 
specified that ?John ran to the house? is a correct 
answer. This sentence is processed by the system 
and the following lexical conceptual structure is 
obtained: 
[Event GO Loc  
([Thing JOHN], 
 [Path TO Loc ([Position AT Loc ([Thing JOHN], 
[Property HOUSE])])], 
 [Manner RUNNINGLY])] 
which is stored by the tutoring system and later 
matched against the student?s answer. If the 
student types ?John went to the house?, the system 
must determine whether this matches the teacher-
specified answer. The student?s sentence is 
processed and respresented as: 
[Event GO Loc  
([Thing JOHN], 
 [Path TO Loc ([Position AT Loc ([Thing JOHN],   
[Property HOUSE])])])] 
The matcher compares the two lexical 
conceptual structures and produces the output: 
 Missing: MANNER RUNNINGLY 
 INCORRECT ANSWER 
Put another way, the comparison of internal 
representations helps in the diagnostics of semantic 
errors and appropriateness, which are two 
different notions. For instance ?John loves Marry?
is a semantically correct sentence, but it is not an 
appropriate answer when the system expects ?John 
ran to the house?. Further discussions in (Dorr, 
1995) show that the matching scenario is very 
useful in question-answering lessons, which are 
formulated as sets of free response questions 
associated with a picture or text in the target 
language. In an authoring session, the lesson 
designer enters the texts, the questions and a 
sample appropriate answer to each question. At 
lesson time, the questions are presented to the 
student who answers them. If the predefined 
answers are general enough, the system will 
flexibly recognise a set of possible answers. For 
instance, the student might answer: 
Juan died   or Carlos killed Juan   or 
Carlos murdered Juan 
to the question ?What happened to Juan?, which 
checks the comprehension of a simple newspaper 
article. The matching technique can be extended to 
check whether the translations of sentences into the 
target language are correct etc. Even as an earlier 
implementation at the ?concept demonstration 
stage?, this prototype identifies possible solutions 
for the integration of semantic analysis in CALL. 
A recent system Why2-Atlas (VanLehn, 2002), 
based on deep syntactic analysis and compositional 
semantics, aims at the understanding of student 
essays in the domain of physics. Why2-Atlas is 
developed within the project Why2 where several 
different NL processing techniques are compared 
(Rose, 2002). The sentence-level understander 
converts each sentence of the student's essay into a 
set of propositions. For instance, the sentence 
?Should the arrow have been drawn to point 
down?? 
is to be (roughly speaking) converted to 
eevents, vvectors, sdraw(e,s,v) & tense 
(e, past)&mood(e,interrog)&direction(v,down). 
As the authors note in (VanLehn, 2002), this is 
just an approximation of the real output, which 
illustrates the challenge of converting words into 
the appropriate domain-specific predicates. The 
left-corner parser LCFlex copes with 
ungrammatical input by skipping words, inserting 
missing categories and relaxing grammatical 
constraints as necessary in order to parse the 
sentence. For instance, ?Should the arrow have 
been drawn point down?? would parse. In case of 
too many analyses, the parser uses statistical 
information about the word roots frequency and 
the grammatical analyses in order to determine the 
most likely parse. If no complete analysis can be 
produced, a fragmentary analysis will be passed for 
further processing. The fragments present 
?domain-specific predicates that are looking for 
argument fillers, and domain-specific typed 
variables that are looking for arguments to fill?. If 
the symbolic approach for input analysis via 
logical forms fails, a probabilistic one will be used 
as an alternative. 
What is particularly interesting for us here, is the 
discourse-level understander (VanLehn, 2002) 
which, given logical forms, outputs a proof. 
Topologically, this is a forest of interwoven trees, 
where the leaves are facts from the problem 
statement or assumptions made during the proof 
construction. The roots (conclusions) are student?s 
propositions. Consider the example: 
 Question: Suppose you are in a free-falling 
elevator and you hold your keys motionless in 
front of your face and then let go. What will 
happen to them? Explain. 
 Answer: The keys will fall parallel to the 
person face because of the constant acceleration 
caused by gravity but later the keys may go over 
your head because the mass of the keys is less. 
The essay answer will be translated into four 
propositions, which will be passed to the discourse 
understander. The first one (keys fall parallel to the 
person's face) is correct and becomes the root of 
the proof. The second one (gravitation 
acceleration is constant) corresponds to facts from 
the knowledge base. The third proposition (keys go 
over the person's head) is based on the common 
misconception that heavier objects fall faster, 
which is pre-stored in the knowledge base as well, 
it becomes the root of the proof. The last one (the 
mass of the keys is less) corresponds to a node of 
the interior of the proof of the third proposition. 
Once a proof has been constructed, a tutorial 
strategist performs an analysis in order to find 
flaws and to discuss them. Here the major one is 
the misconception ?heavier objects fall faster?. The 
tutoring goals have priorities as follows: fix 
misconceptions, then fix self-contradictions, errors 
and incorrect assumptions, and lastly elicit missing 
mandatory points. The Why2 project in general, 
and Why2-Atlas in particular, illustrate the recent 
trends in the ITS development: 
(i) mixture of symbolic and stochastic appro-
aches in order to cope with the free NL input; 
(ii) application of shallow and partial analysis as 
an alternative to the deep understanding; 
(iii) integration of AI techniques (esp. reasoning 
and personalisation); 
(iv) organisation of bigger projects with 
considerable duration to attack the whole 
spectre of problems together (incl. 
development of authoring tools, systematic 
user evaluation at all stages, several 
development cycles and so on). 
We are experienced in the application of 
semantic analysis to CALL in two scenarios. The 
first one1, in 1999-2002, deals with deep 
understanding of the correct sentences and proving 
the domain correctness and the appropriateness of 
the logical form of each one. The second one 
focuses on the integration of  shallow analysis and 
partial understanding in CALL (Boytcheva, 2004). 
 
1 In Larflast, a Copernicus Joint Research Project. 
The system described in (Angelova, 2002) is a 
learning environment for teaching English 
financial terminology to adults, foreigners, with 
intermediate level of English proficiency. The 
prototype is a Web-based learning environment 
where the student accomplishes three basic tasks: 
(i) reading teaching materials, (ii) performing test 
exercises and (iii) discussing his/her own learner 
model with the system. The project is oriented to 
learners who need English language competence as 
well as expertise in correct usage of English 
financial terms. This ambitiously formulated 
paradigm required the integration of some formal 
techniques for NL understanding, allowing for 
analysis of the user?s answers to drills where the 
student is given the opportunity to enter free 
natural language text (normally short discourse of 
2-3 sentences). The morphological, syntax and 
semantic analysis is performed by the system 
Parasite (Ramsay, 2000), developed in UMIST. 
After the logical form has been produced for each 
correct sentence, the CALL environment has to 
determine whether the student?s utterance matches 
the expected appropriate answer in the current 
learning situation. A special prover has been 
developed, which checks whether the logical form 
of the answer is ?between? the minimum and 
maximum predefined answers (Angelova, 2002). 
Unlike MILT (Dorr, 1995), we think that the 
correct answer has to be subsumed by the 
maximum expected one, i.e. there is not only a 
lower but also an upper limit on the correctness. 
Table 1 lists examples for all diagnostic cases from 
user?s perspective, by sentences in natural 
language. Please note that nowadays the deductive 
approach can be relatively efficient, as our prover 
(in Sicstus Prolog) works on-line, integrated in a 
Web-based environment, in real time with several 
hundred meaning postulates. Proofs are certainly 
based on a predefined ontology of the domain 
terms, which in this case is a lexical one since the 
terms are treated as words with special lexical 
meaning encoded in the meaning postulates thus 
forming a hidden hierarchy of meanings. The 
conceptual and lexical hierarchy of meanings are 
further discussed in (Angelova, 2004).  
However, we discovered that deep semantic 
analysis is difficult to integrate in CALL. First, this 
requires enormous amount of efforts for the 
meaning postulates acquisition. While hierarchy of 
terms is reusable, as it is in fact the domain model, 
the propositions, which encode the lexical 
semantics are somewhat application and domain 
specific and therefore difficult to reuse or to 
transfer  to another domain (moreover they are 
bound to the domain words). Implementing the 
prover and testing the definitions and the inference 
Table 1: Decisions about erroneous answers according to the configuration of the logical forms of the 
predefined minimal, maximal and the current learner?s answer (see also Angelova, 2002). 
procedures with several hundred predicates 
required approximately one man-year for an AI 
expert who worked closely with domain experts. 
Second, the result is not perfect from the 
perspective of the user who has to answer with 
correct and full sentences (see section 5 for 
details). Thus our recent work (Boytcheva, 2004) 
is directed towards integration of shallow and 
deep semantic techniques in CALL systems. We 
use shallow parsing, which allows for the 
processing of both syntactically incorrect and 
incomplete answers. However, during the user?s 
Case Sample of learner?s utterance Discussion 
Kernel (predefined 
minimum answer) 
Primary market is a financial market that 
operates with newly issued debt instruments 
and securities. 
The logical form is pre-stored in the 
system as a Kernel. 
Cover (predefined 
maximum answer) 
Primary market is a financial market that 
operates with newly issued debt instruments 
and securities and provides new investments 
and its goal is to raise capital. 
The logical form is pre-stored in the 
system as a Cover. 
1.Correct answer Primary market is a financial market that 
operates with newly issued debt instruments 
and securities and provides new investments. 
This logical form is between the 
Kernel and the Cover. 
2a) Incomplete 
answer 
Primary market is a financial market that 
operates with newly issued securities. 
Missing Kernel term: debt 
instruments. 
2b) Specialisation 
of concepts from 
the definition 
Primary market is a financial market that 
operates with newly issued bonds.
Bond is a specialisation of security; 
Missing: debt instruments. 
2c) Paraphrase 
using the concept 
definition 
Primary market is a financial market that 
operates with new emissions of stocks, bonds 
and other financial assets.
New emissions = newly issued; 
stocks, bonds and other financial 
assets = debt instruments and 
securities. 
3a) Partially correct Primary market is a financial market that 
operates with newly issued debt instruments 
and securities for instant delivery.
Wrong: for instant delivery.
3b) Generalisation 
of concepts from 
the definition 
Primary market is a market that operates 
with newly issued financial instruments.
Market is a generalisation of 
financial market; Financial 
instruments are generalisation of debt 
instruments and securities. 
4. Partially correct Primary market is a financial market that 
operates with newly issued securities for 
instant delivery and provides new 
investments. 
Wrong: for instant delivery;
Missing: debt instruments. 
5. Wrong answer Primary market is an organisation in which 
the total worth is divided into commercial 
papers.
Wrong: an organisation in which the 
total worth is divided into 
commercial papers;
Missing: financial market that 
operates with newly issued debt 
instruments and securities. 
6. Wrong answer Primary market provides new investments for 
instant delivery.
Wrong: for instant delivery;
Missing: financial market that 
operates with newly issued debt 
instruments and securities; 
7. Partially correct Primary market is a financial market that 
operates with newly issued securities and 
provides new investments. 
Missing: debt instruments. 
8. Wrong answer Primary market provides new investments. Missing: financial market that 
operates with newly issued debt 
instruments and securities. 
utterances evaluation we use deep semantic 
analysis concerning the concepts and the relations 
that are important for the domain only. Users? 
answers are represented as logical forms, 
convenient for the inference mechanism, which  
takes into account the type hierarchy and is 
elaborated in domain-specific points only. Thus 
the combination of shallow and deep techniques 
gives the users more freedom in answering, i.e. 
various utterances to express themselves without 
impeding the evaluation process. The idea to 
apply the shallow NLP techniques in CALL was 
inspired by their successful application in IE for 
template filling. The assessment of user 
knowledge in a specific domain can be viewed as 
a kind of  template filling, where the templates 
correspond to concepts and relations relevant to 
the tested domain. 
3 Exploiting Document Proximity in ITS 
There is a huge demand for intelligent systems 
that can handle free texts produced by the learners 
in eLearning mode. As most of the courses being 
taught are represented as texts, the challenge is to 
compare one text to another. Since the phrasing 
will not be the same in both texts, the comparison 
needs to be performed at the semantic level. One 
solution is sketched above: translate the student?s 
text to a set of logical forms and then apply 
symbolic approaches for their assessment. 
Unfortunately, there are only few research 
prototypes that address the problem from this 
perspective, which are very expensive and have 
delivered only partially applicable results so far. 
Another option is to try to exploit  the IR 
techniques we have at hand in order to check for 
instance whether the student?s answer contains the 
?right words? (in which case it would be a good 
writing, since it would be similar to the 
expectation). A natural choice for assessing the 
usage of the ?right words? is the so-called Latent 
Semantic Analysis (LSA) as it reveals the latent 
links between the words and phrases, especially 
when it is trained with enough samples. Below we 
briefly overview the application of LSA in 
eLearning and our experiments in this direction. 
The classical LSA method, as proposed in 
(Deerwester, 1990) is a bag-of-words technique, 
which represents the text semantics by assigning 
vectors to words and texts (or text fragments). 
Indeed, knowing how words are combined to 
encode the document knowledge is a kind of 
semantic representation of the word meaning and 
text semantics. The underlying idea is that words 
are semantically similar, if they appear in similar 
texts, and texts are semantically similar, if they 
contain similar words. This mutual word-text 
dependency is investigated by building a word-
text matrix, where each cell contains the number 
of occurrences of word X in document Y, after 
which the original matrix is submitted to Singular 
Value Decomposition ? a transformation that is 
meant to reveal the hidden (latent) similarity 
between words and texts. This produces a vector 
of low dimensionality (the claim is that 300 is 
near optimal) for each word and for each text. The 
similarity between two words, two texts, or a 
word and a text, is given by the cosine of the 
angle between their corresponding vectors (the 
cosine is the most popular similarity measure). 
Therefore, the similarity between two words or 
two sets of words is a number between ?1 (lowest 
similarity) and 1 (highest similarity). Without 
morphology and grammar rules, syntactical 
analysis, and manually encoded implicit 
knowledge, LSA is considered successful in 
various experiments including assessment of 
student essays. 
For the purposes of assessment, usually a high-
dimensional space is computed from texts 
describing the domain (most often the available 
electronic version of the course). Each word from 
the domain as well as the student?s essay are 
juxtaposed a vector, usually a 300-dimensional 
one. The student gets as feedback an assessment 
score and/or an indication of the topics/aspects 
that are not covered well by the essay. The 
Intelligent Essay Assessor (IEA) (Foltz 1999a, 
Foltz 1999b) is based on reference texts (manually 
pre-graded essays) and assigns a holistic score 
and a gold standard score. The former is 
computed by seeking the closest pre-graded essay 
and returning its grade (i.e. the current one is 
scored as the closest pre-graded one), while the 
latter is based on a standard essay written by an 
expert. It returns the proximity between the 
student?s essay and the expert?s one. An 
experiment with 188 student essays showed a 
correlation of 0.80 between the IEA scores and 
teacher?s ones, which is a very high similarity. 
However, IEA outputs no comments or advice 
regarding the student essay. The Apex system 
(Lemaire, 2001) performs a semantic comparison 
between the essay and the parts of the course 
previously marked as relevant by the teacher. The 
whole student essay is to be compared to each of 
these text fragments. For instance, if the student 
has to write an answer to the question ?What were 
the consequences of the financial crash of 1929??, 
the essay is compared to the following sections of 
the teaching course: The political consequences in 
Europe, Unemployment and poverty, The 
economical effects, The consequences until 1940.
An experiment with 31 student essays in the 
domain of Sociology of Education exhibited  a 
correlation of 0.51 between Apex grades and 
teacher?s ones, which is close to the correlation 
agreement between two human graders in this 
literary domain. Select-a-Kibitzer (Wiemer-
Hastings, 2000) aims at the assessment of essay 
composition. Students are required to write on 
topics like: ?If you could change something about 
school, what would you change??. The assessment 
module is based on reference sentences of what 
students usually discuss about school (food, 
teachers, school hours, etc.). Several kinds of 
feedback are delivered to the student, concerning 
the text coherence, the kind of sentences or the 
topic of the composition. For example, the advice 
regarding coherence can be: ?I couldn?t quite 
understand the connection between the first 
sentence and the second one. Could you make it a 
bit clearer? Or maybe make a new paragraph.?
(Here the underlying idea is that totally new 
words in the subsequent sentence normally 
concern another topic, i.e. this fits to a new 
paragraph). A principled criticism of these three 
recent systems is that the bag-of-words model 
does not take into consideration the grammar 
correctness and the discourse structure, i.e. two 
essays with the same sentences structured in a 
different order would be scored identically (which 
is a funny idea from an NLP perspective). A 
further example illustrates attempts to combine 
the strengths of the bag-of-words and the 
symbolic approaches, while trying to avoid some 
of their weaknesses. CarmelTC (Rose, 2002), a 
recent system which analyses essay answers to 
qualitative physics questions, learns to classify 
units of text based on features extracted from a 
syntactic analysis of that text. The system was 
developed inside the Why2-Atlas conceptual 
physics tutoring environment for the purpose of 
grading short essays written in response to 
questions such as ?Suppose you are running in a 
straight line at constant speed. You throw a 
pumpkin straight up. Where will it land? 
Explain?. CarmelTC?s goal is not to assign a letter 
grade to student essays, but to tally which set of 
?correct answer? aspects are present in student 
essays (e.g. a satisfactory answer to the example 
question above should include a detailed 
explanation of how the Newton's 1st law applies to 
this scenario. Then the student should infer that 
the pumpkin and the man will continue at the 
same constant horizontal velocity that they both 
had before the release. Thus, they will always 
have the same displacement from the point of 
release. Therefore, after the pumpkin rises and 
falls, it will land back in the man's hands. The 
?presence? of certain sentences is checked by 
word classification). The evaluation shows that 
the hybrid CarmelTC approach achieves 90% 
precision, 80% recall and 85% F-measure, and 
thus outperforms the pure bag-of-words run of 
LSA, which scores 93% precision, 54% recall  
and 70% F-measure  (Rose, 2002). 
Our experiments with LSA (Angelova, 2002) 
were focused on finding financial texts, which are 
appropriate to be shown as teaching materials in a 
particular learning situation. Given a set of key-
words, agents retrieve texts from well-known 
financial sites and store them to the servers of our 
environment for further assignment of 
appropriateness. We implemented the classical 
LSA scenario and applied it as a filtering 
procedure, which assigns off-line a similarity 
score to each new text. The text archive consisted 
of 800 most relevant readings, which represent 
HTML-pages with textual information (elements 
signaling prevailing technical content, e.g. tables, 
have been excluded). These texts are offered as 
suggested readings but are also used for building 
dynamic concordances, which show samples of 
terms usages to the learner. The latter may be 
displayed in cases of language errors to drills 
where the student makes linguistic mistakes. 
Choosing this option (view samples) is up to the 
student. The dynamic nature of the text collection 
ensures the appearance of new samples, which 
makes the browsing interesting at every run. 
4 Personalisation 
Our learning environment supports 
personalisation as follows: 
 as a step towards instructional as well as content 
planning: a planner (the so-called pedagogical 
agent) plans the next learner?s moves across the 
hypertext pages which, technically, constitute 
the Web-site of our tutoring system; these moves 
are between (i) performing drills and (ii) choices 
for suggestion of readings, which may be either 
texts from Internet or especially generated Web-
pages. The pedagogical agent deals with both 
presentational and educational issues. The local 
planning strategy aims at creating a complete 
view of the learner?s knowledge of the current 
concept. It supports movements between drills 
with increasing complexity, when the student 
answers correctly. The global planning strategy 
determines movements between drills testing 
different concepts, going from the simple and 
general concepts to the more specific and 
complex notions. 
 as a step towards personalised IR: an LSA-filter 
assigns proximity score to constantly updated 
texts, which are stored as suggested readings. 
This allows for constant update of the system?s 
text archive and, following the practice at the 
main financial sites, provides up-to-date news 
and readings, which may be used as texts for 
different teaching purposes. As key words for 
initial collection of texts, the not_known and 
wrongly_known terms from the learner?s 
models are chosen, so the CALL system always 
stores the proper relevant text for each student. 
The adaptivity is provided using an ontology of 
financial terms as a backbone of all system?s 
resources. No matter whether these are conceptual 
(e.g. knowledge base), linguistic (e.g. lexicons, 
meaning postulates, etc) or pedagogical resources 
(e.g. set of preliminary given drills or learner 
model, which is dynamically constructed at run-
time), the ontology always represents the unifying 
skeleton as all chunks of knowledge are organised 
around the terms?labels. In addition to the is-a 
partition, we support in the knowledge base 
explicit declarations of the perspectives or 
viewpoints. E.g., the isa_kind/4 clause: 
isa_kind(security, [bond, hybrid_security, stock], 
[exhaustive, disjoint],  
?status of security holder: creditor or owner?) 
means that the securities are disjoint and 
exhaustively classified into bonds, stocks and 
hybrid securities depending on the status of their 
owner. These comments provide nice visualisation 
(Angelova, 2004). 
5 User Study and User Evaluation  
Larflast started with a user study of how 
foreigners ? adults acquire domain terminology in 
their second language. In fact the acquisition is 
closely related to the elicitation of domain 
knowledge, especially in a relatively new domain 
(students have to learn simultaneously a subject 
with its terminology and its specific language 
utterances). Mistakes are linguistically-motivated 
but wrong domain conceptualisations contribute 
to the erroneous answers as well. Erroneous 
answers appear in terminology learning due to the 
following reasons: 
 Language errors (spelling, morphology, 
syntax); 
 Question misunderstanding, which causes 
wrong answer; 
 Correct question understanding, but
absent knowledge of the correct term,
which implies usage of paraphrases and 
generalisation instead of the expected 
answer; 
 Correct question understanding, but
absent domain knowledge, which implies 
specialisation, partially correct answers,
incomplete answers and wrong answers. 
This classification influenced considerably the 
design of the prover?s algorithms, i.e. the decision 
how to check of the appropriateness of the student 
answer. The diagnostics shown in Table 1 follows 
closely the four reasons above. 
Our learning prototype was tested by (i) two 
groups of university students in finance with 
intermediate knowledge of English, (ii) their 
university lecturers in English, and (iii) a group of 
students of English philology. The system was 
evaluated as a CALL-tool for self-tuition and 
other autonomous classroom activities, i.e. as an 
integral part of a course in ?English for Special 
Purposes?. The learners could test their 
knowledge through the specially designed 
exercises, compare their answers to the correct 
ones using the generated feedback (immediate, 
concrete and time-saving, it comes in summary 
form, which is crucial in order to accomplish the 
system?s use autonomously) and extract additional 
information from the suggested readings and 
concordancers. 
The users liked the feedback after performing 
drills, immediately after they prompted erroneous 
answers to exercises where this term appears. 
They evaluated positively the visualisation of the 
hierarchy as well as the surrounding context of 
texts and terms usages organised in a 
concordancer, which is dynamically built and 
centred on the terms discussed at the particular 
learning situation. The teachers were very pleased 
to have concordancers with contiguously updated 
term usages; they would gladly see such a 
language resource integrated in a further authoring 
tool, because searching suitable texts in Internet is 
a difficult and time-consuming task.  
Unfortunately the learners were not very 
enthusiastic regarding the free NL input, as it 
permits relatively restricted simple answers and 
does not go beyond the human capacity of the 
teacher. The main disappointment of both learners 
and teachers is the system?s inability to answer 
why, i.e. while the formal semantics and reasoning 
tools provide extremely comprehensive diagnostic 
about the error type, they tell nothing about the 
reason. Fortunately, all users liked the fact that 
there were numerous examples of terms usages 
from real texts whenever morphological or syntax 
errors were encountered in the free NL input. 
Thus we conclude with a certain pessimism 
concerning the appropriateness of today?s formal 
semantic approaches in ITS and much optimism 
that data-driven corpus techniques, if properly 
applied, fit quite well to the adaptive ITS. What is 
still desirable regarding the filtering module is to 
restrict the genre of the suggested readings, since 
the current texts are freely collected from the 
Internet and some of them should be used as 
teaching materials (LSA cannot recognise the text 
educational appropriateness since it considers the 
terms? occurrences only; other supervised 
techniques such as text categorisation might 
improve the filtering, if properly integrated). 
As a possible improvement of the current 
paradigm for formal analysis, we turned recently 
to partial analysis, which gives more flexibility to 
the students to enter phrases instead of full 
sentences (Boytcheva, 2004). 
6 Conclusion 
The conclusion is that teachers as well as 
learners like CALL systems that are easy to 
integrate in the typical educational tasks, i.e. the 
area of language learning has well-established 
traditions and the experimental software is well-
accepted, only if it is really useful and facilitates 
the learning process. Our feeling is that all 
attempts to integrate language technologies in 
CALL should be closely related to testing the 
laboratory software with real students. At the 
same time, cooperation with teachers is an 
obligatory condition as the necessary pedagogical 
background is often missing in the research 
environments where normally the NLP 
applications and language resources appear. 
Language technologies have a long way to go, 
until they find the proper wrappings for 
integration of advanced applications and the 
necessary resources into useful CALL systems. 
References  
[1] WebCT, http://www.webct.com/ 
[2] CISCO, http://cisco.netacad.net/ 
[3] HotPotatoes, http://web.uvic.ca/hrd/hotpot/ 
Angelova G., Boytcheva, Sv., Kalaydjiev, O. 
Trausan-Matu, St., Nakov, P. and A. 
Strupchanska. 2002. Adaptivity in Web-based 
CALL In Proc. of ECAI?02, the 15th European 
Conference on AI, IOS Press, pp. 445-449. 
Angelova G., Strupchanska, A., Kalaydjiev, O., 
Boytcheva, Sv. and I. Vitanova. 2004. 
Terminological Grid and Free Text Repositories 
in Computer-Aided Teaching of Foreign 
Language Terminology. Proc. "Language 
Resources: Integration & Development in e-
learning & in Teaching Computational 
Linguistics", Workshop at LREC 2004, 35-40. 
Boytcheva Sv., Vitanova, I., Strupchanska, A., 
Yankova, M. and G. Angelova. 2004. Towards 
the assessment of free learner's utterances in 
CALL. Proc. "NLP and Speech Technologies in 
Advanced Language Learning Systems", 
InSTIL/ICALL Symposium, Venice,17-19 June. 
Deerwester S., Dumais S.T., Furnas G.W., 
Landauer T.K., and Harshman R. 1990. 
Indexing by latent semantic analysis, Journal of 
the American Society for Information Science, 
41(6), pp. 391?407. 
Dorr, B., Hendler, J., Blanksteen, S. and B. 
Migdaloff. 1995. On Beyond Syntax: Use of 
Lexical Conceptual Structure for Intelligent 
Tutoring. In (Holland, 1995), pp. 289-311. 
Foltz P.W., Laham D., and Landauer T.K. 1999. 
Automated essay scoring: Applications to 
educational technology, In Proceedings of the 
ED-MEDIA Conference, Seattle. 
Foltz P.W., Laham D., and Landauer T.K. 1999. 
The intelligent essay assessor: Applications to 
educational technology, Interactive Multimedia 
Electronic Journal of Computer-Enhanced 
Learning, 1(2).  
Gamper, J. and J. Knapp. 2002. Review of 
intelligent CALL systems. Computer Assisted 
Language Learning 15/4, pp. 329-342. 
Holland, M., Kaplan, J. and R. Sams (eds.) 1995. 
Intelligent Language Tutors: Theory Shaping 
Technology. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 
Lemaire B. and Dessus P. 2001. A system to 
assess the semantic content of student essays, J. 
of Educ. Computing Research, 24(3), 305?320. 
Nerbonne, J. 2002. Computer-Assisted Language 
Learning and Natural Language Processing. In: 
R. Mitkov (Ed.) Handbook of Computational 
Linguistics, Oxford Univ. Press, pp. 670-698.  
Ramsay, A. and H. Seville. 2000. What did he 
mean by that? Proc. Int. Conf. AIMSA-2000, 
Springer, LNAI 1904, pp. 199-209.  
Rose, C.P., Bhembe, D., Roque, A., Siler, S., 
Srivastava, R. and K. van Lehn. 2002. A hybrid 
language understanding approach for robust 
selection of tutoring goals. . In Proc. of the Int. 
Conf. Intelligent Tutoring Systems, Springer, 
LNCS, 2363: 552-561 
VanLehn, K., Jordan, P., Rose, C., Bhembe, D., 
Boettner, M., Gaydos, A., Makatchev, M., 
Pappuswamy, U., Rindenberg, M., Roque, A., 
Siler, A. and Srivastava, R. 2002. The 
Architecture of Why2-Atlas: A Coach for 
Qualitative Physics Essay Writing. In Proc. of 
the Int. Conf. Intelligent Tutoring Systems, 
Springer, Lecture Notes in CS, 2363: 158-162. 
Wiemer-Hastings P. and Graesser A. 2000. Select-
a-kibitzer: A computer tool that gives 
meaningful feedback on student compositions,
Interactive Learning Environments, 8(2), pp. 
149?169. 
