Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Computational Linguistics (Coling 2008), pages 1137?1144
Manchester, August 2008
Active Learning with Sampling by Uncertainty and Density for Word 
Sense Disambiguation and Text Classification  
Jingbo Zhu  Huizhen Wang  Tianshun Yao 
Natural Language Processing Laboratory 
Northeastern University 
Shenyang, Liaoning, P.R.China 110004 
zhujingbo@mail.neu.edu.cn 
wanghuizhen@mail.neu.edu.cn 
Benjamin K Tsou 
Language Information Sciences 
Research Centre 
City University of Hong Kong 
HK, P.R.China 
rlbtsou@cityu.edu.hk 
 
Abstract 
This paper addresses two issues of active 
learning. Firstly, to solve a problem of 
uncertainty sampling that it often fails by 
selecting outliers, this paper presents a 
new selective sampling technique, sam-
pling by uncertainty and density (SUD), 
in which a k-Nearest-Neighbor-based 
density measure is adopted to determine 
whether an unlabeled example is an out-
lier. Secondly, a technique of sampling 
by clustering (SBC) is applied to build a 
representative initial training data set for 
active learning. Finally, we implement a 
new algorithm of active learning with 
SUD and SBC techniques. The experi-
mental results from three real-world data 
sets show that our method outperforms 
competing methods, particularly at the 
early stages of active learning.  
1 Introduction 
Creating a large labeled training corpus is expen-
sive and time-consuming in some real-world ap-
plications (e.g. word sense annotation), and is 
often a bottleneck to build a supervised classifier 
for a new application or domain. Our study aims 
to minimize the amount of human labeling ef-
forts required for a supervised classifier (e.g. for 
automated word sense disambiguation) to 
achieve a satisfactory performance by using ac-
tive learning.  
Among the techniques to solve the knowledge 
bottleneck problem, active learning is a widely 
used framework in which the learner has the abil-
ity to automatically select the most informative 
                                                 
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons Attri-
bution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported 
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-
sa/3.0/). Some rights reserved. 
unlabeled examples for human annotation. The 
ability of the active learner can be referred to as 
selective sampling. Uncertainty sampling (Lewis 
and Gale, 1994) is a popular selective sampling 
technique, and has been widely studied in natural 
language processing (NLP) applications such as 
word sense disambiguation (WSD) (Chen et al, 
2006; Chan and Ng, 2007), text classification 
(TC) (Lewis and Gale, 1994; Zhu et al, 2008), 
statistical syntactic parsing (Tang et al, 2002), 
and named entity recognition (Shen et al, 2004).  
Actually the motivation behind uncertainty 
sampling is to find some unlabeled examples 
near decision boundaries, and use them to clarify 
the position of decision boundaries. However, 
uncertainly sampling often fails by selecting out-
liers (Roy and McCallum, 2001; Tang et al, 
2002). These selected outliers (i.e. unlabeled ex-
amples) have high uncertainty, but can not pro-
vide much help to the learner. To solve the out-
lier problem, we proposed in this paper a new 
method, sampling by uncertainty and density 
(SUD), in which a K-Nearest-Neighbor-based 
density (KNN-density) measure is used to deter-
mine whether an unlabeled example is an outlier, 
and a combination strategy based on KNN-
density measure and uncertainty measure is de-
signed to select the most informative unlabeled 
examples for human annotation at each learning 
iteration.  
The second effort we made is to study how to 
build a representative initial training data set for 
active learning. We think building a more repre-
sentative initial training data set is very helpful 
for active learning. In previous studies on active 
learning, the initial training data set is generally 
generated at random, based on an assumption 
that random sampling will be likely to build the 
initial training set with same prior data distribu-
tion as that of whole corpus. However, this situa-
tion seldom occurs in real-world applications due 
to the small size of initial training set used. In 
1137
this paper, we utilize an approach, sampling by 
clustering (SBC), to selecting the most represen-
tative examples to form initial training data set 
for active learning. To do it, the whole unlabeled 
corpus should be first clustered into predefined 
number of clusters (i.e. the predefined size of the 
initial training data set). The example closest to 
the centroid of each cluster will be selected to 
augment initial training data set, which is consid-
ered as the most representative case.  
Finally, we describe an implementation of ac-
tive learning with SUD and SBC techniques. Ex-
perimental results of active learning for WSD 
and TC tasks show that our proposed method 
outperforms competing methods, particularly at 
the early stages of active learning process. It is 
noteworthy that these proposed techniques are 
easy to implement, and can be easily applied to 
several learners, such as Maximum Entropy 
(ME), na?ve Bayes (NB) and Support Vector 
Machines (SVMs). 
2 Active Learning Process 
In this work, we are interested in uncertainty 
sampling (Lewis and Gale, 1994) for pool-based 
active learning, in which an unlabeled example x 
with maximum uncertainty is selected for human 
annotation at each learning cycle. The maximum 
uncertainty implies that the current classifier (i.e. 
the learner) has the least confidence on its classi-
fication of this unlabeled example.  
Actually active learning is a two-stage process 
in which a small number of labeled samples and 
a large number of unlabeled examples are first 
collected in the initialization stage, and a closed-
loop stage of query and retraining is adopted.  
Procedure: Active Learning Process 
Input: initial small training set L, and pool of unla-
beled data set U 
Use L to train the initial classifier C  
Repeat 
1. Use the current classifier C to label all unla-
beled examples in U 
2. Use uncertainty sampling technique to select 
m2  most informative unlabeled examples, and 
ask oracle H for labeling 
3. Augment L with these m new examples, and 
remove them from U 
4. Use L to retrain the current classifier C 
Until the predefined stopping criterion SC is met. 
Figure 1. Active learning with uncertainty sam-
pling technique 
                                                 
2 A batch-based sample selection labels the top-m most 
informative unlabeled examples at each learning cycle to 
decrease the number times the learner is retrained. 
3 Uncertainty Measures 
In real-world applications, only limited size of 
training sample set can be provided to train a 
supervised classifier. Due to manual efforts in-
volved, such brings up a considerable issue: what 
is the best subset of examples to annotate. In the 
uncertainty sampling scheme, the unlabeled ex-
ample with maximum uncertainty is viewed as 
the most informative case. The key point of un-
certainty sampling is how to measure the uncer-
tainty of an unlabeled example x. 
3.1 Entropy Measure 
The well-known entropy is a popular uncertainty 
measurement widely used in previous studies on 
active learning (Tang et al, 2002; Chen et al 
2006; Zhu and Hovy, 2007): 
?
?
?=
Yy
xyPxyPxH )|(log)|()(             (1) 
where P(y|x) is the a posteriori probability. We 
denote the output class y?Y={y1, y2, ?, yk}. H is 
the uncertainty measurement function based on 
the entropy estimation of the classifier?s 
posterior distribution. 
In the following comparison experiments, the 
uncertainty sampling based on entropy criterion 
is considered as the baseline method, also called 
traditional uncertainty sampling.  
3.2 Density*Entropy Measure 
To analyze the outlier problem of traditional un-
certainty sampling, we first give an example to 
explain our motivation. 
 
Figure 2. An example of two points A and B with 
maximum uncertainty at the ith learning iteration 
 
As mentioned in Section 1, the motivation be-
hind uncertainty sampling is to find some unla-
beled examples near decision boundaries, and 
assume that these examples have the maximum 
uncertainty. Fig. 2 shows two unlabeled exam-
ples A and B with maximum uncertainty at the ith 
1138
learning cycle. Roughly speaking, there are three 
unlabeled examples near or similar to B, but, 
none for A. We think example B has higher rep-
resentativeness than example A, and A is likely 
to be an outlier. We think adding B to the train-
ing set will help the learner more than A.  
The motivation of our study is that we prefer 
not only the most informative example in terms 
of uncertainty measure, but also the most repre-
sentative example in terms of density measure. 
The density measure can be evaluated based on 
how many examples there are similar or near to it. 
An example with high density degree is less 
likely to be an outlier.  
In most real-world applications, because the 
scale of unlabeled corpus would be very large, 
Tang et al (2002) and Shen et al (2004) evalu-
ated the density of an example within a cluster. 
Unlike their work 3 , we adopt a new approach, 
called K-Nearest-Neighbor-based density (KNN-
density) measure, to evaluating the density of an 
unlabeled example x. Given a set of K (i.e. =20 
used in our experiments) most similar examples 
S(x)={s1, s2, ?, sK} of the example x,  the KNN-
density DS(.) of example x is defined as: 
K
sx
xDS xSs
i
i
?
?= )(
),cos(
)(                     (2) 
As discussed above, we prefer to select exam-
ples with maximum uncertainty and highest den-
sity for human annotation. We think getting their 
labels can help the learner greatly. To do it, we 
proposed a new method, sampling by uncertainty 
and density (SUD), in which entropy-based un-
certainty measure and KNN-density measure are 
considered simultaneously.  
In SUD scheme, a new uncertainty measure, 
called density*entropy measure4 , is defined as: 
)()()( xHxDSxDSH ?=                 (3) 
4 Initial Training Set Generation 
As shown in Fig. 1, only a small number of train-
ing samples are provided at the beginning of ac-
tive learning process. In previous studies on ac-
tive learning, the initial training set is generally 
generated by random sampling from the whole 
unlabeled corpus. However, random sampling 
technique can not guarantee selecting a most rep-
                                                 
3 We also tried their cluster-based density measure, but per-
formance was essentially degraded.  
4 We also tried other ways like ?*DS(x)+(1-?) H(x) 
measure used in previous studies, but it seems to be random. 
Actually it is very difficult to determine an appropriate? 
value for a specific task.  
resentative subset, because the size of initial 
training set is generally too small (e.g. 10). We 
think selecting some representative examples to 
form initial training set can help the active 
learner.  
In this section we utilize an approach, sam-
pling by clustering (SBC), to selecting the most 
representative examples to form initial training 
data set. In the SBC scheme, the whole unlabeled 
corpus has been first clustered into a predefined 
number of clusters (i.e. the predefined size of the 
initial training set). The example closest to the 
centroid of each cluster will be selected to aug-
ment initial training set, which is viewed as the 
most representative case.  
We use the K-means clustering algorithm 
(Duda and Hart, 1973) to cluster examples in the 
whole unlabeled corpus. In the following K-
means clustering algorithm, the traditional cosine 
measure is adopted to estimate the similarity be-
tween two examples, that is 
ji
ji
ji ww
ww
ww ?
?=),cos(                     (4) 
where wi and wj are the feature vectors of the ex-
amples i and j.  
To summarize the SBC-based initial training 
set generation algorithm, let U={U1, U2, ?, UN} 
be the set of unlabeled examples to be clustered, 
and k be the predefined size of initial training 
data set. In other words, SBC technique selects k 
most representative unlabeled examples from U 
to generate the initial training data set. The SBC-
based initial training set generation procedure is 
summarized as follows: 
SBC-based Initial Training Set Generation 
Input: U, k 
Phrase 1: Cluster the corpus U into k clusters 
? j(j=1,?,k) by using K-means clustering algo-
rithm as follows: 
1. Initialization. Randomly choosing k exam-
ples as the centroid ?j(j=1,?,k) for initial 
clusters ? j(j=1,?,k), respectively.  
2. Re-partition {U1, U2, ?, UN} into k clus-
ters ?  j(j=1,?,k), where 
}.),,cos(),cos(:{ jtUUU tijiij ??=? ??  
3. Re-estimate the centroid ?j for each clus-
ters ? j, that is: 
m
U
jiU
i
j
?
??=? , where m is the size of ?  j.
4. Repeat Step 2 and Step 3 until the algo-
rithm converges. 
1139
Phrase 2: Select the example uj closest to the 
centroid?j for each cluster j to augment ini-
tial training data set ?, where 
?
]},1[,),,cos(),cos(:{ kjUuUuu ijjijjj ???=? ??
Return?; 
 
The computation complexity of the K-means 
clustering algorithm is O(NdkT), where d is the 
number of features and T is the number of itera-
tions. In practice, we can define the stopping cri-
terion (i.e. shown in Step 4) of K-means cluster-
ing algorithm that relative change of the total 
distortion is smaller than a threshold.  
5 Active Learning with SUD and SBC  
Procedure: Active Learning with SUD and SBC 
Input: Pool of unlabeled data set U; k is the prede-
fined size of initial training data set 
Initialization.  
z Evaluate the density of each unlabeled example 
in terms of KNN-density measure; 
z Use SBC technique to generate the small initial 
training data set of size k. 
Use L to train the initial classifier C  
Repeat 
1. Use the current classifier C to label all unla-
beled examples in U 
2. Use uncertainty sampling technique in terms 
of density*entropy measure to select m most 
informative unlabeled examples, and ask ora-
cle H for labeling, namely SUD scheme.  
3. Augment L with these m new examples, and 
remove them from U 
4. Use L to retrain the current classifier C 
Until the predefined stopping criterion SC is met. 
Figure 3. Active learning with SUD and SBC  
 
Fig. 3 shows the algorithm of active learning 
with SUD and SBC techniques. Actually there 
are some variations. For example, if the initial 
training data set is generated by SBC, and en-
tropy-based uncertainty measure is used, it is 
active learning with SBC. Similarly, if the initial 
training data set is generated at random, and the 
density*entropy uncertainty measure is used, it is 
active learning with SUD. If both SBC and SUD 
techniques are not used, we call it (traditional) 
uncertainty sampling as baseline method.  
6 Evaluation 
In the following comparison experiments, we 
evaluate the effectiveness of various active learn-
ing methods for WSD and TC tasks on three pub-
licly available real-world data sets. 
6.1 Deficiency Measure 
To compare various active learning methods, 
deficiency is a statistic developed to compare 
performance of active learning methods globally 
across the learning curve, which has been used in 
previous studies (Schein and Unga, 2007). The 
deficiency measure can be defined as: 
?
?
=
=
?
?= n
t tn
n
t tn
n
REFaccREFacc
ALaccREFacc
REFALDef
1
1
))()((
))()((
),( (5) 
where acct is the average accuracy at tth learning 
iteration. REF is the baseline active learning 
method, and AL is the active learning variant of 
the learning algorithm of REF, e.g. active learn-
ing with SUD and SBC. n refers to the evaluation 
stopping points (i.e. the number of learned ex-
amples). Smaller deficiency value (i.e. <1.0) in-
dicates AL method is better than REF method. 
Conversely, a larger value (i.e. >1.0) indicates a 
negative result. 
In the following comparison experiments, we 
evaluate the effectiveness of six active learning 
methods, including random sampling (random), 
uncertainty sampling (uncertainty), SUD, ran-
dom sampling with SBC (random+SBC), uncer-
tainty sampling with SBC (uncertainty+SBC), 
and SUD with SBC (SUD+SBC). ?+SBC? indi-
cates initial training data set generated by SBC 
technique. Otherwise, initial training set is gen-
erated at random. To evaluate deficiency of each 
method, the REF method (i.e. the baseline 
method) defined in Equation (5) refers to (tradi-
tional) uncertainty sampling. 
6.2 Experimental Settings 
We utilize a maximum entropy (ME) model 
(Berger et al, 1996) to design the basic classifier 
for WSD and TC tasks. The advantage of the ME 
model is the ability to freely incorporate features 
from diverse sources into a single, well-grounded 
statistical model. A publicly available ME tool-
kit 5  was used in our experiments. To build the 
ME-based classifier for WSD, three knowledge 
sources are used to capture contextual informa-
tion: unordered single words in topical context, 
POS of neighboring words with position infor-
mation, and local collocations, which are the 
same as the knowledge sources used in (Lee and 
Ng, 2002). In the design of text classifier, the 
maximum entropy model is also utilized, and no 
feature selection technique is used. 
                                                 
5See  http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/s0450736/maxent_ 
toolkit.html 
1140
In the following comparison experiments, the 
algorithm starts with a initial training set of 10 
labeled examples, and make 10 queries after each 
learning iteration. A 10 by 10-fold cross-
validation was performed. All results reported 
are the average of 10 trials in each active 
learning process.  
6.3 Data Sets 
Three publicly available natural data sets have 
been used in the following active learning com-
parison experiments. Interest data set is used for 
WSD tasks. Comp2 and WebKB data sets are 
used for TC tasks.  
The Interest data set developed by Bruce and 
Wiebe (1994) has been previously used for WSD 
(Ng and Lee, 1996). This data set consists of 
2369 sentences of the noun ?interest? with its 
correct sense manually labeled. The noun 
?interest? has six different senses in this data set.  
The Comp2 data set consists of comp.graphics 
and comp.windows.x categories from News-
Groups,  which has been previously used in ac-
tive learning for TC (Roy and McCallum, 2001; 
Schein and Ungar, 2007). 
The WebKB dataset was widely used in TC 
research. Following previous studies (McCallum 
and Nigam, 1998), we use the four most popu-
lous categories: student, faculty, course and pro-
ject, altogether containing 4199 web pages. In 
the preprocessing step, we remove those words 
that occur merely once without using stemming. 
The resulting vocabulary has 23803 words. 
 
Data sets Interest Comp2 WebKB 
Accuracy 0.908 0.90 0.91 
Table 1. Average accuracy of supervised learning 
on each data set when all examples have been 
learned. 
6.4 Active Learning for WSD Task 
 0.55
 0.6
 0.65
 0.7
 0.75
 0.8
 0.85
 0.9
 0  50  100  150  200  250  300
A
cc
ur
ac
y
Number of Learned Examples
Active Learning for WSD on Interest
random
random + SBC
uncertainty
uncertainty + SBC
SUD
SUD + SBC
 
Figure 4. Active learning curve for WSD on In-
terest data set 
 
 
Random Random+SBC Uncertainty 
1.926 1.886 NA 
Uncertainty+SBC SUD SUD+SBC 
0.947 0.811 0.758 
Table 2. Average deficiency achieved by various 
active learning methods on Interest data set. The 
stopping point is 300.  
 
Fig. 4 depicts performance curves of various ac-
tive learning methods for WSD task on Interest 
data set. Among these six methods, random sam-
pling method shows the worst performance. SUD 
method constantly outperforms uncertainty sam-
pling. As discussed above, SUD method prefers 
not only the most uncertainty examples, but also 
the most representative examples. In the SUD 
scheme, the factor of KNN-density can effec-
tively avoid selecting the outliers that often cause 
uncertainty sampling to fail.  
It is noteworthy that using SBC to generate 
initial training data set can improve random (-
0.04 deficiency), uncertainty (-0.053 deficiency) 
and SUD (-0.053 deficiency) methods, respec-
tively. If the initial training data set is generated 
at random, the initial accuracy is only 55.6%. 
Interestingly, SBC achieves 62.2% initial accu-
racy, and makes 6.6% accuracy performance im-
provement. However, SBC only makes perform-
ance improvement for each method at the early 
stages of active learning. After 50 unlabeled ex-
amples have been learned, it seems that SBC has 
very little contribution to random, uncertainty 
and SUD methods. Table 2 shows that the best 
method is SUD with SBC (0.758 deficiency), 
followed by SUD method. 
6.5 Active Learning for TC Tasks 
 0.55
 0.6
 0.65
 0.7
 0.75
 0.8
 0.85
 0  50  100  150
A
cc
ur
ac
y
Number of Learned Examples
Active Learning for Text Classification on Comp2
uncertainty
uncertainty + SBC
SUD
SUD + SBC
 
Figure 5. Active learning curve for text classifi-
cation on Comp2 data set 
 
Uncertainty Uncertainty+SBC SUD SUD+SBC
NA 0.409 0.588 0.257 
Table 3. Average deficiency achieved by various 
active learning methods on Comp2 data set. The 
stopping point is 150.  
1141
 0.3
 0.35
 0.4
 0.45
 0.5
 0.55
 0.6
 0.65
 0.7
 0.75
 0.8
 0  50  100  150
A
cc
ur
ac
y
Number of Learned Examples
Active Learning for Text Classification on WebKB
uncertainty
uncertainty + SBC
SUD
SUD + SBC
 
Figure 6. Active learning curve for text classifi-
cation on WebKB data set 
 
Uncertainty Uncertainty+SBC SUD SUD+SBC 
NA 0.669 0.748 0.595 
Table 4. Average deficiency achieved by various 
active learning methods on WebKB data set. The 
stopping point is 150.  
 
Fig. 5 and 6 show the effectiveness of various 
active learning methods for text classification 
tasks. Since random sampling performs poorly as 
shown in Fig. 4, it is not further shown in Fig. 5 
and 6. We only compare uncertainty sampling 
and our proposed methods for both text classifi-
cation tasks.  
Similarly, SUD method constantly outper-
forms uncertainty sampling on two data sets. 
SBC greatly improves uncertainty sampling (i.e. 
0.591 and 0.331 deficiencies degraded) and SUD 
method (i.e. 0.331 and 0.153 deficiencies de-
graded), respectively. Interestingly, unlike WSD 
task shown in Fig. 4, Table 3 and 4 show that 
uncertainty sampling with SBC outperforms our 
SUD method for text classification on both data 
sets. The reason is that SBC makes about 15% 
initial accuracy improvement on Comp2 data set, 
and about 23% initial accuracy improvement on 
WebKB data set. Such improvements indicate 
that selecting high representative initial training 
set is very necessary and helpful for active learn-
ing. Table 3 and 4 show that the best active 
learning method for TC task is SUD with SBC, 
following by uncertainty sampling with SBC 
method. It is noteworthy that on WebKB uncer-
tainty sampling with SBC (0.669 deficiency) 
achieves only slight better performance than 
SUD method (0.748 deficiency) as shown in Ta-
ble 4, simply because SBC only introduce good 
performance improvement at the early stages. 
Actually on WebKB SUD method achieves 
slight better performance than uncertainty sam-
pling with SBC after about 50 unlabeled exam-
ples have been learned. 
7 Related Work 
In recent years active learning has been widely 
studied in various natural language processing 
(NLP) tasks, such as word sense disambiguation 
(Chen et al, 2006; Zhu and Hovy, 2007), text 
classification (TC) (Lewis and Gale, 1994; 
McCallum and Nigam, 1998), named entity 
recognition (NER) (Shen et al, 2004), chunking 
(Ngai and Yarowsky, 2000), information 
extraction (IE) (Thompson et al, 1999), and 
statistical parsing (Tang et al, 2002). 
In addition to uncertainty sampling, there is 
another popular selective sampling scheme, 
Query-by-committee (Engelson and Dagan, 
1999), which generates a committee of classifiers 
(always more than two classifiers) and selects the 
next unlabeled example by the principle of 
maximal disagreement among these classifiers. A 
method similar to committee-based sampling is 
co-testing proposed by Muslea et al (2000), 
which trains two learners individually on two 
compatible and uncorrelated views that should be 
able to reach the same classification accuracy. In 
practice, however, these conditions of view se-
lection are difficult to meet in real-world applica-
tions. Cohn et al (1996) and Roy and McCallum 
(2001) proposed a method that directly optimizes 
expected future error on future test examples. 
However, the computational complexity of their 
methods is very high.  
There are some similar previous studies (Tang 
et al, 2002; Shen et al, 2004) in which the rep-
resentativeness criterion in active learning is 
considered. Unlike our sampling by uncertainty 
and density technique, Tang et al (2002) adopted 
a sampling scheme of most uncertain per cluster 
for NLP parsing, in which the learner selects the 
sentence with the highest uncertain score from 
each cluster, and use the density to weight the 
selected examples while we use density informa-
tion to select the most informative examples. Ac-
tually the scheme of most uncertain per cluster 
still can not solve the outlier problem faced by 
uncertainty sampling technique. Shen et al 
(2004) proposed an approach to selecting exam-
ples based on informativeness, representativeness 
and diversity criteria. In their work, the density 
of an example is evaluated within a cluster, and 
multiple criteria have been linearly combined 
with some coefficients. However, it is difficult to 
automatically determine sufficient coefficients in 
real-world applications. Perhaps there are differ-
ent appropriate coefficients for various applica-
tions.  
1142
8 Discussion 
For batch mode active learning, we found some-
times there is a redundancy problem that some 
selected examples are identical or similar. Such 
situation would reduce the representativeness of 
selected examples. To solve this problem, we 
tried the sampling scheme of ?most uncertain per 
cluster? (Tang et al, 2002) to select the most 
informative examples. We think selecting exam-
ples from each cluster can alleviate the redun-
dancy problem. However, this sampling scheme 
works poorly for WSD and TC on the three data 
sets, compared to traditional uncertainty sam-
pling. From the clustering results, we found these 
resulting clusters are very imbalanced. It makes 
sense that more informative examples are con-
tained in a bigger cluster. In this work, we only 
use SUD technique to select the most informative 
examples for active learning. We plan to study 
how combining SBC and SUD techniques can 
enhance the selection of the most informative 
examples in the future work. 
Furthermore, we think that a misclassified 
unlabeled example may convey more 
information than a correctly classified unlabeled 
example which is closer to the decision boundary. 
But there is a difficulty that the true label of each 
unlabeled example is unknown. To use misclassi-
fication information to select the most informa-
tive examples, we should study how to automati-
cally determine whether an unlabeled example 
has been misclassified. For example, we can 
make an assumption that an unlabeled example 
may be misclassified if this example was previ-
ously ?outside? and is now ?inside?. We will 
study this issue in the future work.  
Actually these proposed techniques can be 
easily applied for committee-based sampling for 
active learning. However, to do so, we should 
adopt a new uncertainty measurement such as 
vote entropy to measure the uncertaity of each 
unlabled example in committee-based sampling 
scheme. 
9 Conclusion and Future Work 
In this paper, we have addressed two issues of 
active learning, involving the outlier problem of 
traditional uncertainty sampling, and initial train-
ing data set generation. To solve the outlier prob-
lem of traditional uncertainly sampling, we pro-
posed a new method of sampling by uncertainty 
and density (SUD) in which KNN-density meas-
ure and uncertainty measure are combined to-
gether to select the most informative unlabeled 
example for human annotation at each learning 
cycle. We employ a method of sampling by clus-
tering (SBC) to generate a representative initial 
training data set. Experimental results on three 
evaluation data sets show that our combined 
SUD with SBC method achieved the best per-
formance compared to other competing methods, 
particularly at the early stages of active learning 
process. In future work, we will focus on the re-
dundancy problem faced by batch mode active 
learning, and how to make use of misclassified 
information to select the most useful examples 
for human annotation. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported in part by the National 
863 High-tech Project (2006AA01Z154) and the 
Program for New Century Excellent Talents in 
University (NCET-05-0287). 
References 
Berger Adam L., Vincent J. Della Pietra, Stephen A. 
Della Pietra. 1996. A maximum entropy approach 
to natural language processing. Computational 
Linguistics 22(1):39?71. 
Bruce Rebecca and Janyce Wiebe. 1994. Word sense 
disambiguation using decomposable models. Pro-
ceedings of the 32nd annual meeting on Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pp. 139-146. 
Chan Yee Seng and Hwee Tou Ng. 2007. Domain 
adaptation with active learning for word sense dis-
ambiguation. Proceedings of the 45th annual meet-
ing on Association for Computational Linguistics, 
pp. 49-56 
Chen Jinying, Andrew Schein, Lyle Ungar and 
Martha Palmer. 2006. An empirical study of the 
behavior of active learning for word sense disam-
biguation. Proceedings of the main conference on 
Human Language Technology Conference of the 
North American Chapter of the Association of 
Computational Linguistics, pp. 120-127 
Cohn David A., Zoubin Ghahramani and Michael I. 
Jordan. 1996. Active learning with statistical mod-
els. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 4, 
129?145. 
Duda Richard O. and Peter E. Hart. 1973. Pattern 
classification and scene analysis. New York: 
Wiley. 
Engelson S. Argamon and I. Dagan. 1999. Commit-
tee-based sample selection for probabilistic classi-
fiers. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 
(11):335-360. 
1143
Lee Yoong Keok and Hwee Tou Ng. 2002. An em-
pirical evaluation of knowledge sources and learn-
ing algorithm for word sense disambiguation. In 
Proceedings of the ACL-02 conference on Empiri-
cal methods in natural language processing, pp. 41-
48 
Lewis David D. and William A. Gale. 1994. A se-
quential algorithm for training text classifiers. In 
Proceedings of the 17th annual international ACM 
SIGIR conference on Research and development in 
information retrieval, pp. 3-12 
McCallum Andrew and Kamal Nigam. 1998. A com-
parison of event models for na?ve bayes text classi-
fication. In AAAI-98 workshop on learning for text 
categorization. 
Muslea Ion, Steven Minton and Craig A. Knoblock. 
2000. Selective sampling with redundant views. In 
Proceedings of the Seventeenth National Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence and Twelfth Confer-
ence on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intel-
ligence, pp. 621-626. 
Ng Hwee Tou and Hian Beng Lee. 1996. Integrating 
multiple knowledge sources to disambiguate word 
sense: an exemplar-based approach. In Proceed-
ings of the Thirty-Fourth Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 40-
47 
 Ngai Grace and David Yarowsky. 2000. Rule writing 
or annotation: cost-efficient resource usage for 
based noun phrase chunking. In Proceedings of the 
38th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pp. 117-125 
Roy Nicholas and Andrew McCallum. 2001. Toward 
optimal active learning through sampling estima-
tion of error reduction. In Proceedings of the 
Eighteenth International Conference on Machine 
Learning, pp. 441-448 
Schein Andrew I. and Lyle H. Ungar. 2007. Active 
learning for logistic regression: an evaluation. 
Machine Learning 68(3): 235-265 
Schohn Greg and David Cohn. 2000. Less is more: 
Active learning with support vector machines. In 
Proceedings of the Seventeenth International Con-
ference on Machine Learning, pp. 839-846 
Shen Dan, Jie Zhang, Jian Su, Guodong Zhou and 
Chew-Lim Tan. 2004. Multi-criteria-based active 
learning for named entity recognition. In Proceed-
ings of the 42nd Annual Meeting on Association 
for Computational Linguistics. 
Tang Min, Xiaoqiang Luo and Salim Roukos. 2002. 
Active learning for statistical natural language 
parsing. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meet-
ing on Association for Computational Linguistics, 
pp. 120-127 
Thompson Cynthia A., Mary Elaine Califf and Ray-
mond J. Mooney. 1999. Active learning for natural 
language parsing and information extraction. In 
Proceedings of the Sixteenth International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, pp. 406-414 
Zhu Jingbo and Eduard Hovy. 2007. Active learning 
for word sense disambiguation with methods for 
addressing the class imbalance problem. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2007 Joint Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing and 
Computational Natural Language Learning, pp. 
783-790 
Zhu Jingbo, Huizhen Wang and Eduard Hovy. 2008. 
Learning a stopping criterion for active learning 
for word sense disambiguation and text classifica-
tion. In Proceedings of the Third International Joint 
Conference on Natural Language Processing, pp. 
366-372 
1144
A Knowledge-based Approach to Text Classification 
Zhu Jingbo Yao Tianshun 
Institute of Computer Software & Theory Institute of Computer Software & Theory 
Northeastern University, Shenyang Liaoning, 
P.R.China 110006 
Northeastern University, Shenyang Liaoning, 
P.R.China 110006 
zhujingbo@yahoo.com tsyao@china.com  
 
Abstract 
The paper presents a simple and effective 
knowledge-based approach for the task of text 
classification. The approach uses topic 
identification algorithm named FIFA to text 
classification. In this paper the basic process of 
text classification task and FIFA algorithm are 
described in detail. At last some results of 
experiment and evaluations are discussed. 
Keywords: FIFA algorithm, topic identification, 
text classification, natural language processing 
 
Introduction  
The text automatic classification method is based 
on the content analysis automatically to allocate 
the text into pre-determined catalogue. The 
methods of text automatic classification mainly 
use information retrieval techniques. Traditional 
information retrieval mainly retrieves relevant 
documents by using keyword-based or 
statistic-based techniques (Salton.G1989). 
Generally, three famous models are used: vector 
space model, Boolean model and probability 
model, based on the three models, some 
researchers brought forward extended models such 
as John M.Picrrc(2001), Thomas Bayer, Ingrid 
Renz,Michael Stein(1996), Antal van den Bosch, 
Walter Daelemans, Ton Weijters(1996), Manuel de 
Buenaga Rodriguez, Jose Maria Gomez-llidalgo, 
Belen Diaz-agudo(1997), Ellen Riloff and Wendy 
Lehnert(1994). 
One central step in automatic text classification 
is to identify the major topics of the texts. We 
present a simple and effective knowledge-based 
approach to text automatic classification. The 
approach uses topic identification algorithm 
named FIFA to text classification. In this paper the 
basic process of text classification task and FIFA 
algorithm are described in detail. At last some 
results of experiment and evaluations are 
discussed. 
 
1 Knowledge-based text classification 
The principal process for the Knowledge -based 
text classification is illustrated as following: 
 
Text set 
 
 
NULL?                    End 
 
 
Select a text for analysis 
 
 
Topic identification 
 
 
Output topic tagging of the text 
  
Figure 1 The principal process for the knowledge-based text classification 
 
From the figure 1 we can know that the crucial 
technique of the text classification is the topic 
identification parser. The topic tagging of the text 
is identified as its catalogue. 
Dictionary 
Rule base 
Topic feature aggregation
formula library 
N 
Y 
2 Automatic Topic Identification 
2.1 Feature Dictionary 
The feature dictionary is mainly used to store 
some terms that can illustrate the topic feature 
concept, and we call these terms as ?feature 
terms?. The data structure of the feature 
dictionary is consist of word, POS, semantic, 
location and field attribute. Some examples of 
feature dictionary are described as following: 
 
Feature terms Attributes 
??? 
 
HuiTong County 
S(),,?,(???),,??(?)??(*+)(??),Z?(?) 
S(),,LOCATION,LOCATION(HuitongCounty),,COUNTRY(China)PRO
VINCE (HuNan)CITY(HuaiHua),FIELD(geography) 
??  
Bank of China 
N(),,? ,X(?