Topic Identification in Chinese Based on Centering Model 
Ching-Long Yeh and Yi-Chun Chen 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Tatung University 
40 Chungshan N. Rd. 3rd. Section 
Taipei 104 Taiwan 
R.O.C. 
chingyeh@cse.ttu.edu.tw, d8806005@mail.ttu.edu.tw 
 
Abstract 
In this paper we are concerned with 
identifying the topics of sentences in Chinese 
texts. The key elements of the centering model 
of local discourse coherence are employed to 
identify the topic which is the most salient 
element in a Chinese sentence. Due to the 
phenomenon of zero anaphora occurring in 
Chinese texts frequently, in addition to the 
centering model, we further employ the 
constraint rules to identify the antecedents of 
zero anaphors. Unlike most traditional 
approaches to parsing sentences based on the 
integration of complex linguistic information 
and domain knowledge, we work on the 
output of a part-of-speech tagger and use 
shallow parsing instead of complex parsing to 
identify the topics from sentences. 
1 Introduction 
One of the most striking characteristics in a 
topic-prominent language like Chinese is the 
important element, ?topic,? in a sentence which 
can represent what the sentence is about (Li and 
Thompson, 1981). That is, if we can identify topics 
from Chinese sentences, we can obtain the most 
information embedded in the text. In this paper, we 
tend to identify the topic of each utterance within a 
discourse based on the centering model. However, 
in many natural languages, elements that can be 
easily deduced by the reader are frequently omitted 
from expressions in texts. The elimination of 
anaphoric expressions is termed zero anaphor (ZA) 
which often occurs in topic position in a Chinese 
sentence, due to their prominence in discourse. 
Accordingly, to accomplish the task of topic 
identification, we have to solve the problem of 
zero anaphora resolution. 
There are several methods of anaphora 
resolution. One method is to integrate different 
knowledge sources or factors (e.g. gender and 
number agreement, c-command constraints, 
semantic information) that discount unlikely 
candidates until a minimal set of plausible 
candidates is obtained (Grosz et al, 1995; Lappin 
and Leass, 1994; Okumura and Tamura, 1996; 
Walker et al, 1998; Yeh and Chen, 2001). 
Anaphoric relations between anaphors and their 
antecedents are identified based on the integration 
of linguistic and domain knowledge. However, it is 
very labor-intensive and time-consuming to 
construct a domain knowledge base. Another 
method employs statistical models or AI 
techniques, such as machine learning, to compute 
the most likely candidate (Aone and Bennett, 1995; 
Connoly et al, 1994; Ge et al, 1998; Seki et al, 
2002). This method can sort out the above 
problems. However, it heavily relies upon the 
availability of sufficiently large text corpora that 
are tagged, in particular, with referential 
information (Stuckardt, 2002). 
Our method is an inexpensive, fast and reliable 
procedure for anaphora resolution, which relies on 
cheaper and more reliable NLP tools such as part-
of-speech (POS) tagger and shallow parsers 
(Baldwin, 1997; Ferr?ndez et al, 1998; Kennedy 
and Boguraev, 1996; Mitkov, 1998; Yeh and Chen, 
2003). The resolution process works from the 
output of a POS tagger enriched with annotations 
of grammatical function of lexical items in the 
input text stream. The shallow parsing technique is 
used to detect zero anaphors and identifies the 
noun phrases preceding the anaphors as 
antecedents. 
In the following sections we first describe the 
centering model which including the key elements 
of the centering model of local discourse 
coherence. In Section 3 we describe the details of 
shallow parsing we employed. In Section 4 we 
explain our ZA resolution method based on the 
centering model and the constraint rules. The 
method of topic identification in Chinese sentences 
is illustrated in Section 5. In the last section the 
conclusions are made. 
2 Centering Model 
In the centering theory (Grosz and Sidner, 1986; 
Grosz et al 1995; Walker et al, 1994; Strube and 
Hahn, 1996), the 'attentional state' was identified as 
a basic component of discourse structure that 
consisted of two levels of focusing: global and 
local. For Grosz and Sidner, the centering theory 
provided a model for monitoring local focus and 
yielded the centering model which was designed to 
account for the difference in the perceived 
coherence of discourses. In the centering model, 
each utterance U in a discourse segment has two 
structures associated with it, called forward-
looking centers, Cf(U), and backward-looking 
center, Cb(U). The forward-looking centers of Un, 
Cf(Un), depend only on the expressions that 
constitute that utterance. They are not constrained 
by features of any previous utterance in the 
discourse segment (DS), and the elements of Cf(Un) 
are partially ordered to reflect relative prominence 
in Un. Grosz et al, in their paper (Grosz et al 
1995), assume that grammatical roles are the major 
determinant for ranking the forward-looking 
centers, with the order ?Subject > Object(s) > 
Others?. The superlative element of Cf(Un) may 
become the Cb of the following utterance, Cb(Un+1). 
In addition to the structures for centers, Cb, and 
Cf, the centering model specifies a set of 
constraints and rules (Grosz et al 1995; Walker et 
al. 1994). 
Constraints 
For each utterance Ui in a discourse segment 
consisting of utterances U1, ?, Um: 
1. Ui has exactly one Cb. 
2. Every element of Cf(Ui) must be realized in Ui. 
3. Ranking of elements in Cf(Ui) guides 
determination of Cb(Ui+1). 
4. The choice of Cb(Ui) is from Cf(Ui-1), and can 
not be from Cf(Ui-2) or other prior sets of Cf. 
Backward-looking centers, Cbs, are often 
omitted or pronominalized and discourses that 
continue centering the same entity are more 
coherent than those that shift from one center to 
another. This means that some transitions are 
preferred over others. These observations are 
encapsulated in two rules: 
Rules 
For each utterance Ui in a discourse segment 
consisting of utterances U1, ?, Um: 
I. If any element of Cf(Ui) is realized by a 
pronoun in Ui+1 then the Cb(Ui+1) must be 
realized by a pronoun also. 
II. Sequences of continuation are preferred over 
sequence of retaining; and sequences of 
retaining are to be preferred over sequences of 
shifting. 
Rule I represents one function of pronominal 
reference: the use of a pronoun to realize the Cb 
signals the hearer that the speaker is continuing to 
talk about the same thing. Psychological research 
and cross-linguistic research have validated that 
the Cb is preferentially realized by a pronoun in 
English and by equivalent forms (i.e. zero 
anaphora) in other languages (Grosz et al 1995). 
Rule II reflect the intuition that continuation of 
the center and the use of retentions when possible 
to produce smooth transitions to a new center 
provide a basis for local coherence. 
For example in (1), the subjects of the utterance 
(1b) and (1d)  are eliminated, and their antecedents 
are identified as the subjects of the preceding 
utterances (1a) and (1c) respectively1 according to 
the centering model. 
(1) a.  i  	 
  
Electronics stocki receive USA high-tech 
stock heavy-fall affect 
Electronics stocksi were affected by high-
tech stocks fallen heavily in America. 
b. i   
(Electronics stocks)i continue fall 
(Electronics stocks)i continued falling down. 
c.  j    