A Web-based English Proofing System for English as a Second Language
Users
Xing Yi1, Jianfeng Gao2 and William B. Dolan2
1Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval, Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003-4610, USA
yixing@cs.umass.edu
2Microsoft Research, One Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA 98052, USA
{jfgao,billdol}@microsoft.com
Abstract
We describe an algorithm that relies on
web frequency counts to identify and correct
writing errors made by non-native writers of
English. Evaluation of the system on a real-
world ESL corpus showed very promising
performance on the very difficult problem of
critiquing English determiner use: 62% pre-
cision and 41% recall, with a false flag rate
of only 2% (compared to a random-guessing
baseline of 5% precision, 7% recall, and
more than 80% false flag rate). Performance
on collocation errors was less good, sug-
gesting that a web-based approach should be
combined with local linguistic resources to
achieve both effectiveness and efficiency.
1 Introduction
Proofing technology for native speakers of English
has been a focus of work for decades, and some
tools like spell checkers and grammar checkers have
become standard features of document processing
software products. However, designing an English
proofing system for English as a Second Language
(ESL) users presents a major challenge: ESL writ-
ing errors vary greatly among users with different
language backgrounds and proficiency levels. Re-
cent work by Brockett et al (2006) utilized phrasal
Statistical Machine Translation (SMT) techniques to
correct ESL writing errors and demonstrated that
this data-intensive SMT approach is very promising,
but they also pointed out SMT approach relies on the
availability of large amount of training data. The ex-
pense and difficulty of collecting large quantities of
Search Phrase Google.com Live.com Yahoo.com
English as
Second Language 306,000 52,407 386,000
English as a
Second Language 1,490,000 38,336,308 4,250,000
Table 1: Web Hits for Phrasal Usages
raw and edited ESL prose pose an obstacle to this
approach.
In this work we consider the prospect of using
the Web, with its billions of web pages, as a data
source with the potential to aid ESL writers. Our
research is motivated by the observation that ESL
users already use the Web as a corpus of good En-
glish, often using search engines to decide whether
a particular spelling, phrase, or syntactic construc-
tion is consistent with usage found on the Web. For
example, unsure whether the native-sounding phrase
includes the determiner ?a?, a user might search for
both quoted strings ?English as Second Language?
and ?English as a Second Language?. The counts
obtained for each of these phrases on three different
search engines are shown in Table 1. Note the cor-
rect version, ?English as a Second Language?, has a
much higher number of web hits.
In order to determine whether this approach holds
promise, we implemented a web-based system for
ESL writing error proofing. This pilot study was in-
tended to:
1. identify different types of ESL writing errors and
how often they occur in ESL users? writing samples,
so that the challenges and difficulties of ESL error
proofing can be understood better;
2. explore the advantages and drawbacks of a web-
619
based approach, discover useful web data features,
and identify which types of ESL errors can be reli-
ably proofed using this technique.
We first catalog some major categories of ESL
writing errors, then review related work. Section 3
describes our Web-based English Proofing System
for ESL users (called ESL-WEPS later). Section 4
presents experimental results. Section 5 concludes.
1.1 ESL Writing Errors
In order to get ESL writing samples, we employed
a third party to identify large volumes of ESL web
pages (mostly from Japanese, Korean and Chinese
ESL users? blogs), and cull 1K non-native sen-
tences. A native speaker then rewrote these ESL
sentences ? when possible ? to produce a native-
sounding version. 353 (34.9%) of the original 1012
ESL sentences were labeled ?native-like?, another
347 (34.3%) were rewritten, and the remaining 312
(30.8%) were classified as simply unintelligible.
Table 2 shows some examples from the corpus il-
lustrating some typical types of ESL writing errors
involving: (1) Verb-Noun Collocations (VNC) and
(4) Adjective-Noun Collocations (ANC); (2) incor-
rect use of the transitive verb ?attend?; (3) deter-
miner (article) usage problems; and (5) more com-
plex lexical and style problems. We analyzed all
the pre- and post-edited ESL samples and found 441
ESL errors: about 20% are determiner usage prob-
lems(missing/extra/misused); 15% are VNC errors,
1% are ANC errors; others represent complex syn-
tactic, lexical or style problems. Multiple errors can
co-occur in one sentence. These show that real-
world ESL error proofing is very challenging.
Our findings are consistent with previous research
results on ESL writing errors in two respects:
1. ESL users have significantly more problems
with determiner usage than native speakers be-
cause the use and omission of definite and
indefinite articles varies across different lan-
guages (Schneider and McCoy, 1998)(Lons-
dale and Strong-Krause, 2003).
2. Collocation errors are common among ESL
users, and collocational knowledge contributes
to the difference between native speakers and
ESL learners (Shei and Pain, 2000): in CLEC,
a real-world Chinese English Learner Corpus
(Gui and Yang, 2003), about 30% of ESL writ-
ing errors involve different types of collocation
errors.
In the remainder of the paper, we focus on proofing
determiner usage and VNC errors.
2 Related Work
Researchers have recently proposed some success-
ful learning-based approaches for the determiner se-
lection task (Minnen et al, 2000), but most of this
work has aimed only at helping native English users
correct typographical errors. Gamon et al(2008)
recently addressed the challenging task of proofing
writing errors for ESL users: they propose combin-
ing contextual speller techniques and language mod-
eling for proofing several types of ESL errors, and
demonstrate some promising results. In a departure
from this work, our system directly uses web data
for the ESL error proofing task.
There is a small body of previous work on the
use of online systems aimed at helping ESL learners
correct collocation errors. In Shei and Pain?s sys-
tem (2000), for instance, the British National Cor-
pus (BNC) is used to extract English collocations,
and an ESL learner writing corpus is then used to
build a collocation Error Library. In Jian et al?s sys-
tem (2004), the BNC is also used as a source of col-
locations, with collocation instances and translation
counterparts from the bilingual corpus identified and
shown to ESL users. In contrast to this earlier work,
our system uses the web as a corpus, with string fre-
quency counts from a search engine index used to in-
dicate whether a particular collocation is being used
correctly.
3 Web-based English Proofing System for
ESL Users (ESL-WEPS)
The architecture of ESL-WEPS, which consists of
four main components, is shown in Fig.1.
Parse ESL Sentence and Identify Check Points
ESL-WEPS first tags and chunks (Sang and Buck-
holz, 2000) the input ESL sentence1, and identi-
fies the elements of the structures in the sentence
to be checked according to certain heuristics: when
1One in-house HMM chunker trained on English Penn Tree-
bank was used.
620
ID Pre-editing version Post-editing version
1 Which team can take the champion? Which team will win the championship?
2 I attend to Pyoung Taek University. I attend Pyoung Taek University.
3 I?m a Japanese and studying Info and I?m Japanese and studying Info
Computer Science at Keio University. Computer Science at Keio University.
4 Her works are kinda erotic but they will Her works are kind of erotic, but they will
never arouse any obscene, devil thoughts which might never arouse any obscene, evil thoughts which might
destroy the soul of the designer. destroy the soul of the designer.
5 I think it is so beautiful to go the way of theology I think it is so beautiful to get into theology,
and very attractive too, especially in the area of Christianity. especially Christianity, which attracts me.
Table 2: Some pre- and post-editing ESL writing samples, Bold Italic characters show where the ESL errors
are and how they are corrected/rewritten by native English speaker.
ESL
Sentences
Pre-processing(POS Tagger and Chunk Parser) IdentifyCheck Point
I am learning economics
at university.
[NP I/PRP] [VP am/VBP  learning/
VBG economics/NNS] [PP at/IN] [NP
university/NN] ./.
[VP am/VBP learning/VBG
economics/NNS]
Generate a set of queries, in order to
search correct English usages from Web
Queries:
1.   [economics at university]  AND  [learning]
2.  [economics] AND  [at university] AND
[learning]
3.  [economics]  AND  [university]  AND
[learning]
Search
Engine
Use Web statistics to identify plausible errors, Collect Summaries, Mine collocations or
determiner usages, Generate good suggestions and provide Web example sentences
N-best suggestions:
1. studying 194
2. doing 12
3. visiting 11
Web Examples:
Why Study Economics? - For Lecturers
The design of open days, conferences and other events for school
students  studying economics  and/or thinking of  studying economics at
university . These could be held in a university, in a conference  
http://whystudyeconomics.ac.uk/lecturers/
Figure 1: System Architecture
checking VNC errors, the system searches for a
structure of the form (VP)(NP) or (VP)(PP)(NP) in
the chunked sentence; when checking determiner
usage, the system searches for (NP). Table 3 shows
some examples. For efficiency and effectiveness, the
user can specify that only one specific error type be
critiqued; otherwise it will check both error types:
first determiner usage, then collocations.
Generate Queries In order to find appropriate web
examples, ESL-WEPS generates at each check point
a set of queries. These queries involve three differ-
ent granularity levels, according to sentence?s syntax
structure:
1. Reduced Sentence Level. In order to use
more contextual information, our system pref-
erentially generates a maximal-length query
hereafter called S-Queries, by using the origi-
nal sentence. For the check point chunk, the
verb/adj. to be checked is found and extracted
based on POS tags; other chunks are simply
concatenated and used to formulate the query.
For example, for the first example in Table 3,
the S-Query is [?I have? AND ?this person for
years? AND ?recognized?].
2. Chunk Level. The system segments each ESL
sentence according to chunk tags and utilizes
chunk pairs to generate a query, hereafter re-
ferred to as a C-Query, e.g. the C-Query for the
second example in Table 3 is [?I? AND ?went?
AND ?to climb? AND ?a tall mountain? AND
?last week?]
3. Word Level. The system generates queries by
using keywords from the original string, in the
processing eliminating stopwords used in typ-
ical IR engines, hereafter referred to as a W-
Query, e.g. W-Query for the first example in
Table 3 is [?I? AND ?have? AND ?person? AND
?years? AND ?recognized?]
As queries get longer, web search engines tend to re-
turn fewer and fewer results. Therefore, ESL-WEPS
first segments the original ESL sentence by using
punctuation characters like commas and semicolons,
then generates a query from only the part which con-
tains the given check point. When checking deter-
miner usage, three different cases (a or an/the/none)
621
Parsed ESL sentence Error Type Check Points
(NP I/PRP) (VP have/VBP recognized/VBN) (NP this/DT person/NN) (PP for/IN) (NP years/NNS) ./. VNC recognized this person
(NP I/PRP) (VP went/VBD) (VP to/TO climb/VB) (NP a/DT tall/JJ mountain/NN) (NP last/JJ week/NN) ./. ANC tall mountain, last week
(NP I/PRP) (VP went/VBD) (PP to/TO) (NP coffee/NN) (NP shop/NN) (NP yesterday/NN) ./. Determiner usage coffee, shop, yesterday
(NP Someone/NN) (ADVP once/RB) (VP said/VBD) (SBAR that/IN) Determiner usage meet a right person
(ADVP when/WRB) (NP you/PRP) (VP meet/VBP) (NP a/DT right/JJ person/NN) at the wrong time
(PP at/IN) (NP the/DT wrong/JJ time/NN),/, (NP it/PRP) (VP ?s/VBZ) (NP a/DT pity/NN)./. ?s a pity
Table 3: Parsed ESL sentences and Check Points.
are considered for each check point. For instance,
given the last example in Table 3, three C-Queries
will be generated: [meet a right person],[meet the
right person] and [meet right person]. Note that a
term which has been POS-tagged as NNP (proper
noun) will be skipped and not used for generating
queries in order to obtain more web hits.
Retreive Web Statistics, Collect Snippets To col-
lect enough web examples, three levels of query sets
are submitted to the search engine in the following
order: S-Query, C-Query, and finally W-Query. For
each query, the web hits df returned by search en-
gine is recorded, and the snippets from the top 1000
hits are collected. For efficiency reasons, we follow
Dumais (2002)?s approach: the system relies only
on snippets rather than full-text of pages returned
for each hit; and does not rely on parsing or POS-
tagging for this step. However, a lexicon is used in
order to determine the possible parts-of-speech of a
word as well as its morphological variants. For ex-
ample, to find the correct VNC for a given noun ?tea?
in the returned snippets, the verb drank in the same
clause will be matched before ?tea?.
Identify Errors and Mine Correct Usages To de-
tect determiner usage errors, both the web hit dfq and
the length lq of a given query q are utilized, since
longer query phrases usually lead to fewer web hits.
DFLq, DFLMAX , qmax and Rq are defined as:
DFLq = dfq ? lq, for a given query q;
DFLMAX = max(DFLq),
qmax = argmax
q
(DFLq),
q ? {queries for a given check point};
Rq = DFLq/DFLMAX, given query q and check point.
If DFLMAX is less than a given threshold t1, this
check point will be skipped; otherwise the qmax in-
dicates the best usage. We also calculate the relative
ratio Rq for three usages (a or an/the/none). If Rq is
larger than a threshold t2 for a query q, the system
will not report that usage as an error because it is
sufficiently supported by web data.
For collocation check points, ESL-WEPS may in-
teract twice with the search engine: first, it issues
query sets to collect web examples and identify plau-
sible collocation errors; then, if errors are detected,
new query sets will be issued in the second step in
order to mine correct collocations from new web ex-
amples. For example, for the first sentence in Ta-
ble 3, the S-Query will be [?I have? AND ?this per-
son for years? AND ?recognized?]; the system an-
alyzes returned snippets and identifies ?recognized?
as a possible error. The system then issues a new
S-Query [?I have? AND ?this person for years?], and
finally mines the new set of snippets to discover that
?known? is the preferred lexical option. In contrast
to proofing determiner usages errors, mfreq:
mfreq = frequency of matched collocational verb/adj.
in the snippets for a given noun,
is utilized to both identify errors and suggest correct
VNCs/ANCs. If mfreq is larger than a threshold
t3, the system will conclude that the collocation is
plausible and skip the suggestion step.
4 Experiments
In order to evaluate the proofing algorithm described
above, we utilized the MSN search engine API and
the ESL writing sample set described in Section
1.1 to evaluate the algorithm?s performance on two
tasks: determiner usage and VNC proofing. From
a practical standpoint, we consider precision on the
proofing task to be considerably more important
than recall: false flags are annoying and highly vis-
ible to the user, while recall failures are much less
problematic.
Given the complicated nature of the ESL error
proofing task, about 60% of ESL sentences in our set
that contained determiner errors also contained other
types of ESL errors. As a result, we were forced
to slightly revise the typical precision/recall mea-
surement in order to evaluate performance. First,
622
Good Proofing Examples
Error sentence 1 In my opinion, therefore, when we describe terrorism, its crucially important that
we consider the degree of the influence (i.e., power) on the other countries.
proofing suggestion consider the degree of influence
Error sentence 2 Someone once said that when you meet a right person at the wrong time, it?s a pity.
proofing suggestion meet the right person at the wrong time
Plausible Useful Proofing Examples
Error sentence 3 The most powerful place in Beijing, and in the whole China.
native speaker suggestion in the whole of China
system suggestion in whole China
Error sentence 4 Me, I wanna keep in touch with old friends and wanna talk with anyone who has different thought, etc.
native speaker suggestion has different ideas
system suggestion has a different thought
Table 4: ESL Determiner Usage Proofing by Native Speaker and ESL-WEPS.
Good Proofing Examples
Error sentence 1 I had great time there and got many friends.
proofing suggestion made many friends
Error sentence 2 Which team can take the champion?
proofing suggestion win the champion
Plausible Useful Proofing Examples
Error sentence 3 It may sounds fun if I say my firm resolution of this year is to get a girl friend.
native speaker suggestion sound funny
system suggestion make * fun or get * fun
Table 5: ESL VNC Proofing by Native Speaker and ESL-WEPS.
we considered three cases: (1) the system correctly
identifies an error and proposes a suggestion that ex-
actly matches the native speaker?s rewrite; (2) the
system correctly identifies an error but makes a sug-
gestion that differs from the native speaker?s edit;
and (3) the system incorrectly identifies an error. In
the first case, we consider the proofing good, in the
second, plausibly useful, and in the third case it is
simply wrong. Correspondingly, we introduce the
categories Good Precision (GP), Plausibly Useful
Precision (PUP) and Error Suggestion Rate (ESR),
which were calculated by:
GP = # of Good Proofings# of System?s Proofings ;
PUP = # of Plausibly Useful Proofings# of System?s Proofings ;
ESR = # of Wrong Proofings# of System?s Proofings ;
GP + PUP + ESR = 1
Furthermore, assuming that there are overall NA er-
rors for a given type A of ESL error , the typical
recall and false alarm were calculated by:
recall = # of Good ProofingsNA ;
false alarm = # of Wrong Proofings# of Check points for ESL error A
Table 4 and Table 5 show examples of Good or
Plausibly Useful proofing for determiner usage and
collocation errors, respectively. It can be seen the
system makes plausibly useful proofing suggestions
because some errors types are out of current sys-
tem?s checking range.
The system achieved very promising performance
despite the fact that many of the test sentences con-
tained other, complex ESL errors: using appro-
priate system parameters, ESL-WEPS showed re-
call 40.7% on determiner usage errors, with 62.5%
of these proofing suggestions exactly matching the
rewrites provided by native speakers. Crucially, the
false flag rate was only 2%. Note that a random-
guessing baseline was about 5% precision, 7% re-
call, but more than 80% false flag rate.
For collocation errors, we focused on the most
common VNC proofing task. mfreq and threshold
t3 described in Section 3 are used to control false
alarm, GP and recall. A smaller t3 can reduce recall,
but can increase GP. Table 7 shows how performance
changes with different settings for t3, and Fig. 2(b)
plots the GP/recall curve. Results are not very good:
as recall increases, GP decreases too quickly, so that
at 30.7% recall, precision is only 37.3%. We at-
tribute this to the fact that most search engines only
return the top 1000 web snippets for each query and
our current system relies on this limited number of
snippets to generate and rank candidates.
623
Recall 16.3% 30.2% 40.7% 44.2% 47.7% 50.0%
GP 73.7% 70.3% 62.5% 56.7% 53.3% 52.4%
PUP 15.8% 16.2% 25.0% 29.9% 29.9% 29.3%
false alarm 0.4% 1.4% 2.0% 2.6% 3.7% 4.3%
Table 6: Proofing performance of determiner usage
changes when setting different system parameters.
Recall 11.3% 12.9% 17.8% 25.8% 29.0% 30.7%
GP 77.8% 53.3% 52.4% 43.2% 40.9% 37.3%
PUP 11.11% 33.33% 33.33% 45.10% 48.65% 50.00%
false alarm 0.28% 0.57% 0.85% 0.85% 1.13% 2.55%
Table 7: VNC Proofing performance changes when
setting different system parameters.
5 Conclusion
This paper introduced an approach to the challeng-
ing real-world ESL writing error proofing task that
uses the index of a web search engine for cor-
pus statistics. We validated ESL-WEPS on a web-
crawled ESL writing corpus and compared the sys-
tem?s proofing suggestions to those produced by na-
tive English speakers. Promising performance was
achieved for proofing determiner errors, but less
good results for VNC proofing, possibly because the
current system uses web snippets to rank and gener-
ate collocation candidates. We are currently investi-
gating a modified strategy that exploits high quality
local collocation/synonym lists to limit the number
of proposed Verb/Adj. candidates.
We are also collecting more ESL data to validate
our system and are extending our system to more
ESL error types. Recent experiments on new data
showed that ESL-WEPS can also effectively proof
incorrect choices of prepositions. Later research will
compare the web-based approach to conventional
corpus-based approaches like Gamon et al (2008),
and explore their combination to address complex
ESL errors.
Good Precision vs. Recall
20.0%
30.0%
40.0%
50.0%
60.0%
70.0%
80.0%
10.0% 20.0% 30.0% 40.0% 50.0% 60.0% 70.0% 80.0%
Good Precision vs. Recall
20.0%
30.0%
40.0%
50.0%
60.0%
70.0%
80.0%
90.0%
5.0% 10.0% 15.0% 20.0% 25.0% 30.0% 35.0%(a)Determiner Usage Error Proofing (b)VNC Error Proofing
Figure 2: GP/recall curves. X and Y axis denotes
GP and Recall respectively.
Acknowledgement The authors have benefited
extensively from discussions with Michael Gamon
and Chris Brockett. We also thank the Butler Hill
Group for collecting the ESL examples.
References
C. Brockett, W. B. Dolan, and M. Gamon. 2006. Cor-
recting ESL errors using phrasal smt techniques. In
Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on
Computational Linguistics and the 44th annual meet-
ing of the ACL, pages 249?256, Sydney, Australia.
S. Dumais, M. Banko, E. Brill, J. Lin, and A. Ng. 2002.
Web question answering: is more always better? In
Proceedings of the 25th Annual International ACM SI-
GIR, pages 291?298, Tampere, Finland.
M. Gamon, J.F. Gao, C. Brockett, A. Klementiev, W.B.
Dolan, and L. Vanderwende. 2008. Using contextual
speller techniques and language modeling for ESL er-
ror correction. In Proceedings of IJCNLP 2008, Hy-
derabad, India, January.
S. Gui and H. Yang, 2003. Zhongguo Xuexizhe Yingyu
Yuliaoku. (Chinese Learner English Corpus). Shang-
hai Waiyu Jiaoyu Chubanshe, Shanghai. (In Chinese).
Jia-Yan Jian, Yu-Chia Chang, and Jason S. Chang.
2004. TANGO: bilingual collocational concordancer.
In Proceedings of the ACL 2004, pages 19?23,
Barcelona, Spain.
D. Lonsdale and D. Strong-Krause. 2003. Automated
rating of ESL essays. In Proceedings of the NAACL-
HLT 03 workshop on Building educational applica-
tions using natural language processing, pages 61?67,
Edmonton, Canada.
G. Minnen, F. Bond, and A. Copestake. 2000. Memory-
based learning for article generation. In Proceedings
of the Fourth Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning and of the Second Learning Lan-
guage in Logic Workshop, pages 43?48.
E. Tjong Kim Sang and S. Buckholz. 2000. Introduction
to the conll-2000 shared task: Chunking. In Proceed-
ings of CoNLL-2000 and LLL-2000, pages 127?132,
Lisbon, Portugal.
D. Schneider and K. F. McCoy. 1998. Recognizing syn-
tactic errors in the writing of second language learn-
ers. In Proceedings of the 17th international confer-
ence on Computational linguistics, pages 1198?1204,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
C.-C. Shei and H. Pain. 2000. An esl writer?s collo-
cational aid. Computer Assisted Language Learning,
13(2):167?182.
624
Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2007, pages 89?96,
Rochester, NY, April 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Information Retrieval On Empty Fields
Victor Lavrenko, Xing Yi and James Allan
Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval
Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003-4610, USA
{lavrenko,yixing,allan}@cs.umass.edu
Abstract
We explore the problem of retrieving
semi-structured documents from a real-
world collection using a structured query.
We formally develop Structured Rele-
vance Models (SRM), a retrieval model
that is based on the idea that plausible
values for a given field could be inferred
from the context provided by the other
fields in the record. We then carry out a
set of experiments using a snapshot of the
National Science Digital Library (NSDL)
repository, and queries that only mention
fields missing from the test data. For such
queries, typical field matching would re-
trieve no documents at all. In contrast, the
SRM approach achieves a mean average
precision of over twenty percent.
1 Introduction
This study investigates information retrieval on
semi-structured information, where documents con-
sist of several textual fields that can be queried in-
dependently. If documents contained subject and
author fields, for example, we would expect to see
queries looking for documents about theory of rela-
tivity by the author Einstein.
This setting suggests exploring the issue of inex-
act match?is special theory of relativity relevant??
that has been explored elsewhere (Cohen, 2000).
Our interest is in an extreme case of that problem,
where the content of a field is not corrupted or in-
correct, but is actually absent. We wish to find rele-
vant information in response to a query such as the
one above even if a relevant document is completely
missing the subject and author fields.
Our research is motivated by the challenges we
encountered in working with the National Science
Digital Library (NSDL) collection.1 Each item in
the collection is a scientific resource, such as a re-
search paper, an educational video, or perhaps an
entire website. In addition to its main content, each
resource is annotated with metadata, which provides
information such as the author or creator of the re-
source, its subject area, format (text/image/video)
and intended audience ? in all over 90 distinct fields
(though some are very related). Making use of such
extensive metadata in a digital library paves the way
for constructing highly-focused models of the user?s
information need. These models have the potential
to dramatically improve the user experience in tar-
geted applications, such as the NSDL portals. To
illustrate this point, suppose that we are running
an educational portal targeted at elementary school
teachers, and some user requests teaching aids for
an introductory class on gravity. An intelligent
search system would be able to translate the request
into a structured query that might look something
like: subject=?gravity? AND audience=?grades 1-4?
AND format=?image,video? AND rights=?free-for-
academic-use?. Such a query can be efficiently an-
swered by a relational database system.
Unfortunately, using a relational engine to query a
semi-structured collection similar to NSDL will run
into a number of obstacles. The simplest problem is
1http://www.nsdl.org
89
that natural language fields are filled inconsistently:
e.g., the audience field contains values such as K-
4, K-6, second grade, and learner, all of which are
clearly semantically related.
A larger problem, and the one we focus on in this
study, is that of missing fields. For example 24%
of the items in the NSDL collection have no sub-
ject field, 30% are missing the author information,
and over 96% mention no target audience (reading
level). This means that a relational query for ele-
mentary school material will consider at most 4% of
all potentially relevant resources in the NSDL col-
lection.2
The goal of our work is to introduce a retrieval
model that will be capable of answering complex
structured queries over a semi-structured collection
with corrupt and missing field values. This study
focuses on the latter problem, an extreme version
of the former. Our approach is to use a generative
model to compute how plausible a word would ap-
pear in a record?s empty field given the context pro-
vided by the other fields in the record.
The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows. We survey previous attempts at handling semi-
structured data in section 2. Section 3 will provide
the details of our approach, starting with a high-level
view, then providing a mathematical framework, and
concluding with implementation details. Section 4
will present an extensive evaluation of our model on
the large set of queries over the NSDL collection.
We will summarize our results and suggest direc-
tions for future research in Section 5.
2 Related work
The issue of missing field values is addressed in a
number of recent publications straddling the areas of
relational databases and machine learning. In most
cases, researchers introduce a statistical model for
predicting the value of a missing attribute or relation,
based on observed values. Friedman et al(1999) in-
troduce a technique called Probabilistic Relational
Models (PRM) for automatically learning the struc-
ture of dependencies in a relational database. Taskar
2Some of the NSDL metadata fields overlap substantially in
meaning, so it might be argued that the overlapping fields will
cover the collection better. Under the broadest possible inter-
pretation of field meanings, more than 7% of the documents
still contain no subject and 95% still contain no audience field.
et al(2001) demonstrate how PRM can be used to
predict the category of a given research paper and
show that categorization accuracy can be substan-
tially improved by leveraging the relational structure
of the data. Heckerman et al(2004) introduce the
Probabilistic Entity Relationship (PER) model as an
extension of PRM that treats relations between enti-
ties as objects. Neville at al (2003) discuss predict-
ing binary labels in relational data using Relational
Probabilistic Trees (RPT). Using this method they
successfully predict whether a movie was a box of-
fice hit based on other movies that share some of
the properties (actors, directors, producers) with the
movie in question.
Our work differs from most of these approaches in
that we work with free-text fields, whereas database
researchers typically deal with closed-vocabulary
values, which exhibit neither the synonymy nor the
polysemy inherent in natural language expressions.
In addition, the goal of our work is different: we aim
for accurate ranking of records by their relevance to
the user?s query, whereas database research has typ-
ically focused on predicting the missing value.
Our work is related to a number of existing ap-
proaches to semi-structured text search. Desai et
al (1987) followed by Macleod (1991) proposed us-
ing the standard relational approach to searching
unstructured texts. The lack of an explicit rank-
ing function in their approaches was partially ad-
dressed by Blair (1988). Fuhr (1993) proposed the
use of Probabilistic Relational Algebra (PRA) over
the weights of individual term matches. Vasan-
thukumar et al(1996) developed a relational imple-
mentation of the inference network retrieval model.
A similar approach was taken by de Vries and
Wilschut (1999), who managed to improve the ef-
ficiency of the approach. De Fazio et al(1995) in-
tegrated IR and RDBMS technology using an ap-
proached called cooperative indexing. Cohen (2000)
describes WHIRL ? a language that allows efficient
inexact matching of textual fields within SQL state-
ments. A number of relevant works are also pub-
lished in the proceedings of the INEX workshop.3
The main difference between these endeavors and
our work is that we are explicitly focusing on the
cases where parts of the structured data are missing
3http://inex.is.informatik.uni-duisburg.de/index.html
90
or mis-labeled.
3 Structured Relevance Model
In this section we will provide a detailed description
of our approach to searching semi-structured data.
Before diving into the details of our model, we want
to clearly state the challenge we intend to address
with our system.
3.1 Task: finding relevant records
The aim of our system is to identify a set of
records relevant to a structured query provided by
the user. We assume the query specifies a set of
keywords for each field of interest to the user, for
example Q: subject=?physics,gravity? AND audi-
ence=?grades 1-4?4. Each record in the database is
a set of natural-language descriptions for each field.
A record is considered relevant if it could plausibly
be annotated with the query fields. For example, a
record clearly aimed at elementary school students
would be considered relevant to Q even if it does not
contain ?grades 1-4? in its description of the target
audience. In fact, our experiments will specifically
focus on finding relevant records that contain no di-
rect match to the specified query fields, explicitly
targeting the problem of missing data and inconsis-
tent schemata.
This task is not a typical IR task because the
fielded structure of the query is a critical aspect of
the processing, not one that is largely ignored in fa-
vor of pure content based retrieval. On the other
hand, the approach used is different from most DB
work because cross-field dependencies are a key
component of the technique. In addition, the task
is unusual for both communities because it consid-
ers an unusual case where the fields in the query do
not occur at all in the documents being searched.
3.2 Overview of the approach
Our approach is based on the idea that plausible val-
ues for a given field could be inferred from the con-
text provided by the other fields in the record. For
instance, a resource titled ?Transductive SVMs? and
containing highly technical language in its descrip-
tion is unlikely to be aimed at elementary-school stu-
4For this paper we will focus on simple conjunctive queries.
Extending our model to more complex queries is reserved for
future research.
dents. In the following section we will describe a
statistical model that will allow us to guess the val-
ues of un-observed fields. At the intuitive level, the
model takes advantage of the fact that records sim-
ilar in one respect will often be similar in others.
For example, if two resources share the same author
and have similar titles, they are likely to be aimed at
the same audience. Formally, our model is based on
the generative paradigm. We will describe a proba-
bilistic process that could be viewed, hypothetically,
as the source of every record in our collection. We
will assume that the query provided by our user is
also a sample from this generative process, albeit a
very short one. We will use the observed query fields
(e.g. audience and subject) to estimate the likely val-
ues for other fields, which would be plausible in the
context of the observed subject and audience. The
distributions over plausible values will be called rel-
evance models, since they are intended to mimic the
kind of record that might be relevant to the observed
query. Finally, all records in the database will be
ranked by their information-theoretic similarity to
these relevance models.
3.3 Definitions
We start with a set of definitions that will be used
through the remainder of this paper. Let C be a
collection of semi-structured records. Each record
w consists of a set of fields w1. . .wm. Each
field wi is a sequence of discrete variables (words)
wi,1. . .wi,ni , taking values in the field vocabulary
Vi.5 When a record contains no information for the
i?th field, we assume ni=0 for that record. A user?s
query q takes the same representation as a record
in the database: q={qi,j?Vi : i=1..m, j = 1..ni}.
We will use pi to denote a language model over Vi,
i.e. a set of probabilities pi(v)?[0, 1], one for each
word v, obeying the constraint ?vpi(v) = 1. The
set of all possible language models over Vi will be
denoted as the probability simplex IPi. We define
pi : IP1?? ? ??IPm?[0, 1] to be a discrete measure
function that assigns a probability mass pi(p1. . .pm)
to a set of m language models, one for each of the
m fields present in our collection.
5We allow each field to have its own vocabulary Vi, since we
generally do not expect author names to occur in the audience
field, etc. We also allow Vi to share same words.
91
3.4 Generative Model
We will now present a generative process that will be
viewed as a hypothetical source that produced ev-
ery record in the collection C. We stress that this
process is purely hypothetical; its only purpose is to
model the kinds of dependencies that are necessary
to achieve effective ranking of records in response to
the user?s query. We assume that each record w in
the database is generated in the following manner:
1. Pick m distributions p1. . .pm according to pi
2. For each field i = 1. . .m:
(a) Pick the length ni of the i?th field of w
(b) Draw i.i.d. words wi,1. . .wi,ni from pi
Under this process, the probability of observing a
record {wi,j : i=1..m, j=1..ni} is given by the fol-
lowing expression:
?
IP1...IPm
[ m?
i=1
ni?
j=1
pi(wi,j)
]
pi(p1. . .pm)dp1. . .dpm (1)
3.4.1 A generative measure function
The generative measure function pi plays a critical
part in equation (1): it specifies the likelihood of us-
ing different combinations of language models in the
process of generating w. We use a non-parametric
estimate for pi, which relies directly on the combi-
nations of language models that are observed in the
training part of the collection. Each training record
w1. . .wm corresponds to a unique combination of
language models pw1 . . .pwm defined by the following
equation:
pwi (v) = #(v,wi) + ?icvni + ?i (2)
Here #(v,wi) represents the number of times the
word v was observed in the i?th field of w, ni
is the length of the i?th field, and cv is the rela-
tive frequency of v in the entire collection. Meta-
parameters ?i allow us to control the amount of
smoothing applied to language models of different
fields; their values are set empirically on a held-out
portion of the data.
We define pi(p1. . .pm) to have mass 1N when
its argument p1. . .pm corresponds to one of the N
records w in the training part Ct of our collection,
and zero otherwise:
pi(p1. . .pm) = 1N
?
w?Ct
m?
i=1
1pi=pwi (3)
Here pwi is the language model associated with the
training record w (equation 2), and 1x is the Boolean
indicator function that returns 1 when its predicate x
is true and zero when it is false.
3.4.2 Assumptions and limitations of the model
The generative model described in the previous
section treats each field in the record as a bag of
words with no particular order. This representation
is often associated with the assumption of word in-
dependence. We would like to stress that our model
does not assume word independence, on the con-
trary, it allows for strong un-ordered dependencies
among the words ? both within a field, and across
different fields within a record. To illustrate this
point, suppose we let ?i?0 in equation (2) to re-
duce the effects of smoothing. Now consider the
probability of observing the word ?elementary? in
the audience field together with the word ?differen-
tial? in the title (equation 1). It is easy to verify that
the probability will be non-zero only if some train-
ing record w actually contained these words in their
respective fields ? an unlikely event. On the other
hand, the probability of ?elementary? and ?differen-
tial? co-occurring in the same title might be consid-
erably higher.
While our model does not assume word indepen-
dence, it does ignore the relative ordering of the
words in each field. Consequently, the model will
fail whenever the order of words, or their proximity
within a field carries a semantic meaning. Finally,
our generative model does not capture dependencies
across different records in the collection, each record
is drawn independently according to equation (1).
3.5 Using the model for retrieval
In this section we will describe how the generative
model described above can be used to find database
records relevant to the structured query provided by
the user. We are given a structured query q, and
a collection of records, partitioned into the training
portion Ct and the testing portion Ce. We will use
the training records to estimate a set of relevance
92
records average unique
covered length words
title 655,673 (99%) 7 102,772
description 514,092 (78%) 38 189,136
subject 504,054 (77%) 12 37,385
content 91,779 (14%) 743 575,958
audience 22,963 (3.5%) 4 119
Table 1: Summary statistics for the five NSDL fields
used in our retrieval experiments.
models R1. . .Rm, intended to reflect the user?s in-
formation need. We will then rank testing records by
their divergence from these relevance models. A rel-
evance Ri(v) specifies how plausible it is that word
v would occur in the i?th field of a record, given
that the record contains a perfect match to the query
fields q1. . .qm:
Ri(v) = P (q1. . .v?qi. . .qm)P (q1. . .qi. . .qm) (4)
We use v?qi to denote appending word v to the
string qi. Both the numerator and the denomina-
tor are computed using equation (1). Once we have
computed relevance models Ri for each of the m
fields, we can rank testing records w? by their sim-
ilarity to these relevance models. As a similarity
measure we use weighted cross-entropy, which is an
extension of the ranking formula originally proposed
by (Lafferty and Zhai, 2001):
H(R1..m;w1..m) =
m?
i=1
?i
?
v?Vi
Ri(v) logpwi (v) (5)
The outer summation goes over every field of inter-
est, while the inner extends over all the words in the
vocabulary of the i?th field. Ri are computed accord-
ing to equation (4), while pwi are estimated from
equation (2). Meta-parameters ?i allow us to vary
the importance of different fields in the final rank-
ing; the values are selected on a held-out portion of
the data.
4 Experiments
4.1 Dataset and queries
We tested the performance of our model on a Jan-
uary 2005 snapshot of the National Science Digi-
tal Library repository. The snapshot contains a to-
tal of 656,992 records, spanning 92 distinct (though
sometimes related) fields. 6Only 7 of these fields
are present in every record, and half the fields are
present in less than 1% of the records. An average
record contains only 17 of the 92 fields. Our experi-
ments focus on a subset of 5 fields (title, description,
subject, content and audience). These fields were
selected for two reasons: (i) they occur frequently
enough to allow a meaningful evaluation and (ii)
they seem plausible to be included in a potential
query.7 Of these fields, title represents the title of the
resource, description is a very brief abstract, content
is a more detailed description (but not the full con-
tent) of the resource, subject is a library-like clas-
sification of the topic covered by the resource, and
audience reflects the target reading level (e.g. ele-
mentary school or post-graduate). Summary statis-
tics for these fields are provided in Table 1.
The dataset was randomly split into three sub-
sets: the training set, which comprised 50% of the
records and was used for estimating the relevance
models as described in section 3.5; the held-out set,
which comprised 25% of the data and was used to
tune the smoothing parameters ?i and the bandwidth
parameters ?i; and the evaluation set, which con-
tained 25% of the records and was used to evaluate
the performance of the tuned model8.
Our experiments are based on a set of 127 auto-
matically generated queries. We randomly split the
queries into two groups, 64 for training and 63 for
evaluation. The queries were constructed by com-
bining two randomly picked subject words with two
audience words, and then discarding any combi-
nation that had less than 10 exact matches in any
of the three subsets of our collection. This proce-
dure yields queries such as Q91={subject:?artificial
intelligence? AND audience=?researchers?}, or
Q101={subject:?philosophy? AND audience=?high
school?}.
4.2 Evaluation paradigm
We evaluate our model by its ability to find ?rele-
vant? records in the face of missing values. We de-
6As of May 2006, the NSDL contains over 1.5 million doc-
uments.
7The most frequent NSDL fields (id, icon, url, link and 4
brand fields) seem unlikely to be used in user queries.
8In real use, typical pseudo relevance feedback scheme can
be followed: retrieve top-k documents to build relevance mod-
els then perform IR again on the same whole collection
93
fine a record w to be relevant to the user?s query q
if every keyword in q is found in the corresponding
field of w. For example, in order to be relevant to
Q101 a record must contain the word ?philosophy? in
the subject field and words ?high? and ?school? in the
audience field. If either of the keywords is missing,
the record is considered non-relevant.9
When the testing records are fully observable,
achieving perfect retrieval accuracy is trivial: we
simply return all records that match all query key-
words in the subject and audience fields. As we
stated earlier, our main interest concerns the sce-
nario when parts of the testing data are missing. We
are going to simulate this scenario in a rather ex-
treme manner by completely removing the subject
and audience fields from all testing records. This
means that a straightforward approach ? matching
query fields against record fields ? will yield no rel-
evant results. Our approach will rank testing records
by comparing their title, description and content
fields against the query-based relevance models, as
discussed in section 3.5.
We will use the standard rank-based evaluation
metrics: precision and recall. Let NR be the total
number of records relevant to a given query, sup-
pose that the first K records in our ranking contain
NK relevant ones. Precision at rank K is defined
as NKK and recall is defined as
NK
NR . Average preci-
sion is defined as the mean precision over all ranks
where relevant items occur. R-precision is defined
as precision at rank K=NR.
4.3 Baseline systems
Our experiments will compare the ranking perfor-
mance of the following retrieval systems:
cLM is a cheating version of un-structured text
search using a state-of-the-art language-modeling
approach (Ponte and Croft, 1998). We disregard
the structure, take all query keywords and run them
against a concatenation of all fields in the testing
records. This is a ?cheating? baseline, since the con-
9This definition of relevance is unduly conservative by the
standards of Information Retrieval researchers. Many records
that might be considered relevant by a human annotator will be
treated as non-relevant, artificially decreasing the accuracy of
any retrieval algorithm. However, our approach has the advan-
tage of being fully automatic: it allows us to test our model on
a scale that would be prohibitively expensive with manual rele-
vance judgments.
catenation includes the audience and subject fields,
which are supposed to be missing from the testing
records. We use Dirichlet smoothing (Lafferty and
Zhai, 2001), with parameters optimized on the train-
ing data. This baseline mimics the core search capa-
bility currently available on the NSDL website.
bLM is a combination of SQL-like structured
matching and unstructured search with query ex-
pansion. We take all training records that contain
an exact match to our query and select 10 highly-
weighted words from the title, description, and con-
tent fields of these records. We run the resulting 30
words as a language modeling query against the con-
catenation of title, description, and content fields in
the testing records. This is a non-cheating baseline.
bMatch is a structured extension of bLM. As in
bLM, we pick training records that contain an ex-
act match to the query fields. Then we match 10
highly-weighted title words, against the title field of
testing records, do the same for the description and
content fields, and merge the three resulting ranked
lists. This is a non-cheating baseline that is similar
to our model (SRM). The main difference is that this
approach uses exact matching to select the training
records, whereas SRM leverages a best-match lan-
guage modeling algorithm.
SRM is the Structured Relevance Model, as de-
scribed in section 3.5. For reasons of both effec-
tiveness and efficiency, we firstly run the original
query to retrieve top-500 records, then use these
records to build SRMs. When calculating the cross
entropy(equ. 5), for each field we only include the
top-100 words which will appear in that field with
the largest probabilities.
Note that our baselines do not include a standard
SQL approach directly on testing records. Such
an approach would have perfect performance in a
?cheating? scenario with observable subject and au-
dience fields, but would not match any records when
the fields are removed.
4.4 Experimental results
Table 2 shows the performance of our model (SRM)
against the three baselines. The model parameters
were tuned using the 64 training queries on the train-
ing and held-out sets. The results are for the 63 test
queries run against the evaluation corpus. (Similar
results occur if the 64 training queries are run against
94
cLM bMatch bLM SRM %change improved
Rel-ret: 949 582 914 861 -5.80 26/50
Interpolated Recall - Precision:
at 0.00 0.3852 0.3730 0.4153 0.5448 31.2 33/49
at 0.10 0.3014 0.3020 0.3314 0.4783 44.3 42/56
at 0.20 0.2307 0.2256 0.2660 0.3641 36.9 40/59
at 0.30 0.2105 0.1471 0.2126 0.2971 39.8 36/58
at 0.40 0.1880 0.1130 0.1783 0.2352 31.9 36/58
at 0.50 0.1803 0.0679 0.1591 0.1911 20.1 32/57
at 0.60 0.1637 0.0371 0.1242 0.1439 15.8 27/51
at 0.70 0.1513 0.0161 0.1001 0.1089 8.7 21/42
at 0.80 0.1432 0.0095 0.0901 0.0747 -17.0 18/36
at 0.90 0.1292 0.0055 0.0675 0.0518 -23.2 12/27
at 1.00 0.1154 0.0043 0.0593 0.0420 -29.2 9/23
Avg.Prec. 0.1790 0.1050 0.1668 0.2156 29.25 43/63
Precision at:
5 docs 0.1651 0.2159 0.2413 0.3556 47.4 32/43
10 docs 0.1571 0.1651 0.2063 0.2889 40.0 34/48
15 docs 0.1577 0.1471 0.1841 0.2360 28.2 32/49
20 docs 0.1540 0.1349 0.1722 0.2024 17.5 28/47
30 docs 0.1450 0.1101 0.1492 0.1677 12.4 29/50
100 docs 0.0913 0.0465 0.0849 0.0871 2.6 37/57
200 docs 0.0552 0.0279 0.0539 0.0506 -6.2 33/53
500 docs 0.0264 0.0163 0.0255 0.0243 -4.5 26/48
1000 docs 0.0151 0.0092 0.0145 0.0137 -5.8 26/50
R-Prec. 0.1587 0.1204 0.1681 0.2344 39.44 31/49
Table 2: Performance of the 63 test queries retrieving 1000 documents on the evaluation data. Bold figures
show statistically significant differences. Across all 63 queries, there are 1253 relevant documents.
the evalution corpus.)
The upper half of Table 2 shows precision at
fixed recall levels; the lower half shows precision
at different ranks. The %change column shows rel-
ative difference between our model and the base-
line bLM. The improved column shows the num-
ber of queries where SRM exceeded bLM vs. the
number of queries where performance was different.
For example, 33/49 means that SRM out-performed
bLM on 33 queries out of 63, underperformed on
49?33=16 queries, and had exactly the same per-
formance on 63?49=14 queries. Bold figures in-
dicate statistically significant differences (according
to the sign test with p < 0.05).
The results show that SRM outperforms three
baselines in the high-precision region, beating
bLM?s mean average precision by 29%. User-
oriented metrics, such as R-precision and precision
at 10 documents, are improved by 39.4% and 44.3%
respectively. The absolute performance figures are
also very encouraging. Precision of 28% at rank 10
means that on average almost 3 out of the top 10
records in the ranked list are relevant, despite the re-
quested fields not being available to the model.
We note that SRM continues to outperform bLM
until very high recall and until the 100-document
cutoff. After that, SRM degrades rapidly with re-
spect to bLM. We feel the drop in effectiveness is of
marginal interest because precision is already well
below 10% and few users will be continuing to that
depth in the list.
It is encouraging to see that SRM outperforms
both cLM, the cheating baseline that takes advantage
of the field values that are supposed to be ?miss-
ing?, and bMatch, suggesting that best-match re-
trieval provides a superior strategy for selecting a set
of appropriate training records.
5 Conclusions
We have developed and empirically validated a new
retrieval model for semi-structured text. The model
is based on the idea that missing or corrupted val-
ues for one field can be inferred from values in other
fields of the record. The cross-field inference makes
it possible to find documents in response to a struc-
tured query when those query fields do not exist in
the relevant documents at all.
We validated the SRM approach on a large
95
archive of the NSDL repository. We developed a
large set of structured Boolean queries that had rel-
evant documents in the test portion of collection.
We then indexed the documents without the fields
used in the queries. As a result, using standard field
matching approaches, not a single document would
be returned in response to the queries?in particular,
no relevant documents would be found.
We showed that standard information retrieval
techniques and structured field matching could be
combined to address this problem, but that the SRM
approach outperforms them. We note that SRM
brought two relevant documents into the top five?
again, querying on missing fields?and achieved an
average precision of 23%, a more than 35% im-
provement over a state-of-the-art relevance model
approach combining the standard field matching.
Our work is continuing by exploring methods
for handling fields with incorrect or corrupted val-
ues. The challenge becomes more than just inferring
what values might be there; it requires combining
likely missing values with confidence in the values
already present: if an audience field contains ?under-
graduate?, it should be unlikely that ?K-6? would be
a plausible value, too.
In addition to using SRMs for retrieval, we are
currently extending the ideas to provide field valida-
tion and suggestions for data entry and validation:
the same ideas used to find documents with miss-
ing field values can also be used to suggest potential
values for a field and to identify values that seem
inappropriate. We have also begun explorations to-
ward using inferred values to help a user browse
when starting from some structured information?
e.g., given values for two fields, what values are
probable for other fields.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the Center
for Intelligent Information Retrieval and in part by
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA) under contract number HR0011-06-C-
0023. Any opinions, findings and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are the
authors? and do not necessarily reflect those of the
sponsor.
References
D.C. Blair. 1988. An extended relational document re-
trieval model. Inf. Process. Manage., 24(3):349?371.
W.W. Cohen. 2000. WHIRL: A word-based informa-
tion representation language. Artificial Intelligence,
118(1?2):163?196.
S. DeFazio, A. Daoud, L. A. Smith, and J. Srinivasan.
1995. Integrating IR and RDBMS Using Cooperative
Indexing. In Proceedings of SIGIR, pages 84?92.
B. C. Desai, P. Goyal, and F. Sadri. 1987. Non-first nor-
mal form universal relations: an application to infor-
mation retrieval systems. Inf. Syst., 12(1):49?55.
N. Friedman, L. Getoor, D. Koller, and A. Pfeffer. 1999.
Learning probabilistic relational models. In IJCAI,
pages 1300?1309.
N. Fuhr. 1993. A probabilistic relational model for the
integration of IR and databases. In Proceedings of SI-
GIR, pages 309?317.
D. Heckerman, C. Meek, and D. Koller. 2004. Proba-
bilistic models for relational data. Technical Report
MSR-TR-2004-30, Microsoft Research.
J. Lafferty and C. Zhai. 2001. Document language mod-
els, query models, and risk minimization for informa-
tion retrieval. In Proceedings of SIGIR, pages 111?
119.
I. Macleod. 1991. Text retrieval and the relational model.
Journal of the American Society for Information Sci-
ence, 42(3):155?165.
J. Neville, D. Jensen, L. Friedland, and M. Hay. 2003.
Learning relational probability trees. In Proceedings
of ACM KDD, pages 625?630, New York, NY, USA.
J. M. Ponte and W. B. Croft. 1998. A language modeling
approach to information retrieval. In Proceedings of
SIGIR, pages 275?281.
B. Taskar, E. Segal, and D. Koller. 2001. Probabilistic
classification and clustering in relational data. In Pro-
ceedings of IJCAI, pages 870?876.
S. R. Vasanthakumar, J.P. Callan, and W.B. Croft. 1996.
Integrating INQUERY with an RDBMS to support text
retrieval. IEEE Data Eng. Bull., 19(1):24?33.
A.D. Vries and A. Wilschut. 1999. On the integration of
IR and databases. In Proceedings of IFIP 2.6 Working
Conf. on Data Semantics, Rotorua, New Zealand.
96
