A Two-Stage Approach to Retrieving Answers for How-To 
Questions 
Ling Yin 
CMIS, University of Brighton, 
Brighton, BN2 4GJ, United Kingdom 
Y.Ling@brighton.ac.uk
Abstract 
This paper addresses the problem of 
automatically retrieving answers for 
how-to questions, focusing on those that 
inquire about the procedure for 
achieving a specific goal. For such 
questions, typical information retrieval 
methods, based on key word matching, 
are better suited to detecting the content 
of the goal (e.g., ?installing a Windows 
XP server?) than the general nature of the 
desired information (i.e., procedural, a 
series of steps for achieving this goal). 
We suggest dividing the process of 
retrieving answers for such questions 
into two stages, with each stage focusing 
on modeling one aspect of a how-to 
question. We compare the two-stage 
approach with two alternative 
approaches: a baseline approach that 
only uses the content of the goal to 
retrieve relevant documents and another 
approach that explores the potential of 
automatic query expansion. The result of 
the experiment shows that the two-stage 
approach significantly outperforms the 
baseline but achieves similar result with 
the systems using automatic query 
expansion techniques. We analyze the 
reason and also present some future work. 
1 Introduction 
How-To questions constitute a large proportion 
of questions on the Web. Many how-to questions 
inquire about the procedure for achieving a 
specific goal. For such questions, typical 
information retrieval (IR) methods, based on key 
word matching, are better suited to detecting the 
content of the goal (e.g., installing a Windows 
XP server) than the general nature of the desired 
information (i.e., procedural, a series of steps for 
achieving this goal).  The reasons are given as 
below. 
First, documents that describe a procedure 
often do not contain the word ?procedure? itself, 
but we are able to abstract the concept 
?procedure? from cues such as ?first?, ?next? and 
?then?, all of which indicate sequential 
relationships between actions. Secondly, We 
expect that the word ?procedure? or the phrase 
?how to? will occur in a much broader context 
than the words in the goal. In other words, a 
document that contains the words in the goal is 
more likely to be relevant than a document that 
contains the word ?procedure? or the phrase ?how 
to?. Without noticing this difference, treating the 
two parts equally in the retrieving process will 
get many noisy documents. 
Many information requests seem to show such 
a structure, with one part identifying a specific 
topic and another part constraining the kind of 
information required about this topic (Yin and 
Power, 2005). The second part is often omitted 
when selecting retrieval terms from the request to 
construct an effective query for an IR system, 
such as in Picard (1999). 
The first point given above suggests that using 
cues such as ?first? and ?next? to expand the 
initial query may help in retrieving more relevant 
documents. Expansion terms can be generated 
automatically by query expansion techniques. 
The typical process is: (1) use the initial query to 
retrieve documents (referred to as the first round 
of retrieval); (2) consider a few top ranked 
documents as relevant and the rest irrelevant; (3) 
compare the relevant set with the irrelevant set to 
extract a list of most distinctive terms; (4) use the 
extracted terms to retrieve documents (referred to 
as the second round of retrieval). 
However, query expansion may not constitute 
a good solution, because its effectiveness largely 
63
depends on the quality of the few top ranked 
documents retrieved in the first round when the 
aforementioned two problems are not yet 
tackled.  
Our solution is to divide the process of 
retrieving answers for such questions into two 
stages: (1) use typical IR approaches for 
retrieving documents that are relevant to the 
specific goal; (2) use a text categorization 
approach to re-rank the retrieved documents 
according to the proportion of procedural text 
they contain. By ?procedural text? we refer to 
ordered lists of steps, which are very common in 
some instructional genres such as online manuals.  
In this report, we will briefly introduce the 
text categorization approach (details are 
presented in (Yin and Power, 2006) ) and will 
explain in more concrete terms how it is 
integrated into the two-stage architecture 
proposed above. We will compare the 
performance of our two-stage architecture with a 
baseline system that uses only the content of the 
goal to retrieve relevant documents (equivalent 
to the first stage in the two-stage architecture). 
We will also compare the two-stage approach 
with systems that applies automatic query 
expansion techniques. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
introduces some relevant work in IR and 
question answering (QA). Section 3 talks about 
the text categorization approach for ranking 
procedural documents, covering issues such as 
the features used, the training corpus, the design 
of a classification model as well as some 
experiments for evaluation. Section 4 talks about 
integrating the text categorizer into the two-stage 
architecture and presents some experiments on 
retrieving relevant documents for how-to 
questions. Section 5 provides a short summary 
and presents some future work.  
2 Related Work 
The idea of applying text categorization 
technology to help information retrieval is not 
new. In particular, text categorization techniques 
are widely adopted to filter a document source 
according to specific information needs. For 
example, Stricker et al (2000) experiment on 
several news resources to find news addressing 
specific topics. They present a method for 
automatically generating ?discriminant terms? 
(Stricker et al, 2000) for each topic that are then 
used as features to train a neural network 
classifier. Compared to these approaches, the 
novelty of our study lies in the idea that an 
information request consists of two different 
parts that should be retrieved in different ways 
and the whole retrieval process should adopt a 
two-stage architecture.  
A research area that is closely related to IR is 
question answering (QA), the differences being 
a) the input of a QA system is a question rather 
than a few key words; b) a QA system aims to 
extract answers to a question rather than 
retrieving relevant documents only. Most QA 
systems do adopt a two-stage architecture (if not 
consider the initial question analysis stage), i.e., 
perform IR with a few content words extracted 
from the query to locate documents likely to 
contain an answer and then use information 
extraction (IE) to find the text snippets that 
match the question type (Hovy et al, 2001; 
Elworthy, 2000). However, most question 
answering systems target factoid questions ? the 
research of non-factoid questions started only a 
few years ago but limited to several kinds, such 
as definitional questions (Xu et al, 2003) and 
questions asking for biographies (Tsur et al, 
2004).  
Only a few studies have addressed procedural 
questions. Murdok and Croft (2002) distinguish 
between ?task-oriented questions? (i.e., ask about 
a process) and ?fact-oriented questions? (i.e., ask 
about a fact) and present a method to 
automatically classify questions into these two 
categories. Following this work, Kelly et al 
(2002) explore the difference between documents 
that contain relevant information to the two 
different types of questions. They conclude, 
?lists and FAQs occur in more documents judged 
relevant to task-oriented questions than those 
judged relevant to fact-oriented questions? (Kelly 
et al, 2002: 645) and suggest, ?retrieval 
techniques specific to each type of question 
should be considered? (Kelly et al, 2002: 647). 
Schwitter et al (2004) present a method to 
extract answers from technical documentations 
for How-questions.  To identify answers, they 
match the logical form of a sentence against that 
of the question and also explore the 
typographical conventions in technical domains. 
The work that most resembles ours is Takechi et 
al. (2003), which uses word n-grams to classify 
(as procedural or non-procedural) list passages 
extracted using HTML tags. Our approach, 
however, applies to whole documents, the aim 
being to measure the degree of procedurality ? 
i.e., the proportion of procedural text they 
contain.  
64
3 Ranking Procedural Texts 
Three essential elements of a text categorization 
approach are the features used to represent the 
document, the training corpus and the machine 
learning method, which will be described in 
section 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 respectively. Section 3.4 
presents experiments on applying the learned 
model to rank documents in a small test set. 
3.1 Feature Selection and Document 
Representation 
Linguistic Features and Cue Phrases 
We targeted six procedural elements: actions, 
times, sequence, conditionals, preconditions, and 
purposes. These elements can be recognized 
using linguistic features or cue phrases. For 
example, an action is often conveyed by an 
imperative; a precondition can be expressed by 
the cue phrase ?only if?. We used all the 
syntactic and morphological tags defined in 
Connexor?s syntax analyzer 1 . There are some 
redundant tags in this set. For example, both the 
syntactic tag ?@INFMARK>? and the 
morphological tag ?INFMARK>? refer to the 
infinitive marker ?to? and therefore always occur 
together at the same time. We calculated the 
Pearson?s product-moment correlation 
coefficient (r) (Weisstein, 1999) between any 
two tags based on their occurrences in sentences 
of the whole training set. We removed one in 
each pair of strongly correlated tags and finally 
got 34 syntactic tags and 34 morphological tags. 
We also handcrafted a list of relevant cue 
phrases (44), which were extracted from 
documents by using the Flex tool 2  for pattern 
matching. Some sample cue phrases and the 
matching patterns are shown in table 1. 
Procedural 
Element 
Cue Phrase Pattern 
Precondition ?only if?  [Oo]nly[[:space:]]if[[:space:]] 
Purpose ?so that?  [sS]o[[:space:]]that[[:space:]] 
Condition ?as long as?  ([Aa]s) [[:space:]]long[[:space:]]as[[:space:]] 
Sequence ?first?  [fF]irst [[:space:][:punct:]] 
Time ?now?  [nN]ow[[:space:][:punct:]] 
Table 1. Sample cue phrases and matching 
patterns. 
Modeling Inter-Sentential Feature Co-
occurrence 
Some cue phrases are ambiguous and therefore 
cannot reliably suggest a procedural element. 
For example, the cue phrase ?first? can be used to 
                                                       
1 Refer to http://www.connexor.com/ 
2 Refer to http://www.gnu.org/software/flex/flex.html
represent a ranking order or a spatial relationship 
as well as a sequential order. However, it is more 
likely to represent a sequential order between 
actions if there is also an imperative in the same 
sentence. Indeed, sentences that contain both an 
ordinal number and an imperative are very 
frequent in procedural texts. We compared 
between the procedural training set and the non-
procedural training set to extract distinctive 
feature co-occurrence patterns, each of which has 
only 2 features. The formulae used to rank 
patterns with regard to their distinctiveness can 
be found in (Yin and Power, 2006). 
Document Representation 
Each document was represented as a vector 
{ }Njjjj xxxd ,...,, 21= , where ijx  represents the 
number of sentences in the document that 
contains a particular feature normalized by the 
document length. We compare the effectiveness 
of using individual features ( ijx  refers to either a 
single linguistic feature or a cue phrases) and of 
using feature co-occurrence patterns ( ijx refers to 
a feature co-occurrence pattern). 
3.2 Corpus Preparation 
Pagewise 3  provides a list of subject-matter 
domains, ranging from household issues to arts 
and entertainment. We downloaded 1536 
documents from this website (referred to 
hereafter as the Pagewise collection). We then 
used some simple heuristics to select documents 
from this set to build the initial training corpus. 
Specifically, to build the procedural set we chose 
documents with titles containing key phrases 
?how to? and ?how can I? (209 web documents); 
to build the non-procedural set, we chose 
documents which did not include these phrases 
in their titles, and which also had no phrases like 
?procedure? and ?recipe? within the body of the 
text (208 web documents). 
Samples drawn randomly from the procedural 
set (25) and non-procedural set (28) were 
submitted to two human judges, who assigned 
procedurality scores from 1 (meaning no 
procedural text at all) to 5 (meaning over 90% 
procedural text). The Kendall tau-b agreement  
(Kendall, 1979) between the two rankings was 
0.821. Overall, the average scores for the 
procedural and non-procedural samples were 
3.15 and 1.38. We used these 53 sample 
documents as part of the test set and the 
                                                       
3 Refer to http://www.essortment.com 
65
remaining documents as the initial training set 
(184 procedural and 180 non-procedural).  
This initial training corpus is far from ideal: 
first, it is small in size; a more serious problem is 
that many positive training examples do not 
contain a major proportion of procedural text. In 
our experiments, we used this initial training set 
to bootstrap a larger training set. 
3.3 Learning Method 
Although shown to be not so effective in some 
previous studies (Yang, 1999; Yang and Liu, 
1999), Naive Bayes classifier is one of the most 
commonly-used classifiers for text 
categorization. Here we introduce a model 
adapted from the Naive Bayes classifier from the 
weka-3-4 package (Witten and Frank, 2000). 
The Naive Bayes classifier scores a document 
jd  according to whether it is a typical member 
of its set ? i.e., the probability of randomly 
picking up a document like it from the 
procedural class ( ( )proceduralCdp j =| ). This 
probability is estimated from the training corpus. 
As mentioned before, the average procedural 
score of the procedural training set is low. 
Therefore, there is obviously a danger that a true 
procedural document will be ranked lower than a 
document that contains less procedural texts 
when using this training set to train a Naive 
Bayes classifier. Although our procedural 
training set is not representative of the 
procedural class, by comparing it with the non-
procedural training set, we are able to tell the 
difference between procedural documents and 
non-procedural documents. We adapted the 
Naive Bayes classifier to focus on modeling the 
difference between the two classes. For example, 
if the procedural training set has a higher 
average value on feature Xi than the non-
procedural training set, we inferred that a 
document with a higher feature value on Xi 
should be scored higher. To reflect this rule, we 
scored a document jd  by the probability of 
picking a document with a lower feature value 
from the procedural class (i.e., 
)|( proceduralCxXp iji =< ). Again this 
probability is estimated from the training set. 
The new model will be referred to hereafter as 
the Adapted Naive Bayes classifier. The details 
of this new model can be found in (Yin and 
Power, 2006).
3.4 Experiments on Ranking Procedural 
Texts 
There are two sources from which we compiled 
the training and testing corpora: the Pagewise 
collection and the SPIRIT collection. The 
SPIRIT collection contains a terabyte of HTML 
that are crawled from the web starting from an 
initial seed set of a few thousands universities 
and other educational organizations (Clarke et 
al., 1998). 
Our test set contained 103 documents, 
including the 53 documents that were sampled 
previously and then separated from the initial 
training corpus, another 30 documents randomly 
chosen from the Pagewise collection and 20 
documents chosen from the SPIRIT collection. 
We asked two human subjects to score the 
procedurality for these documents, following the 
same instruction described in section 3.2. The 
correlation coefficient (Kendall tau-b) between 
the two rankings was 0.725, which is the upper 
bound of the performance of the classifiers. 
We first used the initial training corpus to 
bootstrap a larger training set (378 procedural 
documents and 608 non-procedural documents), 
which was then used to select distinctive feature 
co-occurrence patterns and to train different 
classifiers. We compared the Adapted Naive 
Bayes classifier with the Naive Bayes classifier 
and three other classifiers, including Maximum 
Entropy (ME) 4 , Alternating Decision Tree 
(ADTree) (Freund and Mason, 1999) and Linear 
Regression (Witten and Frank, 2000).  

 
 
 
 
 
 
    
6XE
6XE
Figure 1. Ranking results using individual 
features: 1 refers to Adapted Naive Bayes, 2 
refers to Naive Bayes, 3 refers to ME, 4 refers to 
ADTree and 5 refers to Linear Regression. 
Ranking Method Agreement 
with Subject 1 
Agreement 
with Subject 2 
Average 
Adapted Naive Bayes 0.270841 0.367515 0.319178 
Naive Bayes 0.381921 0.464577 0.423249 
ME 0.446283 0.510926 0.478605 
                                                       
4 Refer to 
http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/s0450736/maxent.html 
66
ADTree 0.371988 0.463966 0.417977 
Linear Regression 0.497395 0.551597 0.524496 
Table 2. Ranking results using individual 
features. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
    
6XE
6XE
Figure 2. Ranking results using feature co-
occurrence patterns: 1 refers to Adapted Naive 
Bayes, 2 refers to Naive Bayes, 3 refers to ME, 4 
refers to ADTree and 5 refers to Linear 
Regression.  
Ranking Method Agreement 
with Subject 1 
Agreement 
with Subject 2 
Average 
Adapted Naive Bayes 0.420423 0.513336 0.466880 
Naive Bayes 0.420866 0.475514 0.44819 
ME 0.414184 0.455482 0.434833 
ADTree 0.358095 0.422987 0.390541 
Linear Regression 0.190609 0.279472 0.235041 
Table 3. Ranking results using feature co-
occurrence patterns. 
Figure 1 and table 2 show the Kendall tau-b 
coefficient between human subjects? ranking 
results and the trained classifiers? ranking results 
of the test set when using individual features 
(112); Figure 2 and table 3 show the Kendall 
tau-b coefficient when using feature co-
occurrence patterns (813). 
As we can see from the above figures, when 
using individual features, Linear Regression 
achieved the best result, Adapted Naive Bayes 
performed the worst, Naive Bayes, ME and 
ADTree were in the middle; however, when 
using feature co-occurrence patterns, the order 
almost reversed, i.e., Adapted Naive Bayes 
performed the best and Linear Regression the 
worst. Detailed analysis of the result is beyond 
the scope of this paper. The best model gained 
by using feature co-ocurrence patterns (i.e., 
Adapted Naive Bayes classifier) and by using 
individual features (i.e., Linear Regression 
classification model) will be used for further 
experiments on the two-stage architecture. 
4 Retrieving Relevant Documents for 
How-To Questions 
In this section we will describe the experiments 
on retrieving relevant documents for how-to 
questions by applying different approaches 
mentioned in the introduction section. 
4.1 Experiment Setup 
We randomly chose 60 how-to questions from 
the query logs of the FA Q finder system (Burke 
et al, 1997). Three judges went through these 
questions and agreed on 10 procedural 
questions5.
We searched Google and downloaded 40 top 
ranked documents for each question, which were 
then mixed with 1000 web documents from the 
SPIRIT collection to compile a test set. The two-
stage architecture is as shown in figure 3. In the 
first stage, we sent only the content of the goal to 
a state-of-the-art IR model to retrieve 30 
documents from the test set, which were 
reranked in the second stage according to the 
degree of procedurality by a trained document 
classifier. 
7HVWVHW ,5PRGHO
WRS
UDQNHG
ZHEGRFV
'RFXPHQW
FODVVLILHU

UHUDQNHG
ZHEGRFV
7KHFRQWHQW
RIWKHJRDO
Figure 3. A two-stage architecture. 
We also tried to test how well query expansion 
could help in retrieving procedural documents, 
following a process as shown in figure 4. First, 
key words in the content of goal were used to 
query an IR model to retrieve an initial set of 
relevant documents, those of which that do not 
contain the phrase ?how to? were then removed. 
The remaining top ten documents were used to 
generate 40 searching terms, which were applied 
in the second round to retrieve documents. 
Finally the 30 top ranked documents were 
returned as relevant documents.
                                                       
5 We distinguish questions asking for a series of steps 
(i.e., procedural questions) from those of which the 
answer could be a list of useful hints, e.g., ?how to 
make money?.  
Stage One 
Stage Two
67
,5PRGHO 7HVWVHW
'RFXPHQW
UDQNLQJOLVW
,5PRGHO
WRS
UDQNHG
ZHEGRFV
([WUDFWWHUPVIRU
TXHU\H[SDQVLRQ
$QH[SDQGHG
VHWRITXHU\
WHUPV
7KHFRQWHQW
RIWKHJRDO
5HPRYHGRFXPHQWV
FRQWDLQLQJQR
?KRZWR?
WRS
UDQNHGZHE
GRFV
Figure 4. An alternative architecture using query 
expansion. 
4.2 IR Model 
For the above-mentioned IR model, we used the 
BM25 and PL2 algorithms from the Terrier IR 
platform6.
The BM25 algorithm is one variety of the 
probabilistic schema presented in (Robertson et 
al. 1993). It has gained much success in TREC 
competitions and has been adopted by many 
other TREC participants.  
The PL2 algorithm, as most other IR models 
implemented in the Terrier IR platform, is based 
on the Divergence From Randomness (DFR) 
framework. Amati and Rijsbergen (2004) 
provide a detailed explanation of this framework 
and a set of term-weighting formulae derived by 
applying different models of randomness and 
different ways to normalize the weight of a term 
according to the document length and according 
to a notion called information gain. They test 
these different formulae in the experiments on 
retrieving relevant documents for various sets of 
TREC topics and show that they achieve 
comparable result with the BM25 algorithm.  
We also used the Bo1 algorithm from the 
same package to select terms for query 
expansion. Refer to (Plachouras et al, 2004) for 
details about this algorithm. 
4.3 Result 
We tested eight systems, which could be 
organized into two sets. The first set uses BM25 
algorithm as the basic IR model and the second 
set uses PL2 as the basic IR model. Each set 
includes four systems: a baseline system that 
returns the result of the first stage in the two-
stage architecture, one system that uses query 
expansion technique following the architecture 
in figure 4 and two systems that apply the two-
                                                       
6 http://ir.dcs.gla.ac.uk/terrier/index.html 
stage architecture (one uses the Adapted Naive 
Bayes classifier and another one uses the Linear 
Regression classification model).   
The mean average precision (MAP) 7  of 
different retrieval systems is shown in table 4 
and figure 5.  
0
0. 1
0. 2
0. 3
0. 4
0. 5
0. 6
1 2
Basel i ne
Quer y Expansi on
Adapt ed Nai ve Bayes
Li near  Regr essi on
Figure 5. MAPs of different systems: 1 refers to 
using BM25 as the IR model, 2 refers to using 
PL2 as the IR model. 
 Model MAP 
 BM25 (Baseline) 0.33692 
Set1 BM25 + Query Expansion 0.50162 
 BM25 + Adapted Naive Bayes 0.45605 
 BM25 + Linear Regression 0.41597 
   
 PL2  (Baseline) 0.33265 
Set2 PL2 + Query Expansion 0.45821 
 PL2 + Adapted Naive Bayes 0.44263 
 PL2 + Linear Regression 0.40218 
Table 4. Results of different systems. 
We can see that in both sets: (1) systems that 
adopts the two-stage architecture performed 
better than the baseline system but worse than 
the system that applies query expansion 
technique; (2) the system that uses Adapted 
Naive Bayes classifier in the second stage gained 
better result than the one that uses Linear 
Regression classification model. We performed a 
pairwise t-test to test the significance of the 
difference between the results of the two systems 
with an integrated Adapted Naive Bayes 
classifier and of the two baseline systems. Each 
data set contained 20 figures, with each figure 
representing the average precision of the 
retrieving result for one question. The difference 
is significant (p=0.02). We also performed a 
pairwise t-test to test the significance of the 
difference between the two systems with an 
integrated Adapted Naive Bayes classifier and of 
                                                       
7 The average precision of a single question is the 
mean of the precision scores after each relevant 
document is retrieved. The mean average precision is 
the mean of the average precisions of a collection of 
questions. 
Round One 
Round Two
68
the two systems using query expansion 
techniques. The difference is not significant 
(p=0.66).  
4.4 Discussion 
Contrary to our expectation, the result of the 
experiments showed that the two-stage approach 
did not perform better than simply applying a 
query expansion technique to generate an 
expanded list of querying terms. An explanation 
can be sought from the following two aspects   
(each of which corresponds to one of the two 
problems mentioned in the first section).  
First, we expected that many documents that 
contain procedures do not contain the word 
?procedure? or the phrase ?how to?. Therefore, a 
system based on key word matching would not 
be able to identify such documents. However, 
we found that such words or phrases, although 
not included in the body of the text, often occur 
in the title of the document. 
Another problem we pointed out before is that 
the phrase ?how to? occurs in a much broader 
context than keywords in the content of the goal, 
therefore, it would bring a lot of irrelevant 
documents when used together with the content 
of goal for document retrieval. However, in our 
experiment, we used the content of the goal to 
retrieve document first and then removed those 
containing no phrase ?how to? (refer to figure 4).
This is actually also a two-stage approach in 
itself.  
Despite the experiment result, a well-known 
defect of query expansion is that it is only 
effective if relevant documents are similar to 
each other while the two-stage approach does 
not have this limitation. For example, for 
retrieving documents about ?how to cook 
herring?, query expansion is only able to retrieve 
typical recipes while our two-stage approach is 
able to detect an exotic method as long as it is 
described as a sequence of steps. 
5 Summary and Future Work 
In this paper, we suggested that a how-to 
question could be seen as consisting of two 
parts: the specific goal and the general nature of 
the desired information (i.e., procedural). We 
proposed a two-stage architecture to retrieve 
documents that meet the requirement of both 
parts. We compared the two-stage architecture 
with other approaches: one only uses the content 
of the goal to retrieve documents (baseline 
system) and another one uses an expanded set of 
query terms obtained by automatic query 
expansion techniques. The result has shown that 
the two-stage architecture performed better than 
the base line system but did not show superiority 
over query expansion techniques. We provide an 
explanation in section 4.4.  
As suggested in section 1, many information 
requests are formulated as consisting of two 
parts. As a future work, we will test the two-
stage architecture for retrieving answers for other 
kind of questions. 
References 
Amati, Gianni and Cornelis J. van Rijsbergen. 2002. 
Probabilistic models of information retrieval based 
on measuring the divergence from randomness. 
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 20 (4): 
357-389. 
Burke, Robin D., Kristian J. Hammond, Vladimir 
Kulyukin, Steven L. Lytinen, Noriko Tomuro, and 
Scott Schoenberg. 1997. Question answering from 
frequently-asked question files: experiences with 
the FAQ finder system. AI Magazine, 18(2): 57-66. 
Clarke, Charles, Gordan Cormack, M. Laszlo, 
Thomas Lynam, and Egidio Terra. 1998. The 
impact of corpus size on question answering 
performance. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual 
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research 
and Development in IR, Tampere, Finland. 
Elworthy, David. 2000. Question answering using a 
large NLP system. In Proceedings of the Ninth Text 
Retrieval Conference (TREC-9), pages 355-360.  
Freund, Yoav and Llew Mason. 1999. The alternating 
decision tree learning algorithm. In Proceeding of 
the Sixteenth International Conference on Machine 
Learning, pages 124-133, Bled, Slovenia. 
Hovy, Eduard, Laurie Gerber, Ulf Hermjakob, 
Michael Junk, and Chin-Yew Lin. 2001.  Question 
Answering in Webclopedia. In Proceedings of the 
Ninth Text Retrieval Conference (TREC-9), pages 
655-664.  
Kelly, Diane, Vanessa Murdock, Xiao-Jun Yuan, W. 
Bruce Croft, and Nicholas J. Belkin. 2002. Features 
of documents relevant to task- and fact-oriented 
questions. In Proceedings of the Eleventh 
International Conference on Information and 
Knowledge Management (CIKM '02), pages 645-
647, McLean, VA. 
Kendall, Maurice. 1979. The Advanced Theory of 
Statistics. Fourth Edition. Griffin, London. 
Murdok, Vanessa and Bruce Croft. 2002. Task 
orientation in question answering. In Proceedings 
of SIGIR ?02, pages 355-356, Tampere, Finland. 
69
Picard, Justin. 1999. Finding content-bearing terms 
using term similarities. In Proceedings of the Ninth 
Conference of the European Chapter of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL 
1999), pages 241-244, Bergen, Norway.  
Plachouras, Vassilis, Ben He, and Iadh Ounis. 2004. 
University of Glasgow at TREC2004: Experiments 
in web, robust and terabyte tracks with Terrier. In 
Proceedings of the Thirteenth Text REtrieval 
Conference (TREC 2004).
Robertson, Stephen, Steve Walker, Susan Jones, 
Micheline Hancock-Beaulieu, and Mike Gatford. 
1993. Okapi at TREC-2. In Proceedings of the 
Second Text Retrieval Conference (TREC-2), 
pages 21-24. 
Schwitter, Rolf, Fabio Rinaldi, and Simon Clematide. 
2004. The importance of how-questions in 
technical domains. In Proceedings of the Question-
Answering workshop of TALN 04, Fez, Morocco.  
Stricker, Mathieu, Frantz Vichot, G?rard Dreyfus, 
and Francis Wolinski. 2000. Two steps feature 
selection and neural network classification for the 
TREC-8 routing. CoRR cs. CL/0007016.
Takechi, Mineki, Takenobu Tokunaga, Yuji 
Matsumoto, and Hozumi Tanaka. 2003. Feature 
selection in categorizing procedural expressions. In 
Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop 
on Information Retrieval with Asian Languages 
(IRAL2003), pages 49-56, Sapporo, Japan. 
Tsur, Oren, Maarten de Rijke, and Khalil Sima'an. 
2004. BioGrapher: biography questions as a 
restricted domain question answering task. In 
Proceedings ACL 2004 Workshop on Question 
Answering in Restricted Domains, Barcelona.  
Weisstein, Eric. 1999. Correlation Coefficient.
MathWorld--A Wolfram Web Resource. Available 
at: <URL: http://mathworld.wolfram.com/ 
CorrelationCoefficient.html> [Accessed 21 Oct 
2005]
Witten, Ian and Eibe Frank. 2000. Data Mining: 
Practical Machine Learning Tools with Java 
Implementations, Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, 
CA. 
Xu, Jinxi, Ana Licuanan, and Ralph Weischedel. 
2003. TREC2003 QA at BBN: answering 
definitional questions. In Proceedings of the 
Twelfth Text Retrieval Conference (TREC 2003),
pages 98-106.  
Yang, Yi-Ming. 1999. An evaluation of statistical 
approaches to text categorization. Journal of 
Information Retrieval 1(1/2): 67-88. 
Yang, Yi-Ming and Xin Liu. 1999. A re-examination 
of text categorization methods. In Proceedings of 
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and 
Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR'99),
pages 42-49, Berkeley, CA. 
Yin, Ling and Richard Power. 2005. Investigating the 
structure of topic expressions: a corpus-based 
approach. In Proceedings from the Corpus 
Linguistics Conference Series, Vol.1, No.1, 
University of Birmingham, Birmingham.
Yin, Ling and Richard Power. 2006. Adapting the 
Naive Bayes classifier to rank procedural texts. In 
Proceedings of the 28th European Conference on 
IR Research (ECIR 2006).
70
