NAACL HLT Demonstration Program, pages 31?32,
Rochester, New York, USA, April 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Voice-Rate: A Dialog System for Consumer Ratings 
 
Geoffrey Zweig, Y.C. Ju, Patrick Nguyen, Dong Yu, 
Ye-Yi Wang and Alex Acero 
Speech Research Group 
Microsoft Corp. 
Redmond, WA 98052 
{gzweig,yuncj,panguyen,dongyu, yeyi-
wang,alexac}@microsoft.com 
 
  
Abstract 
Voice-Rate is an automated dialog system 
which provides access to over one million 
ratings of products and businesses. By 
calling a toll-free number, consumers can 
access ratings for products, national busi-
nesses such as airlines, and local busi-
nesses such as restaurants. Voice-Rate 
also has a facility for recording and ana-
lyzing ratings that are given over the 
phone. The service has been primed with 
ratings taken from a variety of web 
sources, and we are augmenting these 
with user ratings. Voice-Rate can be ac-
cessed by dialing 1-877-456-DATA. 
1 Overview 
 Voice-Rate is an automated dialog system de-
signed to help consumers while they are shopping. 
The target user is a consumer who is considering 
making an impulse purchase and would like to get 
more information. He or she can take out a cell-
phone, call Voice-Rate, and get rating information 
to help decide whether to buy the item. Here are 
three sample scenarios: 
 
 Sally has gone to Home Depot to buy 
some paint to touch-up scratches on the 
wall at home. She?ll use exactly the same 
color and brand as when she first painted 
the wall, so she knows what she wants. 
While at Home Depot, however, Sally sees 
some hand-held vacuum cleaners and de-
cides it might be nice to have one. But, she 
is unsure whether which of the available 
models is better: The ?Black & Decker 
CHV1400 Cyclonic DustBuster,? the 
?Shark SV736? or the ?Eureka 71A.? Sally 
calls Voice-Rate and gets the ratings and 
makes an informed purchase. 
 John is on vacation with his family in Seat-
tle. After going up in the Space Needle, 
they walk by ?Abbondanza Pizzeria? and 
are considering lunch there. While it looks 
good, there are almost no diners inside, 
and John is suspicious. He calls Voice-
Rate and discovers that in fact the restau-
rant is highly rated, and decides to go 
there. 
 Returning from his vacation, John drops 
his rental car off at the airport. The rental 
company incorrectly asserts that he has 
scratched the car, and causes a big hassle, 
until they finally realize that they already 
charged the last customer for the same 
scratch. Unhappy with the surly service, 
John calls Voice-Rate and leaves a warn-
ing for others.  
 
Currently, Voice-Rate can deliver ratings for over 
one million products, two hundred thousand res-
taurants in over sixteen hundred cities; and about 
three thousand national businesses.  
2 Technical Challenges 
To make Voice-Rate operational, it was necessary 
to solve the key challenges of name resolution and 
disambiguation. Users rarely make an exactly cor-
rect specification of a product or business, and it is 
necessary both to utilize a ?fuzzy-match? for name 
lookup, and to deploy a carefully designed disam-
biguation strategy.  
31
Voice-Rate solves the fuzzy-matching process by 
treating spoken queries as well as business and 
product names as documents, and then performing 
TF-IDF based lookup. For a review of name 
matching methods, see e.g. Cohen et al, 2003. In 
the ideal case, after a user asks for a particular 
product or business, the best-matching item as 
measured by TF-IDF would be the one intended by 
the user. In reality, of course, this is often not the 
case, and further dialog is necessary to determine 
the user?s intent. For concreteness, we will illu-
strate the disambiguation process in the context of 
product identification. 
 
When a user calls Voice-Rate and asks for a prod-
uct review, the system solicits the user for the 
product name, does TF-IDF lookup, and presents 
the highest-scoring match for user confirmation. If 
the user does not accept the retrieved item, Voice-
Rate initiates a disambiguation dialog.  
 
Aside from inadequate product coverage, which 
cannot be fixed at runtime, there are two possible 
sources for error: automatic speech recognition 
(ASR) errors, and TF-IDF lookup errors.  The dis-
ambiguation process begins by eliminating the 
first. To do this, it asks the user if his or her exact 
words were the recognized text, and if not to repeat 
the request. This loop iterates twice, and if the us-
er?s exact words still have not been identified, 
Voice-Rate apologizes and hangs up. 
 
Once the user?s exact words have been validated, 
Voice-Rate gets a positive identification on the 
product category. From the set of high-scoring TF-
IDF items, a list of possible categories is compiled. 
For example, for ?The Lord of the Rings The Two 
Towers,? there are items in Video Games, DVDs, 
Music, VHS, Software, Books, Websites, and Toys 
and Games. These categories are read to the user, 
who is asked to select one. All the close-matching 
product names in the selected category are then 
read to the user, until one is selected or the list is 
exhausted.  
3 Related Work 
To our knowledge, Voice-Rate is the first large 
scale ratings dialog system. However, the technol-
ogy behind it is closely related to previous dialog 
systems, especially directory assistance or ?411? 
systems (e.g. Kamm et al, 1994, Natarajan et al, 
2002, Levin et al, 2005, Jan et al, 2003).  A gen-
eral discussion of name-matching techniques such 
as TF-IDF can be found in (Cohen et al, 2003, 
Bilenko et al, 2003). 
 
The second area of related research has to do with 
web rating systems. Interesting work on extracting 
information from such ratings can be found in, e.g. 
(Linden et al, 2003, Hu et al, 2004, Gammon et 
al., 2005). Work has also been done using text-
based input to determine relevant products (Chai et 
al., 2002).  Our own work differs from this in that 
it focuses on spoken input, and in its breadth ? 
covering both products and businesses. 
References  
M. Bilenko, R. Mooney, W. W. Cohen, P. Ravikumar and S. 
Fienberg. 2003. Adaptive Name-Matching in Information 
Integration. IEEE Intelligent Systems 18(5): 16-23 (2003).  
J. Chai, V. Horvath, N. Nicolov, M. Stys, N. Kambhatla, W. 
Zadrozny and P. Melville.  2002. Natural Language Assis-
tant- A Dialog System for Online Product Recommenda-
tion. AI Magazine (23), 2002 
 
W. W. Cohen, P Ravikumar and S. E. Fienberg . 2003. A 
comparison of string distance metrics for name-matching 
tasks. Proceedings of the IJCAI-2003 Workshop on Infor-
mation, 2003 
M.  Gamon, A. Aue, S. Corston-Oliver and E. Ringger. 2005. 
Pulse: Mining Customer Opinions from Free Text. In Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science. Vol. 3646. Springer Ver-
lag. (IDA 2005)., pages 121-132. 
M. Hu and B. Liu. 2004. Mining and summarizing customer 
reviews. Proceedings of the 2004 ACM SIGKDD interna-
tional conference. 
 
E. E. Jan, B. Maison, L. Mangu and G. Zweig. 2003. Auto-
matic construction of Unique Signatures and Confusable 
sets for Natural Language Directory Assistance Applica-
tion.  Eurospeech 2003 
C. A. Kamm, K. M. Yang, C. R. Shamieh and S. Singhal. 
1994. Speech recognition issues for directory assistance 
applications. Second IEEE Workshop on Interactive Voice 
Technology for Telecommunications Applications. 
 
E. Levin and A. M. Man?. 2005. Voice User Interface Design 
for Automated Directory Assistance Eurospeech 2005. 
G. Linden, B. Smith and J. York. Amazon.com recommenda-
tions: item-to-item collaborative filtering. 2003.  Internet 
Computing, IEEE , vol.7, no.1pp. 76- 80. 
 
P. Natarajan, R. Prasad, R. Schwartz and J. Makhoul. 2002. A 
Scalable Architecture for Directory Assistance Automation, 
ICASSP 2002, Orlando, Florida. 
32
