Automatic Extraction of Chinese Multiword Expressions with a Statis-
tical Tool 
Scott S.L. Piao1 
s.piao@lancaster.ac.uk 
Guangfan Sun2 
morgan2001_sun@sohu.com 
Paul Rayson1 
paul@comp.lancs.ac.uk 
Qi Yuan2 
yq@trans.ccidnet.com 
 
1UCREL 
Computing Department 
Lancaster University 
Lancaster, UK 
2CIPOL 
China Centre for Information Industry De-
velopment (CCID) 
Beijing, China 
 
Abstract 
In this paper, we report on our experi-
ment to extract Chinese multiword ex-
pressions from corpus resources as part 
of a larger research effort to improve a 
machine translation (MT) system. For ex-
isting MT systems, the issue of multi-
word expression (MWE) identification 
and accurate interpretation from source to 
target language remains an unsolved 
problem. Our initial test on the Chinese-
to-English translation functions of 
Systran and CCID?s Huan-Yu-Tong MT 
systems reveal that, where MWEs are in-
volved, MT tools suffer in terms of both 
comprehensibility and adequacy of the 
translated texts. For MT systems to be-
come of further practical use, they need 
to be enhanced with MWE processing 
capability. As part of our study towards 
this goal, we test and evaluate a statistical 
tool, which was developed for English, 
for identifying and extracting Chinese 
MWEs. In our evaluation, the tool 
achieved precisions ranging from 61.16% 
to 93.96% for different types of MWEs.  
Such results demonstrate that it is feasi-
ble to automatically identify many Chi-
nese MWEs using our tool, although it 
needs further improvement. 
1 Introduction 
In real-life human communication, meaning is 
often conveyed by word groups, or meaning 
groups, rather than by single words. Very often, 
it is difficult to interpret human speech word by 
word. Consequently, for an MT system, it is im-
portant to identify and interpret accurate meaning 
of such word groups, or multiword expressions 
(MWE hereafter), in a source language and in-
terpret them accurately in a target language. 
However, accurate identification and interpreta-
tion of MWEs still remains an unsolved problem 
in MT research. 
In this paper, we present our experiment on 
identifying Chinese MWEs using a statistical 
tool for MT purposes. Here, by multiword ex-
pressions, we refer to word groups whose con-
stituent words have strong collocational relations 
and which can be translated in the target lan-
guage into stable translation equivalents, either 
single words or MWEs, e.g. noun phrases, 
prepositional phrases etc. They may include 
technical terminology in specific domains as well 
as more general fixed expressions and idioms. 
Our observations found that existing Chinese-
English MT systems cannot satisfactorily trans-
late MWEs, although some may employ a ma-
chine-readable bilingual dictionary of idioms. 
Whereas highly compositional MWEs may pose 
a trivial challenge to human speakers for inter-
pretation, they present a tough challenge for fully 
automatic MT systems to produce even remotely 
fluent translations. Therefore, in our context, we 
expand the concept of MWE to include those 
compositional ones which have relatively stable 
identifiable patterns of translations in the target 
language. 
By way of illustration of the challenge, we ex-
perimented with simple Chinese sentences con-
taining some commonly-used MWEs in 
SYSTRAN (http://www.systransoft.com/) and 
Huan-Yu-Tong (HYT henceforth) of CCID 
(China Centre for Information Industry Devel-
opment) (Sun, 2004). The former is one of the 
most efficient MT systems today, claiming to be 
?the leading provider of the world?s most scal-
able and modular translation architecture?, while 
the latter is one of the most successful MT sys-
tems in China. Table 1 shows the result, where 
SL and TL denote source and target languages 
respectively.. As shown by the samples, such 
17
highly sophisticated MT tools still struggle to 
produce adequate English sentences.. 
 
Chinese 
Sentences 
English 
(Systran) 
English 
(HYT) 
??????
???  ??
???? 
This afternoon 
can practice a 
ball game? I 
hope not to be 
able. 
Can practise a 
ball game this 
afternoon? I hope 
can not. 
??????
??????
???? 
You may not 
such do, let us 
pay respec-
tively each. 
You cannot do 
like that, and let 
us make it Dutch. 
??????
??????
??????
????? 
Perhaps does 
not have the 
means to let 
you sit shares a 
table, did you 
mind sits sepa-
rately? 
Perhaps no way 
out(ly) let you sit 
with table, are 
you situated be-
tween not mind 
to separate to sit? 
??????
??? 
Selects the 
milk coffee 
which ices. 
Ice breasts coffee 
take is selected. 
??????
??????
?? 
Good, I want 
the beer, again 
comes to select 
the coffee. 
Alright, I want 
beer, and take the 
coffee of order-
ing again. 
 
 
Table 1: Samples of Chinese-to-English transla-
tions of Systran and HYT. 
 
Ignoring the eccentric English syntactic struc-
tures these tools produced, we focus on the trans-
lations of Chinese MWEs (see the italic charac-
ters in the Table 1) which have straightforward 
expression equivalents in English. For example, 
in this context,  ???? can be translated into 
?hope not?, ??? into ?go Dutch?, ?? into 
?together? or ?at the same table?, ??? into 
?white coffee? or ?coffee with milk?, ??? 
into ?want some more (in addition to something 
already ordered)?. While these Chinese MWEs 
are highly compositional ones, when they are 
translated word by word, we see verbose and 
awkward translations (for correct translations, 
see the appendix). 
To solve such problems, we need algorithms 
and tools for identifying MWEs in the source 
language (Chinese in this case) and to accurately 
map them to their adequate translation equiva-
lents in the target language (English in our case) 
that are appropriate for given contexts. In the 
previous examples, an MT tool should be able to 
identify the Chinese MWE ???  and either 
provide the literal translation of ?pay for each? or 
map it to the more idomatic expressions of ?go 
Dutch?. 
Obviously, it would involve a wide range of 
issues and techniques for a satisfactory solution 
to this problem. In this paper, we focus on the 
sub-issue of automatically recognising and ex-
tracting Chinese MWEs. Specifically, we test 
and evaluate a statistical tool for automatic 
MWE extraction in Chinese corpus data. As the 
results of our experiment demonstrate, the tool is 
capable of identifying many MWEs with little 
language-specific knowledge. Coupled with an 
MT system, such a tool could be useful for ad-
dressing the MWE issue. 
2 Related Work  
The issue of MWE processing has attracted 
much attention from the Natural Language Proc-
essing (NLP) community, including Smadja, 
1993; Dagan and Church, 1994; Daille, 1995; 
1995; McEnery et al, 1997; Wu, 1997; Michiels 
and Dufour, 1998; Maynard and Ananiadou, 
2000; Merkel and Andersson, 2000; Piao and 
McEnery, 2001; Sag et al, 2001; Tanaka and 
Baldwin, 2003;  Dias, 2003; Baldwin et al, 
2003; Nivre and Nilsson, 2004 Pereira et al. 
2004; Piao et al, 2005. Study in this area covers 
a wide range of sub-issues, including MWE iden-
tification and extraction from monolingual and 
multilingual corpora, classification of MWEs 
according to a variety of viewpoints such as 
types, compositionality and alignment of MWEs 
across different languages. However studies in 
this area on Chinese language are limited. 
A number of approaches have been suggested, 
including rule-based and statistical approaches, 
and have achieved success to various extents. 
Despite this research, however, MWE processing 
still presents a tough challenge, and it has been 
receiving increasing attention, as exemplified by 
recent MWE-related ACL workshops. 
Directly related to our work is the develop-
ment of a statistical MWE tool at Lancaster for 
searching and identifying English MWEs in run-
ning text (Piao et al, 2003, 2005). Trained on 
corpus data in a given domain or genre, this tool 
can automatically identify MWEs in running text 
or extract MWEs from corpus data from the 
similar domain/genre (see further information 
about this tool in section 3.1). It has been tested 
and compared with an English semantic tagger 
(Rayson et al, 2004) and was found to be effi-
cient in identifying domain-specific MWEs in 
English corpora, and complementary to the se-
18
mantic tagger which relies on a large manually 
compiled lexicon. 
Other directly related work includes the de-
velopment of the HYT MT system at CCID in 
Beijing, China. It has been under development 
since 1991 (Sun, 2004) and it is one of the most 
successful MT systems in China. However, being 
a mainly rule-based system, its performance de-
grades when processing texts from domains pre-
viously unknown to its knowledge database. Re-
cently a corpus-based approach has been adopted 
for its improvement, and efforts are being made 
to improve its capability of processing MWEs.  
Our main interest in this study is in the appli-
cation of a MWE identification tool to the im-
provement of MT system. As far as we know, 
there has not been a satisfactory solution to the 
efficient handling of Chinese MWEs in MT sys-
tems, and our experiment contributes to a deeper 
understanding of this problem.  
3 Automatic Identification and extrac-
tion of Chinese MWEs  
In order to test the feasibility of automatic 
identification and extraction of Chinese MWEs 
on a large scale, we used an existing statistical 
tool built for English and a Chinese corpus built 
at CCID. A CCID tool is used for tokenizing and 
POS-tagging the Chinese corpus. The result was 
thoroughly manually checked by Chinese experts 
at CCID. In this paper, we aim to evaluate this 
existing tool from two perspectives a) its per-
formance on MWE extraction, and b) its per-
formance on a language other than English. In 
the following sections, we describe our experi-
ment in detail and discuss main issues that arose 
during the course of our experiment. 
3.1 MWE extraction tool 
The tool we used for the experiment exploits 
statistical collocational information between 
near-context words (Piao et al, 2005). It first 
collects collocates within a given scanning win-
dow, and then searches for MWEs using the col-
locational information as a statistical dictionary. 
As the collocational information can be extracted 
on the fly from the corpus to be processed for a 
reasonably large corpus, this process is fully 
automatic. To search for MWEs in a small cor-
pus, such as a few sentences, the tool needs to be 
trained on other corpus data in advance. 
With regards to the statistical measure of col-
location, the option of several formulae are 
available, including mutual information and log 
likelihood, etc. Our past experience shows that 
log-likelihood provides an efficient metric for 
corpus data of moderate sizes. Therefore it is 
used in our experiment. It is calculated as fol-
lows (Scott, 2001). 
For a given pair of words X and Y and a search 
window W, let a be the number of windows in 
which X and Y co-occur, let b be the number of 
windows in which only X occurs, let c be the 
number of windows in which only Y occurs, and 
let d be the number of windows in which none of 
them occurs, then 
 
G2 = 2 (alna + blnb + clnc + dlnd - (a+b)ln(a+b)  
        - (a+c)ln(a+c) - (b+d)ln(b+d)  
        - (c+d)ln(c+d)) + (a+b+c+d)ln(a+b+c+d)) 
 
In addition to the log-likelihood, the t-score is 
used to filter out insignificant co-occurrence 
word pairs (Fung and Church, 1994), which is 
calculated as follows: 
 
),(
1
)()(),(
ba
baba
WWprob
M
WprobWprobWWprob
t
?=  
 
In order to filter out weak collocates, a thresh-
old is often used, i.e. in the stage of collocation 
extraction, any pairs of items producing word 
affinity scores lower than a given threshold are 
excluded from the MWE searching process. Fur-
thermore, in order to avoid the noise caused by 
functional words and some extremely frequent 
words, a stop word list is used to filter such 
words out from the process. 
If the corpus data is POS-tagged, some simple 
POS patterns can be used to filter certain syntac-
tic patterns from the candidates. It can either be 
implemented as an internal part of the process, or 
as a post-process. In our case, such pattern filters 
are mostly applied to the output of the MWE 
searching tool in order to allow the tool to be 
language-independent as much as possible. 
Consequently, for our experiment, the major 
adjustment to the tool was to add a Chinese stop 
word list. Because the tool is based on Unicode, 
the stop words of different languages can be kept 
in a single file, avoiding any need for adjusting 
the program itself. Unless different languages 
involved happen to share words with the same 
form, this practice is safe and reliable. In our par-
ticular case, because we are dealing with English 
and Chinese, which use widely different charac-
ters, such a practice performs well. 
19
Another language-specific adjustment needed 
was to use a Chinese POS-pattern filter for se-
lecting various patterns of the candidate MWEs 
(see Table 6). As pointed out previously, it was 
implemented as a simple pattern-matching pro-
gram that is separate from the MWE tool itself, 
hence minimizing the modification needed for 
porting the tool from English to Chinese lan-
guage. 
A major advantage of this tool is its capability 
of identifying MWEs of various lengths which 
are generally representative of the given topic or 
domain. Furthermore, for English it was found 
effective in extracting domain-specific multi-
word terms and expressions which are not in-
cluded in manually compiled lexicons and dic-
tionaries. Indeed, due to the open-ended nature 
of such MWEs, any manually compiled lexicons, 
however large they may be, are unlikely to cover 
them exhaustively. It is also efficient in finding 
newly emerging MWEs, particularly technical 
terms, that reflect the changes in the real world. 
3.2 Experiment 
In this experiment, our main aim was to exam-
ine the feasibility of practical application of the 
MWE tool as a component of an MT system, 
therefore we used test data from some domains 
in which translation services are in strong de-
mand. We selected Chinese corpus data of ap-
proximately 696,000 tokenised words (including 
punctuation marks) which cover the topics of 
food, transportation, tourism, sports (including 
the Olympics) and business. 
In our experiment, we processed the texts 
from different topics together. These topics are 
related to each other under the themes of enter-
tainment and business. Therefore we assume, by 
mixing the data together, we could examine the 
performance of the MWE tool in processing data 
from a broad range of related domains. We ex-
pect that the different features of texts from dif-
ferent domains will have a certain impact on the 
result, but the examination of such impact is be-
yond the scope of this paper. 
As mentioned earlier, the Chinese word to-
keniser and POS tagger used in our experiment 
has been developed at CCID. It is an efficient 
tool running with accuracy of 98% for word to-
kenisation and 95% for POS annotation. It em-
ploys a part-of-speech tagset of 15 categories 
shown in Table 2. Although it is not a finely 
grained tagset, it meets the need for creating POS 
pattern filters for MWE extraction.  
 
N Name 
V Verb 
A Adjective 
F Adverb 
R Pronoun 
I Preposition 
J Conjunction 
U Number 
S classifier (measure word)  
G Auxiliary verb 
E Accessory word 
L directional noun 
P Punctuation 
H Onomatopoeia 
X Subject-predicate phrase 
  
Table 2: CCID Chinese tagset 
 
Since function words are found to cause noise 
in the process of MWE identification, a Chinese 
stop list was collected. First, a word frequency 
list was extracted. Next, the top items were con-
sidered and we selected 70 closed class words for 
the stop word list. When the program searches 
for MWEs, such words are ignored. 
The threshold of word affinity strength is an-
other issue to be addressed. In this experiment, 
we used log-likelihood to measure the strength of 
collocation between word pairs. Generally the 
log-likelihood score of 6.6 (p < 0.01 or 99% con-
fidence) is recommended as the threshold (Ray-
son et al, 2004), but it was found to produce too 
many false candidates in our case. Based on our 
initial trials, we used a higher threshold of 30, 
i.e. any word pairs producing log-likelihood 
score less than this value are ignored in the 
MWE searching process. Furthermore, for the 
sake of the reliability of the statistical score, 
when extracting collocates, a frequency threshold 
of five was used to filter out low-frequency 
words, i.e. word pairs with frequencies less than 
five were ignored. 
An interesting issue for us in this experiment 
is the impact of the length of collocation search-
ing window on the MWE identification. For this 
purpose, we tested two search window lengths 2 
and 3, and compared the results obtained by us-
ing them. Our initial hypothesis was that the 
shorter window length may produce higher pre-
cision while the longer window length may sacri-
fice precision but boost the MWE coverage. 
The output of the tool was manually checked 
by Chinese experts at CCID, including cross 
checking to guarantee the reliability of the re-
sults. There were some MWE candidates on 
which disagreements arose. In such cases, the 
20
candidate was counted as false. Furthermore, in 
order to estimate the recall, experts manually 
identified MWEs in the whole test corpus, so that 
the output of the automatic tool could be com-
pared against it.  In the following section, we 
present a detailed report on our evaluation of the 
MWE tool. 
3.3 Evaluation 
We first evaluated the overall precision of the 
tool. A total of 7,142 MWE candidates (types) 
were obtained for window lengths of 2, of which 
4,915 were accepted as true MWEs, resulting in 
a precision of 68.82%. On the other hand, a total 
of 8,123 MWE candidates (types) were obtained 
for window lengths of 3, of which 4,968 were 
accepted as true MWEs, resulting in a precision 
of 61.16%. This result is in agreement with our 
hypothesis that shorter search window length 
tends to produce higher precision. 
Next, we estimated the recall based on the 
manually analysed data. When we compared the 
accepted MWEs from the automatic result 
against the manually collected ones, we found 
that the experts tend to mark longer MWEs, 
which often contain the items identified by the 
automatic tool. For example, the manually 
marked MWE ?? ?? ?? ?? (develop-
ment plan for the tennis sport) contains shorter 
MWEs ?? ?? (tennis sport) and?? ?? 
(development plan) which were identified by the 
tool separately. So we decided to take the partial 
matches into account when we estimate the re-
call. We found that a total 14,045 MWEs were 
manually identified and, when the search win-
dow length was set to two and three, 1,988 and 
2,044 of them match the automatic output, pro-
ducing recalls of 14.15% and 14.55% respectively. 
It should be noted that many of the manually ac-
cepted MWEs from the automatic output were 
not found in the manual MWE collection. This 
discrepancy was likely caused by the manual 
analysis being carried out independently of the 
automatic tool, resulting in a lower recall than 
expected. Table 3 lists the precisions and recalls. 
 
Window length = 2 Window length = 3 
Precision Recall Precision Recall 
68.82% 14.15% 61.16% 14.55% 
 
Table 3: Overall precisions and recalls 
 
Furthermore, we evaluated the performance of 
the MWE tool from two aspects: frequency and 
MWE pattern. 
Generally speaking, statistical algorithms 
work better on items of higher frequency as it 
depends on the collocational information. How-
ever, our tool does not select MWEs directly 
from the collocates. Rather, it uses the colloca-
tional information as a statistical dictionary and 
searches for word sequences whose constituent 
words have significantly strong collocational 
bonds between them. As a result, it is capable of 
identifying many low-frequency MWEs. Table 4 
lists the breakdown of the precision for five fre-
quency bands (window length = 2). 
 
Freq Candidates True MWEs Precision 
>= 100 17 9 52.94% 
10 ~ 99 846 646 76.36% 
3 ~ 9 2,873 2,178 75.81% 
2 949 608 64.07% 
1 2,457 1,474 59.99% 
Total 7,142 4,915 68.82% 
 
Table 4: Breakdown of precision for frequencies 
(window length = 2). 
 
As shown in the table above, the highest preci-
sions were obtained for the frequency range be-
tween 3 and 99. However, 2,082 of the accepted 
MWEs have frequencies of one or two, account-
ing for 42.36% of the total accepted MWEs. 
Such a result demonstrates again that our tool is 
capable of identifying low-frequency items. An 
interesting result is for the top frequency band 
(greater than 100). Against our general assump-
tion that higher frequency brings higher preci-
sion, we saw the lowest precision in the table for 
this band. Our manual examination reveals this 
was caused by the high frequency numbers, such 
as ?one? or ?two? in the expressions ???? 
(a/one) and ???? ( a kind of). This type of ex-
pression were classified as uninteresting candi-
dates in the manual checking, resulting in higher 
error rates for the high frequency band. 
When we carry out a parallel evaluation for 
the case of searching window length of 3, we see 
a similar distribution of precision across the fre-
quency bands except that the lowest frequency 
band has the lowest precision, as shown by Table 
5. When we compare this table against Table 4, 
we can see, for all of the frequency bands except 
the top one, that the precision drops as the search 
window increases. This further supports our ear-
lier assumption that wider searching window 
tends to reduce the precision. 
 
 
21
Freq candidates true MWEs Precision 
>= 100 17 9 52.94% 
10 ~ 99 831 597 71.84% 
3 ~ 9 3,093 2,221 71.81% 
2 1,157 669 57.82% 
1 3,025 1,472 48.66% 
Total 8,123 4,968 61.16% 
 
Table 5: Breakdown of precision for frequencies 
(window length = 3). 
 
In fact, not only the top frequency band, much 
of the errors of the total output were found to be 
caused by the numbers that frequently occur in 
the test data, e.g. ?_U ?_S (one), ?_U ?_S 
(two) etc. When a POS filter was used to filter 
them out, for the window length 2, we obtained a 
total 5,660 candidates, of which 4,386 were ac-
cepted as true MWEs, producing a precision of 
77.49%. Similarly for the window length 3, a 
total of 6,526 candidates were extracted in this 
way and 4,685 of them were accepted as true 
MWEs, yielding a precision of 71.79%. 
Another factor affecting the performance of 
the tool is the type of MWEs. In order to exam-
ine the potential impact of MWE types to the 
performance of the tool, we used filters to select 
MWEs of the following three patterns: 
1) AN: Adjective + noun structure; 
2) NN: Noun + noun Structure; 
3) FV: Adverb + Verb. 
Table 6 lists the precision for each of the 
MWE types and for search window lengths of 2 
and 3. 
 
Search window length = 2 
Pattern Candidate True MWEs Precision 
A+N 236 221 93.64% 
N+N 644 589 91.46% 
F+V 345 321 93.04% 
total 1,225 1,131 92.33% 
Search window length = 3 
Pattern Candidate True MWEs Precision 
A+N 259 233 89.96% 
N+N 712 635 89.19% 
F+V 381 358 93.96% 
Total 1,352 1,226 90.68% 
 
Table 6: Precisions for three types of MWEs 
 
As shown in the table, the MWE tool achieved 
high precisions above 91% when we use a search 
window of two words. Even when the search 
window expands to three words, the tool still 
obtained precision around 90%. In particular, the 
tool is efficient for the verb phrase type. Such a 
result demonstrates that, when we constrain the 
search algorithm to some specific types of 
MWEs, we can obtain higher precisions. While 
one may argue that rule-based parser can do the 
same work, it must be noted that we are not in-
terested in all grammatical phrases, but those 
which reflect the features of the given domain. 
This is achieved by combining statistical word 
collocation measures, a searching strategy and 
simple POS pattern filters. 
Another interesting finding in our experiment 
is that our tool extracted clauses, such as???
?? (What would you like to drink?) and??
???? (Would you like a drink first?). The 
clauses occur only once or twice in the entire test 
data, but were recognized by the tool because of 
the strong collocational bond between their con-
stituent words. The significance of such per-
formance is that such clauses are typical expres-
sions which are frequently used in real-life con-
versation in the contexts of the canteen, tourism 
etc. Such a function of our tool may have practi-
cal usage in automatically collecting longer typi-
cal expressions for the given domains. 
4 Discussion 
As our experiment demonstrates, our tool pro-
vides a practical means of identifying and ex-
tracting domain specific MWEs with a minimum 
amount of linguistic knowledge. This becomes 
important in multilingual tasks in which it can be 
costly and time consuming to build comprehen-
sive rules for several languages. In particular, it 
is capable of detecting MWEs of various lengths, 
sometimes whole clauses, which are often typical 
of the given domains of the corpus data. For ex-
ample, in our experiment, the tool successfully 
identified several daily used long expressions in 
the domain of food and tourism. MT systems 
often suffer when translating conversation. An 
efficient MWE tool can potentially alleviate the 
problem by extracting typical clauses used in 
daily life and mapping them to adequate transla-
tions in the target language. 
 Despite the flexibility of the statistical tool, 
however, there is a limit to its performance in 
terms of precision. While it is quite efficient in 
providing MWE candidates, its output has to be 
either verified by human or refined by using lin-
guistic rules. In our particular case, we improved 
the precision of our tool by employing simple 
POS pattern filters. Another limitation of this 
tool is that currently it can only recognise con-
tinuous MWEs. A more flexible searching algo-
22
rithm is needed to identify discontinuous MWEs, 
which are important for NLP tasks. 
Besides the technical problem, a major unre-
solved issue we face is what constitutes MWEs. 
Despite agreement on the core MWE types, such 
as idioms and highly idiosyncratic expressions, 
like ?? (Cheng-Yu) in Chinese, it is difficult to 
reach agreement on less fixed expressions. 
We contend that MWEs may have different 
definitions for different research purposes. For 
example, for dictionary compilation, lexicogra-
phers tend to constrain MWEs to highly non-
compositional expressions (Moon, 1998: 18). 
This is because monolingual dictionary users can 
easily understand compositional MWEs and 
there is no need to include them in a dictionary 
for native speakers. For lexicon compilation 
aimed at practical NLP tasks, however, we may 
apply a looser definition of MWEs. For example, 
in the Lancaster semantic lexicon (Rayson et al, 
2004), compositional word groups such as 
?youth club? are considered as MWEs alongside 
non-compositional expressions such as ?food for 
thought? as they depict single semantic units or 
concepts. Furthermore, for the MT research 
community whose primary concern is cross-
language interpretation, any multiword units that 
have stable translation equivalent(s) in a target 
language can be of interest. 
As we discussed earlier, a highly idiomatic 
expression in a language can be translated into a 
highly compositional expression in another lan-
guage, and vice versa. In such situations, it can 
be more practically useful to identify and map 
translation equivalents between the source and 
target languages regardless of their level of com-
positionality.  
Finally, the long Chinese clauses identified by 
the tool can potentially be useful for the im-
provement of MT systems. In fact, most of them 
are colloquial expressions in daily conversation, 
and many such Chinese expressions are difficult 
to parse syntactically. It may be more feasible to 
identify such expressions and map them as a 
whole to English equivalent expressions. The 
same may apply to technical terms, jargon and 
slang. In our experiment, our tool demonstrated 
its capability of detecting such expressions, and 
will prove useful in this regard. 
5 Conclusion 
In this paper, we have reported on our experi-
ment of automatic extraction of Chinese MWEs 
using a statistical tool originally developed for 
English. Our statistical tool produced encourag-
ing results, although further improvement is 
needed to become practically applicable for MT 
system in terms of recall. Indeed, for some con-
strained types of MWEs, high precisions above 
90% have been achieved. This shows, enhanced 
with some linguistic filters, it can provide a prac-
tically useful tool for identifying and extracting 
MWEs. Furthermore, in our experiment, our tool 
demonstrated its capability of multilingual proc-
essing. With only minor adjustment, it can be 
ported to other languages. Meanwhile, further 
study is needed for a fuller understanding of the 
factors affecting the performance of statistical 
tools, including the text styles and topic/domains 
of the texts, etc.   
Acknowledgement 
This work was supported by the National Natural 
Science Foundation of China (grant no. 
60520130297) and the British Academy (grant 
no. SG-42140). 
References 
Biber, D., Conrad, S., Cortes, V., 2003. Lexical bun-
dles in speech and writing: an initial taxonomy. In: 
Wilson, A., Rayson P., McEnery, T. (Eds.), Corpus 
Linguistics by the Lune: A Festschrift for Geoffrey 
Leech. Peter Lang, Frankfurt. pp. 71-92.   
Baldwin, T., Bannard, C., Tanaka, T. and Widdows, 
D. 2003 An Empirical Model of Multiword Ex-
pression Decomposability, In Proceedings of the 
ACL-2003 Workshop on Multiword Expressions: 
Analysis, Acquisition and Treatment, Sapporo, Ja-
pan, pp. 89?96. 
Dagan, I., Church, K., 1994. Termight: identifying 
and translating technical terminology. In: Proceed-
ings of the 4th Conference on Applied Natural 
Language Processing, Stuttgart, German. pp. 34-
40. 
Daille, B., 1995. Combined approach for terminology 
extraction: lexical statistics and linguistic filtering. 
Technical paper 5, UCREL, Lancaster University. 
Dias, G., 2003. Multiword unit hybrid extraction. In: 
Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword Ex-
pressions: Analysis, Acquisition and Treatment, at 
ACL'03, Sapporo, Japan. pp. 41-48. 
Dunning, T., 1993. Accurate methods for the statistics 
of surprise and coincidence. Computational Lin-
guistics 19 (1), 61-74. 
Fung, P., Church, K., 1994. K-vec: a new approach 
for aligning parallel texts. In: Proceedings of COL-
ING '94, Kyoto, Japan. pp. 1996-2001. 
23
Maynard, D., Ananiadou, S., 2000. Trucks: a model 
for automatic multiword term recognition. Journal 
of Natural Language Processing 8 (1), 101-126. 
McEnery, T., Lange, J. M., Oakes, M., Vernonis, J.., 
1997. The exploitation of multilingual annotated 
corpora for term extraction. In: Garside, R., Leech, 
G., McEnery, A. (Eds.), Corpus Annotation --- 
Linguistic Information from Computer Text Cor-
pora. Longman,  London & New York. pp 220-
230. 
Merkel, M., Andersson, M., 2000. Knowledge-lite 
extraction of multi-word units with language filters 
and entropy thresholds. In: Proceedings of 2000 
Conference User-Oriented Content-Based Text and 
Image Handling (RIAO'00), Paris, France. pp. 737-
746. 
Michiels, A., Dufour, N., 1998. DEFI, a tool for 
automatic multi-word unit recognition, meaning 
assignment and translation selection. In: Proceed-
ings of the First International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources & Evaluation, Granada, Spain. 
pp. 1179-1186. 
Moon, R. 1998. Fixed expressions and idioms in Eng-
lish: a corpus-based approach. Clarendon Press: 
Oxford. 
Nivre, J., Nilsson, J., 2004. Multiword units in syntac-
tic parsing. In: Proceedings of LREC-04 Workshop 
on Methodologies & Evaluation of Multiword 
Units in Real-world Applications, Lisbon, Portugal. 
pp. 37-46. 
Pereira, R., Crocker, P., Dias, G., 2004. A parallel 
multikey quicksort algorithm for mining multiword 
units. In: Proceedings of LREC-04 Workshop on 
Methodologies & Evaluation of Multiword Units in 
Real-world Applications, Lisbon, Portugal. pp. 17-
23. 
Piao, S. L., Rayson, P., Archer, D. and McEnery, T. 
2005. Comparing and Combining A Semantic Tag-
ger and A Statistical Tool for MWE Extraction. 
Computer Speech & Language Volume 19, Issue 4,  
pp. 378-397. 
Piao, S.L , Rayson, P., Archer, D., Wilson, A. and 
McEnery, T. 2003. Extracting multiword expres-
sions with a semantic tagger. In Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Analysis, 
Acquisition and Treatment, at ACL'03, Sapporo, 
Japan, pp. 49-56. 
Piao, S., McEnery, T., 2001. Multi-word unit align-
ment in English-Chinese parallel corpora. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Corpus Linguistics 2001, Lancas-
ter, UK. pp. 466-475. 
Rayson, P., Archer, D., Piao, S. L., McEnery, T. 
2004. The UCREL semantic analysis system. In 
proceedings of the workshop on Beyond Named 
Entity Recognition Semantic labelling for NLP 
tasks in association with LREC 2004, Lisbon, Por-
tugal, pp. 7-12. 
Rayson, P., Berridge, D. and Francis, B. 2004. Ex-
tending the Cochran rule for the comparison of 
word frequencies between corpora. In Proceedings 
of the 7th International Conference on Statistical 
analysis of textual data (JADT 2004), Louvain-la-
Neuve, Belgium. pp. 926-936. 
Sag, I., Baldwin, T., Bond, F., Copestake, A., Dan, F., 
2001. Multiword expressions: a pain in the neck 
for NLP. LinGO Working Paper No. 2001-03, 
Stanford University, CA. 
Scott, M., 2001. Mapping key words to problem and 
solution. In: Scott, M., Thompson, G. (Eds.), Pat-
terns of Text: in Honour of Michael Hoey. Benja-
mins, Amsterdam. pp. 109 ? 127. 
Smadja, F., 1993. Retrieving collocations from text: 
Xtract. Computational Linguistics 19 (1), 143-177. 
Sun, G. 2004. Design of an Interlingua-Based Chi-
nese-English Machine Translation System. In Pro-
ceedings of the 5th China-Korea Joint Symposium 
on Oriental Language Processing and Pattern Rec-
ognition, Qingdao, China. pp. 129-134. 
Tanaka, T., Baldwin, T., 2003. Noun-noun compound 
machine translation: a feasibility study on shallow 
processing. In: Proceedings of the ACL-03 Work-
shop on Multiword Expressions: Analysis, Acquisi-
tion and Treatment, Sapporo, Japan. pp. 17-24. 
Wu, D., 1997. Stochastic inversion transduction 
grammars and bilingual parsing of parallel corpora. 
Computational Linguistics 23 (3), 377-401. 
Appendix: English translations of the 
sample Chinese sentences 
1. ????????? ?????? 
Tran: Do we have (football) training this af-
ternoon? I hope not. 
2. ???????????????? 
Tran: You can?t do that. Let?s go Dutch. 
3. ?????????????????
?????? 
Tran: I am afraid I can?t arrange for you to sit 
at the same table. Would you mind if 
you sit separately? 
4. ????????? 
Tran: I?d like iced white coffee (please). 
5. ?????????????? 
Tran: OK, I want beer and some coffee 
(please). 
24
