 Corporate Language Resources in Multilingual Content Creation, 
Maintenance and Leverage 
Elia YUSTE 
Institute of Computational Linguistics  
University of Zurich 
Winterthurerstrasse 190 
CH-8057 Z?rich 
Switzerland 
yuste@ifi.unizh.ch  
 
 
Abstract 
This paper focuses on how language 
resources (LR) for translation (hence 
LR4Trans) feature, and should ideally 
feature, within a corporate workflow of 
multilingual content development. The 
envisaged scenario will be that of a content 
management system that acknowledges the 
value of LR4Trans in the organisation as a 
key component and corporate knowledge 
resource. 
1 Introduction 
Corporations willing to go multilingual face 
two main difficulties, especially at the beginning. 
The first one is that many organisations are not 
acquainted with the processes behind 
internationalising their many products, 
documents, web pages and database interfaces 
effectively, so they opt to reduce the costs of 
localisation (and some even do not dare to step in 
and consequently remain monolingual). The 
second problem, which may derive from problem 
number one, relates to the fact that the corporation 
is then likely to end up hiring the wrong 
translation team or language service vendor after 
promising a top quality product1 quickly and 
inexpensively.  
Unfortunately, qualified and truly skilled 
candidates for posts in translation, localisation, 
internationalisation, and language-related project 
management are very difficult to find. Despite the 
growing competition among language service 
                                                     
                                                     
1 Translation (any form thereof, human, machine, 
technical, scientific, commercial, written, oral, etc.) 
involves both process and product. One should not put 
under scrutiny just the latter and ignore the former. 
vendors and providers, the language industry is 
relatively immature. It is composed of young 
language service companies that are highly 
project-driven. The lessons learned in one project 
may be left behind and are often not assembled in 
a baseline knowledge solution to be retrieved and 
leveraged later.  
The fact that most companies, regardless of 
whether they outsource2 their translation jobs or 
have their own inhouse language service 
department, pay little attention to the integration, 
reusability of and interaction with language 
resources for translation (LR4Trans) within a 
project, let alne from project to project, 
constitutes a less than desirable panorama for the 
creation of corporate multilingual content.  
So far, the leverage of LR4Trans has been 
limited to translation memory systems, where 
previously translated content is available to the 
translator through a software tool. This 
technology is not by any means new or highly 
sophisticated. While insufficient attention has 
been given to the integration of translation 
memories with other language resources and 
technologies3 in the workflow, modes of 
accessing translation memory databases have 
evolved from purely standalone to distributed 
data, either synchronised with a central database 
or as a remotely4 accessed central database.  
2 Since the 1980s and 1990s, outsourcing of 
translation, as of many highly specialised business 
processes, has become prevalent. In an attempt to 
lower translation-mediated communication costs, most 
activities, even the application of translation memory 
tools, are managed outside the boundaries of the 
corporate firewall.  
3 A good start for this, though, are Bruckner & Plitt 
2001 and M?gge 2001. 
4 This is the typical situation when outsourcing, 
whereby the content moves out of the source language 
As a result, translation memories have gradually 
become widely adopted and almost the 
indispensable tool of the trade. Commercial 
producers of translation memory packages claim 
that, if properly used and maintained, they are 
valuable corporate knowledge resources. 
The question is whether translation memories 
constitute the only possible corporate language 
resource containing corporate knowledge, or 
whether there can be other components, agents 
and processes that play an important role in 
multilingual content as well.  
In the next section we would like to carefully 
examine the notion of knowledge in connection 
with those of LR4Trans and multilingual content. 
2 From theory to practice  
2.1 Language resources and Knowledge 
The breadth and depth of knowledge required 
today in order to perform a good quality technical 
or specialised corporate translation relies upon a 
panoply of language resources (LR) in machine-
readable form, which are self-created in the 
corporation or purchased from external parties 
(sister organisations, domain-specific specialist 
groups and societies, applied software and 
solution companies, etc.). In this panoply of 
corporate  LR4Trans, one may find domain 
specific terminology, source and target language 
dictionaries of corporation-dependant word 
meanings, source and target language structures 
and rules, a corporate language stylesheet, 
appendix of phrases and expressions denoting 
cultural differences within a (multinational) 
corporation or when attempting global expansion, 
prescriptive and descriptive notes about the 
corporation ?culture?, among others.  
All these resources contain precious corporate 
knowledge that should be taken into consideration 
and be made accessible to all corporate members 
and partners accordingly.  Tagging or flagging the 
knowledge in those language resources will be 
extremely useful for optimising - on a constant 
basis - not only the resources themselves but the 
whole of the multilingual content production 
process. Tags or flags, normally called content 
properties, content attibutes or metadata, are 
aimed at retrieving a content unit when necessary 
and preventing loss of content. It is precisely 
thanks to these attributes, often visualised to the 
                                                                                  
                                                     
content repository into an external translation process, 
and then returns in one or more new languages ? a 
further challenge, especially if there is not yet an 
effective content management system in place.  
user by means colours or other agreed 
conventions, that a content management system 
can manage content even if it moves across 
multiple languages or sites. 
Capturing that knowledge will thus be helpful 
when developing scalable and adaptive 
applications for managing corporate multilingual 
content. 
 
2.2 From LR4Trans to knowledge 
repositories and content management 
systems 
A corporate knowledge-geared multilingual 
content strategy is open to a varying degree of 
automation, in terms of not only linguistic 
processing but also in content transaction5 
operations, on the basis of the type of 
documentation, business conditioning factors, etc. 
It usually combines tightly integrated translation 
technologies (and maybe other kind of human 
language technologies) with human specialist 
intervention, i.e. unique6 language work  
processes, which have to be driven by highly 
skilled linguists.  
This form of knowledge-based translation work 
aims to bridge the gap between low cost, poor 
output machine-only  translation and costly high-
quality human-only translation. Although this 
could be seen as a type of machine-aided human 
translation (MAHT), we would like to emphasise 
the issue of knowledge, corporate knowledge in 
particular, which precisely ought to be captured 
into the translation system?s knowledge base. 
This corporate knowledge base, characterised 
for being configurable and updatable, will detect 
and classify the knowledge present in the 
language resources into: general knowledge, 
domain-specific knowledge and, knowledge 
specific to each individual customer or 
department within the organisation. 
The knowledge base will nonetheless be acting 
as a single repository with the following possible 
functions7: automated identification of terms that 
5 Transaction costs can outweigh translation costs, 
especially when the creation and maintenance of 
multilingual content is required for e-learning or e-
customer support.  
6 Ideally tailor-made and customisable, that is, 
conceived for the corporation or the client they work in 
or for. 
7 These functions will be linked to one another and 
called according to the stage of multilingual content 
creation we are in. A function or component may be 
called more than once within the multilingual content 
are candidates for once-only translation; spotting 
of translation for terms from previously translated, 
aligned texts; semi- or automated creation of 
domain and/or customer-specific terminology, 
dictionaries and glossaries; creation and regular 
update of domain and/or customer-specific 
language rules; implementation of domain and/or 
customer-specific translation memories; dynamic 
and integrative machine translation, making use of 
customised dictionaries (lexicons) and language 
rules; translation and edition application, ideally 
increasing ease of use by showing colour-coded 
aligned bi-texts (bilingual) or multi-texts 
(multilingual) with a context expansion feature 
and highlighting terminology; and, most 
importantly, automated and user-dependant 
feedback of new knowledge into the knowledge 
base.  
 
3 The envisaged scenario: workflows, 
content management systems, and agents 
Having the corporate knowledge base linked to 
various LR4Trans, as presented in section 2 
makes us think of a procedural and very agile 
multilingual content workflow. But let us examine 
it in greater detail starting to look at the simplest 
of workflows first (figure 1): 
 
 
Author: edit/ 
approve ??  
 
                                    Translator:  
         feedback from author ?? 
Figure 1.- Typical Workflow diagram 
 
Typically authors do not edit or approve content 
for translation. The texts to translate, usually from 
an unstructured document collection, are handed 
over to the translator, who does translate without 
having the chance to get feedback from the 
authorship department. There is neither an 
obvious use of language resources in machine-
readable form nor a corporate knowledge 
detection and exploitation strategy in operation. 
This poor production process will have negative 
consequences in terms of the quality of the 
product translation (e.g. lacking consistency, 
                                                                                  
                                                     
production lifecycle. 
frequent content losses, etc.) and costs, 
particularly in the long run. 
In order to streamline the procurement and 
management of corporate multilingual content we 
propose the following workflow (see figure 2 in 
the appendix). Its main assets would be an overall 
corporate knowledge base linked to various 
LR4Trans, as appropriate, and maintained by all 
agents8 intervening in the workflow, plus a 
content management system, or CMS, that would 
reflect the business roles controlling the 
workflow, data production and update flow, user 
roles and access privileges, costing rules, etc. 
In contrast to figure 1, the following features 
can be found in the workflow presented in figure 
2:  
? Cyclic nature of content, from 
monolingual to multilingual, and back 
to enhance and expand the first; 
? Corporate content is traceable and its 
state and structure can be followed-up 
at all times;  
? Authors are aware of what happens at 
the other end, and so are capable of 
?writing for translation?, that is, editing 
or approving content that will be later 
received by an audience or market of 
another language and culture. In other 
words, the package of the content starts 
being taken care of from the beginning; 
? Translators are connected with the 
authoring department: the concepts of 
content negotiation and feedback are 
essential here. Translators, being 
intercultural mediators, have a strong 
say in issues of international content 
relevancy. 
Source 
Language 
Document 
Collection 
 
TRANSLATION 
CMS are meant to work seamlessly in the 
background, automatically identifying changes 
in the content (e.g. keeping track of the content 
production or processing stage, keeping a log of 
agent participation, etc.) by means of a built-in 
feedback loop mechanism. Besides, a 
multilingual CMS comes to live action when, as 
some kind of document gate keeper and donor, 
passes on the content from one agent to another, 
8 By this we mean not only the multiskilled 
corporate linguist (who could be a translator, 
terminologist, editor, domain validator, cross-cultural 
consultant...), but also all those agents that construct 
and share the knowledge of a corporation, namely 
decision makers (i.e. management force), marketeers, 
legal specialists, and so on. 
notifying him or her of any vital new piece of 
information: ?a new translation has been 
received?, ?glossary validated by expert XY 
and saved today at 18:27 hours?, ?not possible 
to close up project before client acceptancy 
test?. 
CMS are usually dependant on the corporate 
knowledge base. Together, they define the 
workflow and have interaction capabilities with 
the various users by means of secure interfaces, 
usually very similar to a web portal for internal 
and very often external use, too (mainly for 
workers or at different sites and clients).  
Concerning language work, it is extremely 
important that both online and offline editing 
and review of content are allowed. In other 
words, the corporate knowledge base has to be 
centralised (online use) and yet distributed at 
times (offline use). It will be the system, which 
will manage the synchronisation of content and 
knowledge base alterations and updates across 
all the different user types.  
The CMS thus relies heavily upon automated 
mechanisms (e.g. automatic updating of the 
translation memory once the project translations 
have gone through the review process) but 
needs skilled human intervention to improve its 
efficiency over time.  
4 Conclusion 
After introducing some commonplace 
problematic issues surrounding the creation, 
managing and leveraging of multilingual content, 
we have analysed the interrelation of corporate 
knowledge and language resources for translation 
in a corporate setting. It has been argued that the 
corporate knowledge residing in the corporation 
documentation and language resources has to be 
captured and introduced in a corporate knowledge 
base, which has to be made accessible to and 
constantly cared for by all agents intervening in 
the multilingual content workflow, not only by 
linguists. We have gone on to underline the 
importance of having a content management 
system in place, in order to account for and 
dynamise the tasks and processes within the 
workflow. Other relevant issues such as linkage 
between resources, knowledge base and CMS, 
and balance between automation and human 
intervention have been discussed. 
5 Acknowledgements 
My special thanks go to the two blind reviewers 
of this paper?s first draft. I would also like to 
thank my colleagues at the Institute for 
Computational Linguistics of the University of 
Zurich for their interesting questions during a 
recent presentation. 
References  
D. Barab?. 2003. Soaring demand, shrinking 
supply in translation: how we plan to make ends 
meet. MT Summit IX, New Orleans, USA, 23-27 
September 2003. Presentation slides available 
at:  
http://www.amtaweb.org/summit/MTSummit/Fi
nalPapers/MTSummit_Sept2003.ppt 
[Powerpoint file, last consulted: 20 May 2004] 
U. Boehme & S. Svetova. 2001. An integrated 
solution: applying PROMT machine translation 
technology, terminology mining, and the 
TRADOS TWB translation memory to SAP 
content translation. MT Summit VIII, Santiago 
de Compostela, Spain, 18-22 September 2001; 
pp. 49-52. 
C. Boitet. 2001. Four technical and organizational 
keys to handle more languages and improve 
quality (on demand) in MT. MT Summit VIII, 
Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 18-22 
September 2001. Towards a Road Map for MT. 
C. Bruckner & M. Plitt. 2001. Evaluating the 
operational benefit of using machine translation 
output as translation memory input.  MT Summit 
VIII, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 18-22 
September 2001. Workshop on MT Evaluation. 
J. A. Brundage. 2001. Machine translation ? 
evolution not revolution. MT Summit VIII, 
Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 18-22 
September 2001; pp.59-62. 
A. Clarke. 2000. MT within Productive 
Translation Workflow. Fifth EAMT Workshop 
"Harvesting existing resources", May 11 - 12, 
2000, Ljubljana, Slovenia; pp.79-81. 
M. Franco Sabar?s, J.L. Rojas Alonso, C. Dafonte 
& B. Arcay. 2001. Multilingual authoring 
through an artificial language. MT Summit VIII, 
Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 18-22 
September 2001; pp.99-102. 
D. Gervais, 2003. MultiTrans? system 
presentation: translation support and language 
management solutions. MT Summit IX, New 
Orleans, USA, 23-27 September 2003; pp.459-
462. 
J. Hutchings (ed). 1998. Translation technology: 
integration in the workflow environment. EAMT 
Workshop, WHO, Geneva, 2-3 April 1998. 
C. Hyland. 2003. Testing ?Prompt?: the 
development of a rapid post-editing service at 
CLS Corporate Language Services AG, 
Switzerland.  MT Summit IX, New Orleans, 
USA, 23-27 September 2003; pp.189-193. 
T. Lewis. 2001. Combining tools to improve 
automatic translation. MT Summit VIII, Santiago 
de Compostela, Spain, 18-22 September 2001; 
pp.207-209. 
E. Maier & A Clarke. 2003. Scalability in MT 
systems. MT Summit IX, New Orleans, USA, 
23-27 September 2003; pp.248-253. 
E. Maier, A. Clarke & H.-U. Stadler. 2001. 
Evaluation of machine translation systems at 
CLS Corporate Language Services AG. MT 
Summit VIII, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 
18-22 September 2001; pp.223-228. 
E. Macklovitch & A. S?nchez Valderr?banos. 
2001. Rethinking interaction: the solution for 
high-quality MT? MT Summit VIII, Santiago de 
Compostela, Spain, 18-22 September 2001. 
Towards a Road Map for MT. 
T. Mitamura, K. Baker, E. Nyberg & D. Svoboda. 
2003a. Diagnostics for interactive controlled 
language checking. Controlled language 
translation, EAMT-CLAW-03, Dublin City 
University, 15-17 May 2003; pp. 87-94. 
T. Mitamura, K. Baker, D. Svoboda, & E. 
Nyberg. 2003b. Source language diagnostics for 
MT. MT Summit IX, New Orleans, USA, 23-27 
September 2003; pp.254-260. 
T. Murata, M. Kitamura, T. Fukui & T. Sukehiro. 
2003. Implementation of collaborative 
translation environment ?Yakushite Net?. MT 
Summit IX, New Orleans, USA, 23-27 
September 2003; pp.479-482. 
http://www.yakushite.net/ [last consulted: 20 
May 2004] 
U. M?gge. 2001. The Best of Two Worlds: 
Integrating Machine Translation intoTranslation 
Memory Systems - A universal approach based 
on the TMX standard. Language International, 
December 2001, John Benjamins, 26-29. 
E. Nyberg, T. Mitamura, D. Svoboda, J. Ko, K. 
Baker, & J. Micher. 2003. An integrated system 
for source language checking, analysis and term 
management. MT Summit IX, New Orleans, 
USA, 23-27 September 2003; pp.487-490. 
U. Reuther. 2003. Two in one ? Can it work? 
Readability and translatability by means of 
controlled language.  Controlled language 
translation, EAMT-CLAW-03, Dublin City 
University, 15-17 May 2003; pp.124-132. 
A. Rinsche. 2000. Computer-assisted business 
process management for translation and 
localisation companies. Fifth EAMT Workshop 
"Harvesting existing resources", May 11 - 12, 
2000, Ljubljana, Slovenia; pp.83-85. 
A. S?nchez Valderr?banos, J. Esteban & L. Iraola. 
2003. TransType2 ? a new paradigm for 
translation automation. MT Summit IX, New 
Orleans, USA, 23-27 September 2003; pp.498-
501. 
F. Sch?fer. 2003. MT post-editing: how to shed 
light on the "unknown task". Experiences at 
SAP. Controlled language translation, EAMT-
CLAW-03, Dublin City University, 15-17 May 
2003; pp.133-140.  
J. Senellart, C. Boitet & L. Romary. 2003. 
SYSTRAN new generation: the XML 
translation workflow. MT Summit IX, New 
Orleans, USA, 23-27 September 2003; pp.338-
345. 
R. Smith. 2001. Using information technology to 
optimise translation processes at 
PricewaterhouseCoopers Madrid.  MT Summit 
VIII, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 18-22 
September 2001; pp.341-344. 
N. Underwood & B. Jongejan. 2001. 
Translatability checker: a tool to help decide 
whether to use MT. MT Summit VIII, Santiago 
de Compostela, Spain, 18-22 September 2001; 
pp.363-368. 
J. van der Meer. 2003. At last translation 
automation becomes a reality: an anthology of 
the translation market. Controlled language 
translation, EAMT-CLAW-03, Dublin City 
University, 15-17 May 2003, pp. 180-184. 
E. Yuste. 2002a. Language Resources and the 
Language Professional. In E. Yuste (Ed.) 
Proceedings of the First International 
Workshop in Language Resources for 
Translation Work and Research. LREC 2002, 
28th May 2002. Las Palmas de Gran Canaria 
(Spain). Paris: ELRA (European Association for 
Language Resources). More information can be 
found at the workshop and post-workshop web 
sites at 
http://www.ifi.unizh.ch/cl/yuste/LREC/LR4Tra
ns.html and 
http://www.ifi.unizh.ch/cl/yuste/postworkshop/p
ostworkshop.html
E. Yuste. 2002b. MT and the Swiss language 
service providers: an analysis and training 
perspective.  Sixth EAMT Workshop "Teaching 
machine translation", November 14-15, 2002, 
UMIST, Manchester, England; pp.23-32. 
E. Yuste & S. Cerrella Bauer. 2004. In print. 
Circumstances, challenges and consequences of 
implementing a quality-geared and technology-
aided process of translating: a case study. 90-
minute workshop delivered at the IV Jornadas 
Internacionales sobre la Formaci?n y la 
Profesi?n del Traductor e Int?rprete. 
UEM,Madrid, 25th-27th February 2004. Paper9 
due to appear later on this year in resulting CD-
ROM Proceedings. More info about this 
international conference is available at 
http://www.uem.es/traduccion/actividades/jorna
das/.  
T. Zervaki. 2002. Globalize, Localize, Translate: 
Tips and Resources for Success. Bloomington: 
1st Book Library. 
                                                     
9 The results in this paper are also discussed in two 
other articles by the same authors, due to appear by 
invitation in two other professional publications, 
namely in the Bulletin of the D?V (Agentur der 
Dolmetscher- und ?bersetzervereinigung, Switzerland, 
http://www.duev.ch), under the title ?Implementing a 
quality-geared and technology-aided process of 
translating: a case study?, and Hieronymous, the 
professional quarterly journal of the ASTTI 
(Association suisse des traducteurs, terminologues et 
interpr?tes, http://www.astti.ch), under the title 
?Circumstances, challenges and consequences of a 
quality-geared and technology-aided process of 
translating: a case study?. [last consulted in May 2004] 
APPENDIX 
 
 
Corporate Knowledge Base 
Detects and keeps knowledge through the 
integration and exploitation of corporate language 
resources 
 
Corporate Content Management System 
CMS 
Manages workflow incorporating automated 
processes, interconnects agents with components, 
ensures multilinguality 
 
 
 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 
        Authors  Operations         Legal        Marketing  
           Translation 
 
 
                                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
           Domain 
           Experts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SL Content 
Repository 
(controlled 
authoring 
possible) 
CMS 
Corporate 
Documentation 
 
Validated 
Translated
Content 
Repository
CMS 
Processing though 
Human Language 
Technologies 
+  
Team of Corporate 
Linguists   
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
Web Portal 
[various user-geared interfaces possible:  
project manager, linguist, client, etc] 
 
Figure 2.- Envisaged Corporate Multilingual Content Development with Knowledge Base and Content 
Management System 
