OntoSem and SIMPLE: Two Multi-Lingual World Views 
Marjorie MCSHANE, Margalit ZABLUDOWSKI, Sergei NIRENBURG and Stephen BEALE 
Institute for Language and Information Technologies (ILIT) 
University of Maryland Baltimore County 
1000 Hilltop Circle 
Baltimore, MD  21250  USA   
marge@umbc.edu, margalit@rcn.com, sergei@umbc.edu, sbeale@umbc.edu 
 
Abstract 
In this paper we compare programs of work 
that aim to develop broad coverage cross-
linguistic resources for NLP: Ontological 
Semantics (OntoSem) and SIMPLE. The 
approaches taken in these projects differ in 
three notable respects: the use of an 
ontology versus a word net as the semantic 
substrate; the development of knowledge 
resources inside of as opposed to outside of 
a processing environment; and the 
development of lexicons for multiple 
languages based on a single core lexicon or 
without such a core (i.e., in parallel 
fashion). In large part, these differences 
derive from project-driven, real-world 
requirements and available resources ? a 
reflection of their being practical rather 
than theoretical projects. However, that 
being said, we will suggest certain 
preferences  regarding the content and 
development of NLP resources with a view 
toward both short- and long-term, high-
level language processing goals. 
1 Introduction 
Ontological Semantics (OntoSem) is a multi-
lingual text processing environment that takes as 
input unrestricted text and, using a suite of static 
resources and processors, automatically creates 
text-meaning representations (TMRs) which can 
then be used as the basis for any NLP application, 
including MT, question answering, summarization, 
etc. OntoSem knowledge resources are developed 
in coordination with each other and with the 
processors they serve. Some of the resources are 
fully language independent while others are readily 
parameterizable, wherein lies the cross-linguistic 
portability of the system. Although in  this paper, 
we focus on OntoSem lexicons, a crucial point is 
that they are not built in isolation but, rather, in an 
integrated environment where their utility can be 
tested and evaluated in a variety of practical 
applications.  
The SIMPLE project takes a different approach 
to achieving the dual goals of multilinguality and 
resource utility across applications. It aims to 
develop compatible (they use the term 
?harmonised?) lexicons for 12 European 
languages, attempting to foresee what will be most 
useful for applications but without referring to any 
particular processors that will use the information 
and without building any other knowledge 
resources to share the burden of semantic 
specification. As we will show, these different 
points of departure lead to quite different 
realizations of cross-lingual lexicons for NLP.  
2 Overview of SIMPLE 
The SIMPLE project is developing 10K-sense 
?harmonised? semantic lexicons for 12 European 
Union languages (Catalan, Danish, Dutch, English, 
Finnish, French, German, Greek, Italian, 
Portuguese, Spanish, Swedish), continuing the 
earlier PAROLE project, which developed 20K-
sense morphological and syntactic lexicons for 
these languages. The lexicons are monolingual and 
are developed independently, with the word stock 
based on corpus evidence for each language. To 
ensure some overlap of lexical senses, certain Base 
Concepts of EuroWordNet must be covered in 
each language (462 nominal, 187 verbal and 185 
adjectival Base Concepts that were culled and 
cleaned from EuroWordNet). This overlap will 
permit direct interlinking among languages; 
interlinking of the rest of the lexical stock is slated 
as future work. Pustejovsky?s four Qualia (which 
are, essentially, properties expressing formal, 
agentive, constitutive and telic meanings; see 
Pustejovsky 1995) are used to specify certain 
aspects of word meaning, and a common library of 
140 template types is used to guide acquisition in 
all languages (Lenci et al2000a, 2000b).  
Lenci et al 2000b (p. 5) summarize the 
information that can be represented in a SIMPLE 
lexicon entry: ?i) semantic type, corresponding to 
the template the SemU (semantic unit) instantiates; 
ii) domain information; iii) lexicographic gloss; iv) 
argument structure for predicative SemUs; v) 
selectional restrictions on the arguments; vi) event 
type, to characterise the aspectual properties of 
verbal predicates; vii) link of the arguments to the 
syntactic subcategorization frames, as represented 
in the PAROLE lexicons; viii) Qualia Structure; 
ix) information about regular polysemous 
alternation in which a word sense may enter; x) 
cross-part-of-speech relations (e.g. intelligent - 
intelligence; writer - to write); xi) synonymy.? 
 Below  is the SemU for a sense of lancet, 
instantiating the template Instrument (from 
Palmer et al 2000). 
 
Instrument 
Usem:     Lancet 
BC number: 
Template_Type:  [Instrument] 
Unification_path:  [Concrete_entity|ArtifactAgentive |  
      Telic] 
Domain:    Medicine 
Semantic Class:  Instrument 
Gloss: a surgical knife with a pointed double-edged 
blade; used for punctures and small incisions 
Pred_Rep.:    <Nil> 
Selectional Restr.:  <Nil> 
Derivation:    <Nil> 
Formal:    isa (<lancet>, <knife>: [Instrument]) 
Agentive:    created_by (<lancet>, <make>: 
      [Creation]) 
Constitutive:   made_of (<lancet>, <metal>:  
      [Substance]) 
      has_as_part (<lancet>, <edge>: 
      [Part]) 
Telic:     used_for(<lancet>, <cut>: [Constitu
      tive_change]) 
      used_by (<lancet>, <doctor>) 
Synonymy:    <Nil> 
Collocates:    Collocates (<SemU1>,?,<SemUn>) 
Complex:    <Nil> 
 
While the SIMPLE project is certainly 
producing useful resources, we would suggest that 
the lexical information and structure are being 
overly constrained by the frameworks selected, 
which we will comment on briefly in preparation 
for an extended comparison between OntoSem and 
SIMPLE in section 4. 
EuroWordNet is being used as the anchor for 
semantic description in SIMPLE. However, like 
the original English WordNet, it is not a property-
rich ontology but, rather, a hierarchical net of 
lexical items whose use in NLP has the same 
pitfalls  as any non-ontological word net (e.g., lack 
of disambiguating power and lack of sufficient 
relations between entities; see Nirenburg 2004c for 
a discussion of the insufficiency of WordNet for 
NLP). In order to make up for the sparsity of 
information in the semantic substrate, the SIMPLE 
lexicons contain what would, we believe, be more 
efficiently recorded in a single, sufficient ontology. 
For example, when the lexicon acquirers for each 
language use the Instrument template to describe 
lancet, they must rerecord in the lexicon of each L 
all of the language-independent property values for 
this lexical item, like the values for the four Qualia 
(formal, agentive, constitutive, telic), the domain, 
the unification path, etc. This is significant 
redundancy and, moreover, there is no guarantee 
that acquirers will arrive at the same decisions, 
either through  error, oversight or competing 
analyses of the phenomena in question. 
Another, in our view, insufficiently explained 
aspect of SIMPLE is the priority given to Qualia as 
descriptors of lexical  items. The original inventory 
of Qualia (from Pustejovsky 1995) consists of only 
four properties of the hundreds that can usefully be 
used to link concepts for purposes of NLP. Lenci et 
al. (2000b) address this issue as follows: 
?Although they [the four Qualia] clearly do not 
exhaust the semantic content of lexical items, 
Pustejovsky (1995) has convincingly shown that 
these four Qualia dimensions play a particularly 
prominent role in determining the linguistic 
behavior of word senses, as well as in the 
explanation of the generative mechanisms at the 
basis of lexical creativity. Qualia-based 
information can be specified for all the parts of 
speech, although prima facie it seems to be more 
directly suitable for the characterization of certain 
types of nominals?. However, there is large gap 
between theoretical interest and practical 
application: in fact, because of this, the SIMPLE 
project has moved toward an Extended Qualia 
Structure with more fine-grained subtypes of given 
Qualia.1  
In conclusion, we believe that SIMPLE is 
pursuing useful goals that could be pursued in even 
more useful ways by shifting the focus from 
lexicon-only work to integrated work within an 
environment in which ontological and lexical 
resources are developed together and where extant 
types of processors can be used to test the value of 
resources as they are developed.   
3 Overview of OntoSem 
The OntoSem approach to lexicon and ontology 
acquisition differs from that used in SIMPLE 
                                                     
1 As an aside, we see a parallel between focusing on 
Qualia in lexical description and, for example, focusing 
on classes of verbs with respect to their alternations, as 
is done, for example, in Levin 1995. While the 
descriptions that derive from theoretically-driven 
research such as this can certainly be useful, when it 
comes to writing ?well-rounded? semantic descriptions 
of words for large-scale systems, there is no distinction 
between a Quale and other properties. Similarly, the fact 
that a verb belongs to some group with respect to 
alternations is no more or less important than its other 
potential group membership along other parameters. See 
Nirenburg and Raskin 2004 for further discussion of 
these and related issues. 
because OntoSem is an integrated text processing 
environment, meaning that knowledge resources 
are crafted hand-in-hand with each other and with 
processors such that responsibility for various 
analysis tasks can be distributed in an ideal (to the 
degree of our understanding) way.  
 OntoSem takes as input unrestricted raw text 
and carries out preprocessing, morphological 
analysis, syntactic analysis and semantic analysis, 
with the results of semantic analysis represented as 
formal text-meaning representations (TMRs) that 
can then be used as the basis for a wide variety of 
NLP applications. Text analysis relies on:  
 
? The OntoSem language-independent ontology, 
which is written using a metalanguage of 
description and currently contains around 5,500 
concepts, each of which is described by an 
average of 16 properties. In all, the ontology 
contains hundreds of properties (which cover the 
same territory as the Qualia plus much more). 
Fillers for properties can be other ontological 
concepts or literals. 
? An OntoSem lexicon for each language 
processed, which contains syntactic and semantic 
zones (linked using variables) as well as calls to 
?meaning procedures? (i.e., programs that carry 
out procedural semantics, see McShane et al 
2004a) when applicable. The semantic zone most 
frequently refers to ontological concepts, either 
directly or with property-based modifications, 
but can also describe word meaning extra-
ontologically, for example, in terms of modality, 
aspect, time, etc. The current English lexicon 
contains approximately 12K senses, including all 
closed-class items and the most frequent verbs, 
as indicated by corpus analysis. This English 
lexicon  took less than 1 person year to build and 
can (as described below) be ported to other 
languages. 
? An onomasticon, or lexicon of proper names, 
which contains approximately 350,000 entries 
and is growing daily using semi-automated 
extraction techniques.  
? A fact repository, which contains real-world 
facts represented as numbered ?remembered 
instances? of ontological concepts (e.g., SPEECH-
ACT-3366 is the 3366th instantiation of the 
concept SPEECH-ACT in the world model 
constructed during the given run of the analyzer). 
? The OntoSem text analyzers, which cover 
preprocessing, syntactic analysis, semantic 
analysis, and creation of TMRs. They are largely 
parameterizable and thus can be ported to other 
languages. 
? The TMR language, which is the metalanguage 
for representing text meaning. A very simple 
example of a TMR (simple because most of the 
sentences we process are much longer), which 
reflects the meaning of the sentence He asked the 
UN to authorize the war, is as follows:  
 
REQUEST-ACTION-69  
    AGENT      HUMAN-72  
    THEME        ACCEPT-70  
    BENEFICIARY     ORGANIZATION-71  
    SOURCE-ROOT-WORD  ask  
    TIME       (< (FIND-ANCHOR-TIME))  
ACCEPT-70  
   THEME      WAR-73  
   THEME-OF     REQUEST-ACTION-69  
   SOURCE-ROOT-WORD   authorize 
ORGANIZATION-71  
   HAS-NAME     UNITED-NATIONS 
   BENEFICIARY-OF   REQUEST-ACTION-69  
   SOURCE-ROOT-WORD  UN 
HUMAN-72  
   HAS-NAME    COLIN POWELL 
   AGENT-OF     REQUEST-ACTION-69  
   SOURCE-ROOT-WORD  he ; ref. resolution done 
WAR-73  
   THEME-OF                ACCEPT-70  
    SOURCE-ROOT-WORD  war  
Details of this approach to text processing can be 
found, e.g., in Nirenburg et al 2004a,b. The 
ontology itself, a brief ontology tutorial, and an 
extensive lexicon tutorial can be viewed at 
http://ilit.umbc.edu. 
 OntoSem has been used with languages 
including English, Spanish, Chinese, Arabic and 
Persian, to varying degrees of lexical coverage 
(e.g., earlier, less fine-grained English and Spanish 
lexicons contained 40K entries and were used for 
MT in the Mikrokosmos project). What makes 
OntoSem amenable to efficient cross-linguistic 
usage is that many of the resources are either fully 
language independent (the ontology, the fact 
repository, the TMR metalanguage) or 
parameterizable in well understood ways. Here we 
focus on exploiting cross-linguistic similarity for 
lexical acquisition, but a similar analysis could be 
applied to the OntoSem analyzers. 
 
3. 1  OntoSem Lexicons 
A basic verbal lexicon entry in OntoSem looks as 
follows (in presentation format): 
 
watch  
watch-v1 
    synonyms ?observe? 
    anno 
         definition  ?to observe, look at? 
         example ?He?s watching the competition.? 
syn-struc 
       subject    $var1   cat n 
        v                $var0   cat v 
       directobject   $var2   cat n  
sem-struc 
     VOLUNTARY-VISUAL-EVENT 
            agent   ^$var1 
          theme   ^$var2 
 
The syntactic structure (syn-struc) says that this is 
a transitive sense of watch and the semantic 
structure (sem-struc) says that a VOLUNTARY-
VISUAL-EVENT ? which is a concept in our 
ontology ? must be instantiated in the TMR. The 
variables are used for linking, so, for example, the 
syntactic subject is linked to the meaning of the 
AGENT of the VOLUNTARY-VISUAL-EVENT (^ is 
read ?the meaning of?).  
 Apart from mapping directly to an ontological 
concept, there are many other ? and more complex 
? ways to express meaning in OntoSem. For 
example, one can map to an ontological concept 
with modified property values: e.g.,  
 
? Zionist is described as a POLITICAL-ROLE  that 
is the AGENT-OF a SUPPORT event whose THEME 
is Israel.  
? asphalt (v.) is described as a COVER event 
whose INSTRUMENT is ASPHALT.  
? recall (v. as in they recalled the high chairs) is 
described as a RETURN-OBJECT event that is 
CAUSED-BY a FOR-PROFIT-CORPORATION and 
whose THEME is ARTIFACT, INGESTIBLE or 
MATERIAL. 
 
There are also a number of fully or partially 
non-ontological ways of describing meaning, like 
the use of parametric values of mood or aspect. For 
example, the auxiliary might as in He might come 
over is described using the modality ?epistemic?, 
which deals with the truth value of a statement:    
 syn-struc 
      subject    $var1   cat n 
      v                $var0   cat v 
      inf-cl    $var2   cat v    
 sem-struc 
       ^$var2  
   epistemic  .5 
   agent   ^$var1 
 meaning-procedure 
   fix-case-role (value ^$var1) (value ^$var2) 2 
                                                     
                                                                                   2 This meaning procedure reassigns a case-role if the 
listed AGENT case-role is inappropriate considering the 
meaning of $var1 and/or $var2: e.g., in the truck might 
come, truck is a THEME of a MOTION-EVENT, not an 
 
Another set of extra-ontological semantic 
descriptors is used for time expressions, as shown 
by the example of yesterday below. 
 
syn-struc 
     root   $var1   cat v 
     mods   root $var0 cat adv   
     type    pre-verb-post-clause 
sem-struc 
    ^$var1  
        time  
      combine-time  
     (find-anchor-time) (day 1) before 
 
As already shown in the examples of might and 
yesterday, calls to procedural semantic routines 
(which may or may not be listed in the meaning-
procedure zone of the lexicon entry) are used 
widely in OntoSem lexical description. This 
reflects the fact that many aspects of meaning 
cannot be statically described but, rather, must be 
computed. An advantage of developing lexical 
resources within a processing environment is being 
able to assign responsibility for portions of 
semantic composition to resources best suited for 
them. 
In addition to the means of lexical expression 
described above, OntoSem lexicon entries can 
include entities of any degree of complexity, 
including phrasals of any profile, as reported in 
McShane et al 2004b.  
 
3.2  Porting OntoSem Lexicon Entries Across 
Languages 
As is clear from the examples above, OntoSem 
provides significant expressive power semantically 
(not to mention syntactically, which we do not 
pursue here). Expressive means include mapping 
to the ontology (which itself is rich in property-
value descriptors), mapping to the ontology with 
lexical supplementation of properties, or referring 
to extra-ontological microtheories like those that 
treat time, reference resolution, comparison, 
ellipsis resolution, modality, aspect, etc. What 
must be emphasized, however, is how language 
neutral ? and therefore portable across languages ? 
the semantic descriptions are. Whereas it is typical 
to assume that lexicons are language-specific 
whereas ontologies are language-independent, 
most aspects of OntoSem sem-strucs are language-
independent, apart from the linking of specific 
variables to their counterparts in the syn-struc. 
AGENT, and in I might get sick, I am an EXPERIENCER of 
a DISEASE  event, not an AGENT of it.  
 
Stated differently, if we consider sem-strucs ? no 
matter what lexicon they originate from ? to be 
building blocks of the representation of word 
meaning (as opposed to concept meaning, as is 
done in the ontology), then the job of writing a 
lexicon for L2 based on the lexicon for L1 is in 
large part limited to a) providing an L2 translation 
for the head word(s), b) making any necessary syn-
struc adjustments and c) checking/modifying the 
linking among variables in the syn- and sem-strucs. 
This conception of cross-linguistic lexicon 
development derives in large part from the 
Principle of Practical Effability (Nirenburg and 
Raskin 2004), which states that what can be 
expressed in one language can somehow be 
expressed in all other languages, be it by a word, a 
phrase, etc.  
Apart from this theoretical justification for 
conceptualizing the sem-strucs as building blocks 
for lexical representation, there are two practical 
rationales: supporting consistency of meaning 
representation across languages and using acquirer 
time most efficiently in large-scale lexical 
acquisition.  
 As regards consistency, the potential for 
paraphrase must be considered when building 
multi-lingual resources. For instance, ?weapons of 
mass destruction? can be described as the union of 
CHEMICAL-WEAPON and BIOLOGICAL-WEAPON, or 
it can be described as WEAPON with the ability to 
KILL > 10,000 HUMANs (the actual number 
recorded will be treated by the analyzer in a fuzzy 
fashion; however, it would be less than ideal for a 
lexicon for L2 to record 10,000 while a lexicon for 
L3 recorded 25,000). While both representations 
are valid, it is desirable to use the same one in all 
languages covered. In addition, the decision of 
how to describe a notion ? whether by ontologizing 
it, describing it using extra-ontological means, 
describing it using an existing concept with 
additional properties and values defined ? is often 
a judgment call. It would not be desirable for the 
acquirer of German to map the word Schimmel 
?white horse? to the concept HORSE with the lexical 
restriction COLOR: WHITE, while the acquirer of 
some other language that also has a word for 
?white horse? introduced an ontological concept 
specifically for this entity. Again, while both 
representations are valid and, in this case, 
semantically equivalent, the general tendency 
should be to strive toward uniformity where 
possible. 
As concerns acquirer time, composing sem-
strucs is, by far, the most time- and effort-intensive 
aspect of writing OntoSem lexicon entries. This 
derives from the wealth of expressive means; the 
fact that microtheories of time, reference, etc., are 
naturally built during lexicon development (recall 
that our environment is fully integrated with 
processors); and the fact that ontology 
development occurs hand-in-hand with lexicon 
development. Therefore, work on the first lexicon 
entry that describes a word sense ? regardless of 
the language of origin ? takes much more time 
than editing a word sense for a new language. 
Moreover, although in the worst case some editing 
of entries is necessary for L2, L3, etc., in most 
cases no such editing is needed. Although one 
might hypothesize this state of affairs based on 
cross-linguistic principles, we have tested it in the 
lexicon-porting experiment described below. 
 
3.3  An English to Polish Lexicon Porting 
Experiment 
For the experiment, a bilingual English/Polish 
computational linguist took the English OntoSem 
lexicon as a seed and experimented with various 
porting methods into Polish.  
The primary insight was that while manually 
porting individual lexical senses is quite 
straightforward and will save time over acquisition 
from scratch, porting lexicons wholesale is rather 
more complex. That is, manually providing 
translations for the senses in L1 is a conceptually 
relatively simple task, complicated only by the 
need for the occasional remapping of variables, 
editing of syntactic structures, omission of given 
senses due to language lacunae (e.g., a phrasal 
encoded in L1 might not occur in L2 in a fixed 
form), etc. However, if one attempts either to 
(semi-)automate the acquisition process and/or use 
L1 as a seed lexicon for more ?creative? 
acquisition of L2, the space of options becomes 
quite broad and must be constrained 
programmatically in order to actually benefit from 
the reuse of semantic descriptions.  
 For example, if a well-trained acquirer of L2 is 
using L1 as a seed, questions that arise include: 
Should the base lexicon be left as is (considering 
that it is known to have incomplete coverage) or 
should one attempt to improve its quality and 
coverage while building L2? Should L2 acquisition 
be driven by correspondences in head words or 
simply by the content of sem-struc zones (e.g., all 
English senses of table will be in one head entry, 
and typically will be acquired at once; should all 
senses of all L2 translations of table be handled at 
once during L2 acquisition or should the L2 
acquirer wait until he comes upon sem-strucs that 
represent the given other meanings of the L2 
words)? To what extent should the regular 
acquisition process ? including ontology 
supplementation ? be carried out on L2? The 
answers to all of these, and more such, questions 
depend entirely upon available resources and 
should be informed by (a) experiments to 
determine what works best for a given acquirer, 
and (b) the goals of a given project.  
 As regards automation, the experiment found 
that automatically mapping L2 words to L1 
OntoSem entries works very well (at well over 
90%) when the machine-tractable L1-L2 resource 
used to support this process has one sense of the 
given word in the given part of speech and the 
OntoSem lexicon also has one sense for the given 
part of speech. The extraction and matching of 
such senses represents a well-defined, extremely 
time-efficient task, especially for specialized 
terminology that tends to have only one sense in 
any language. When the mapping between senses 
in the L1-L2 lexicon and the OntoSem lexicon is 
more than one to one, manual linking of senses 
(which do not always correspond among the 
languages) has proved necessary, with the potential 
benefits of a time-saving interface becoming 
immediately clear.3 
4 Pudding in SIMPLE and OntoSem 
Now we return to the comparison between 
SIMPLE and OntoSem. We use the example of 
pudding, which is cited in numerous documents 
related to SIMPLE. The Qualia (in italics) and 
their values (in boldface) for this word are: formal 
? substance; constitutive ? ingredients; telic ? 
eat; agentive ? make. The stated rationale for 
encoding these qualia values in SIMPLE lexicon 
entries is that they are needed to understand the 
semantics of the sentences like the following (from 
Lenci et al 2000b):  
 
a) John refused the pudding (= refused to eat: telic);  
b) That?s an easy pudding (= easy to make: agentive);  
c) There is pudding on the floor (= substance: formal);  
d) The pudding came out well (= has been made well: 
agentive);  
e) That was a nice bread pudding (= made of/ingredient: 
constitutive)   
 
 We would suggest, as before, that the lexicon is 
not the best place for this information and, further, 
that this information is incomplete. For 
comparison, we present our approach to describing 
and processing pudding in the OntoSem 
environment. Since OntoSem uses a full ontology 
(not a word net), the ontological specification of 
the concept PUDDING contains much of the needed 
                                                     
3 Some automation of the mapping between L1-L2 
multi-sense words is possible as demonstrated by 
Pianta, et al 2002, but the results still require intensive 
manual work by an acquirer. 
 
information for processing all the above sentences 
containing pudding. Moreover, since the OntoSem 
ontology, lexicons and processors are developed 
together, their known mutual contributions drive 
resource acquisition. Obviously, one cannot expect 
the same approaches to be used in a lexicon-only 
project like SIMPLE. However, a non-trivial 
question, considering the expense of manual 
resource acquisition, is to what extent should we 
be developing resources separately from 
processors that can use them, especially when the 
nature of processors crucially affects what is 
needed of knowledge resources? 
Below is a subset (for reasons of space) of the 
properties and values for the concept PUDDING in 
the OntoSem ontology; the first 4 are locally 
specified while the others are inherited. 
 
PUDDING 
   IS-A            
 DESSERT 
     HAS-OBJECT-AS-PART  MILK, SUGAR, EGG 
     FATTINESS     > .6 
     THICKNESS     > .8 
 Inherited from DESSERT 
     BITTERNESS     0 
     SALTINESS     0 
  SWEETNESS     > .7 
  SPICINESS     0 
 Inherited from PREPARED-FOOD 
  THEME-OF    PREPARE-FOOD, BUY 
  PRODUCT-TYPE-OF   FOOD-SERVICE-  
         ORGANIZATION 
 Inherited from FOOD 
  THEME-OF    INGEST 
 Inherited from ARTIFACT 
  CREATION-RELATION HUMAN 
  COST      > 0 
(Inheritance continues, from INANIMATE, 
 PHYSICAL-OBJECT, OBJECT, ALL.) 
   
Since all of the necessary information about 
PUDDING is encoded in the ontology, the OntoSem 
lexicon entry for pudding need only contain a 
direct link to the concept.  
 The analysis of sentences (a)-(e) in OntoSem is 
carried out as follows. For (a), there is a lexical 
sense of refuse that expects an OBJECT (not an 
EVENT, as in the main sense) as its direct object. 
This sense expects the semantic ellipsis of a verb 
and, as such, is supplemented with a meaning 
procedure called ?seek-specification?, which 
searches for the elided event. There are two 
sources it searches: previous TMRs, for a recent 
semantically viable event, and the ontology itself, 
for an EVENT (or EVENTs) whose default AGENT is 
HUMAN and default THEME is PUDDING. This 
search procedure in some cases returns more than 
one candidate event to reconstruct the semantic 
ellipsis. While this is not always ideal, it does 
reflect precisely the type of lexical ambiguity that 
can be resolved only by contextual clues. For 
example, the sentence John refused the pudding 
could be used in a supermarket context to describe 
a situation where John refused to take/accept a free 
box of pudding that was being pushed upon him by 
a promoter. The desire to be able to treat this 
second reading of the sentence is the reason for 
treating constraints in OntoSem abductively. As far 
as one can tell, the constraints in SIMPLE are 
rigid: ?telic = eat? for pudding is a hard constraint. 
In fact, the example John refused the pudding is 
representative of a much broader class of 
phenomena known as semantic ellipsis, the 
treatment of which must be carried out by 
procedural semantic routines (see McShane et al 
2004a for details).  
 Example (b) is another case that OntoSem 
handles through lexical and procedural semantics 
working in tandem. The NP easy pudding is 
actually a construction {a value on the scale 
DIFFICULTY + ARTIFACT} that is known to involve 
semantic ellipsis. Thus, we prepare for it in the 
OntoSem lexicon by associating this construction 
with the seek-specification meaning procedure, 
described above, which handles with equal 
efficacy easy pudding (PREPARE-FOOD), easy song 
(PERFORM-MUSIC), etc.  
 Example (c) is handled trivially based on the 
fact that PUDDING is a PHYSICAL-OBJECT and, like 
all PHYSICAL-OBJECTs, is ontologically defined for 
LOCATION.  
 Example (d) is analyzed using the information 
that PUDDING is a PREPARED-FOOD and, as such, is 
the THEME-OF PREPARE-FOOD, which in turn is a 
child of CREATE-ARTIFACT. The lexicalized phrasal 
{ARTIFACT + come out + a value of evaluative 
modality} is mapped to CREATE-ARTIFACT, with 
the THEME being the given ARTIFACT and the 
evaluative modality being concretized based on the 
evaluative value of the lexical item (e.g., ?well?, as 
in ?the pudding came out well? is mapped to 
?evaluative .7?). This phrasal, of course, works for 
any ARTIFACT and any value of evaluative 
modality, so lexicalizing it once is a real savings in 
time and effort. 
 Example (e) has two possible treatments in 
OntoSem: on the one hand, the lexical item ?bread 
pudding? could (and, ultimately, should ? though it 
is not in the OntoSem lexicon at the moment)  be 
listed as a phrasal in the lexicon, described as 
PUDDING: HAS-OBJECT-AS-PART BREAD. However, 
if it is not listed, it is treated by our productive 
rules for treating noun-noun compounds. One of 
the N-N compound rules is that the pattern 
MATERIAL + N is analyzed as N:HAS-OBJECT-AS-
PART:MATERIAL.  
 
5 Conclusions 
Although space does not permit us to fully describe 
the resources, programs and resulting TMRs for 
sentences (a)-(e), this snapshot of their processing 
underscores the point that developing resources 
within an environment where they are tightly 
coupled with processing has clear advantages over 
developing resources in the abstract. Of course, in 
the absence of a full environment, projects like 
SIMPLE make sense. However, the challenges of 
resource development outside of an environment 
are keenly felt by developers: as Calzolari 
(1999:42) reports: ?A dichotomy at stake here is 
the one between generality of a LR [lexical 
resource] vs. usefulness for applications. In 
principle, only when we know the actual specific 
use we intend to do [sic] of a LR can we build the 
?very best? LR for that use, but this has proved to 
be too expensive and not realistic. In practice, 
however, there exists a large core of information 
that can be shared by many applicative uses, and 
this leads to the concept of ?generic? LR, which is 
at the basis for the EAGLES initiative and of the 
PAROLE/SIMPLE projects, to be then enhanced 
and tuned with other means?. The only aspect of 
this statement that we would dispute is the 
unrealistic nature of building resources for 
particular systems. If a system, like OntoSem, 
creates text-meaning representations that can be 
used equally effectively for many applications, 
then there is no reason why they cannot be built 
specifically for the given environment. In other 
words, when the result of semantic analysis is a 
metalanguage-formulated TMR, programs of any 
profile can exploit this representation. Stated 
differently, there need not be a direct link between 
end applications and the input text elements or 
their lexical representations.  
References 
Lenci, Alessandro, Federica Busa, Nilda Ruimy, 
Elisabetta Gola, Monica Monachini, Nicoletta 
Calzolari, Antonio Zampolli et al 2000a. 
SIMPLE Work Package 2, Linguistic 
Specifications, Deliverable D2.1, March 2000. 
Lenci, Alessandro, Nuria Bel, Federica Busa, 
Nicoletta Calzolari, Elisabetta Gola, Monica 
Monachini, Antoine Ogonowski, Ivonne Peters, 
Wim Peters, Nilda Ruimy, Marta Villegas, 
Antonio Zampolli. 2000b. SIMPLE: A General 
Framework for the Development of Multilingual 
Lexicons. Proceedings of LREC 2000. 
Levin, Beth. 1995. English Verb Classes and 
Alternations. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 
McShane, Marjorie, Stephen Beale and Sergei 
Nirenburg. 2004a (forthcoming).  Some 
meaning procedures of Ontological Semantics. 
Proceedings of LREC 2004, Lisbon, Portugal.   
McShane, Marjorie, Sergei Nirenburg and Stephen 
Beale. 2004b (ms.). The description and 
processing of multi-word expressions in 
OntoSem. Available at 
http://ilit.umbc.edu/RecentPubl.htm. 
Nirenburg, Sergei and Victor Raskin. 2004a 
(forthcoming). Ontological Semantics, the MIT 
Press, Cambridge, Mass.  
Nirenburg, Sergei, Stephen Beale and Marjorie 
McShane. 2004b (forthcoming). Evaluating the 
performance of the OntoSem semantic analyzer. 
ACL 2004 Workshop on Text Meaning and 
Interpretation.. 
Nirenburg, Sergei, McShane, Marjorie, Stephen 
Beale.  Forthcoming. 2004c (forthcoming). The 
rationale for building resources expressly for 
NLP. Proceedings of LREC 2004, Lisbon, 
Portugal.   
Palmer, Martha, Ralph Grishman Nicoletta 
Calzolari, Antonio Zampolli. 2000. 
Standardizing multilingual lexicons. Paper 
presented at the workshop on Web-Based 
Language Documentation and Description 12-15 
December 2000, Philadelphia, USA. 
Pederson, Bolette Sandford and Britt Keson. 
SIMPLE - Semantic information for 
multifunctional plurilingual lexica: Some 
examples of Danish concrete nouns. SIGLEX99: 
Standardizing Lexical Resources Workshop, 
ACL99. 
Pianta, Emanuele, Luisa Bentivogli and Christian 
Girardi. 2002. MultiWordNet: Developing an 
aligned multilingual database. Proceedings of the 
First International Conference on Global 
WordNet, Mysore, India, January 21-25, 2002. 
Pustejovsky, J. 1995. The Generative Lexicon. 
Cam, 28(1):11-21. 
