MT and Topic-Based Techniques to Enhance Speech Recognition 
Systems for Professional Translators 
Yevgeny Ludovik and Ron Zacharski 
Computing Research Laboratory 
New Mexico State University 
Las Cruces, New Mexico 
{ eugene, raz } @crl.nmsu.edu 
Abstract 
Our principle objective was to reduce the 
error rate of speech recognition systems 
used by professional translators. Our work 
concentrated on Spanish-to-English trans- 
lation. In a baseline study we estimated the 
error rate o1' an off-the-shelf recognizer to 
he 9.98%. in this paper we describe two 
independent methods ot' improving speech 
recognizers: a machine translation (MT) 
method and a topic-based one. An 
evaluation of the MT method suggests that 
the vocabulary used for recognition cannot 
be completely restricted to the set of 
translations produced by the MT system and 
a more sophisticated constraint system must 
be used. An ewduation of the topic-based 
method showed significanl error rate 
reduction, to 5.07%. 
Introduction 
Our goal is to improve tim throughput of 
professional translators by using speech 
recognition. The problem with using current off- 
the-shelf speech recognition systems is that 
these systems have high error rates for similar 
tasks. If the task is simply to recognize the 
speech of a person reading out loud, the error 
rate is relatively low; the error rate of large 
vocabulary research systems (20,000-60,000 
word vocahularies) performing such a task is, at 
best, around 10% (see, for example, Robinson 
and Christie 1998, Renals and Hochberg 1996, 
Hochberg et al 1995 and Siegler and Stern 
1995). The popular press has reported slightly 
lower results for commercial systems. For 
example, PC Magazine (Poor 1998) compared 
Dragon's NaturallySpeaking and IBM's 
ViaVoice (both continuous peech recognition 
systems with approximately 20,000 word 
vocabularies). They evaluated these systems by 
having five speakers read a 350 word text at a 
slow pace (1.2 words/second) after completing a 
half hour training session with each system. The 
average recognition error rate was 11.5% (about 
40 errors in the 350 word text). An evahmtion of 
the same two systems without training resulted 
in a recognition error rate of 34% (Keizer 1998). 
If the task is more difficult than recognizing the 
speech of a person reading, the error rate 
increases dramatically. For example, Ringger 
(1995) reports an average error rate of 30% for 
recognizing careful, spontaneous speech on a 
specific topic. However, the error rate of paced 
speech can be as low as 5% if the vocahulary is 
severely limited or if the text is highly 
predictable and the system is tuned to that 
particular genre. Unfortunately, the speech of 
expert ranslators producing spoken translations 
f r  " ~ '  does not fall into any of the "easy to rcc%nlze 
categories. 
In many translation tasks the source doctunent is
in electronic form and the obvious question to 
ask is if an analysis of the source document 
could lead to a reduction of the speech 
recognition error rate. For example, suppose we 
have a robust machine translation system and 
use it to generate all the possible translations of 
a given source text. We could then use this set 
of translations to help predict what the translator 
is swing. We describe this approach in ?1 
below. A simpler approach is to identify the 
topic o1' the source text and use that topic to aid 
in speech recognition. Such as approach is 
described in ?2. Both methods were tested in a 
Spanish-to-English translation task. 
1061 
This research rests on two crucial ideas. The 
first is that lexical and translation knowledge 
extracted from source documents by automated 
natural anguage processing can be utilized in a 
large-vocabulary, continuous peech recognizer 
to achieve low word-error ates. The second 
idea is that the translator should be able to 
dictate a translation and correct the resulting 
transcription i  much less time than if they had 
to type the translation themselves or rely on a 
transcribedtypist. 
1. Us ing  mach ine  t rans la t ion  
The difference between a typical speech 
dictation system and the situation described 
above, is that the translator is viewing the 
source text on a computer--that is, the text is 
available online. This source text can be 
analyzed using a machiue translation (MT) 
component. Hopefully, this analysis will cut 
down on the recognition perplexity by having 
the recognizer make choices only from the set of 
possible renderings in the target language of the 
words in the source language. In this section we 
describe the MT subsystem in detail. 
The function of this subsystem is to take 
Spanish senteuces as input and produce a set of 
English words that are likely to occur in 
translations of these sentences. For example, il' 
the Spanish text is 
1. Bulros Ghali propone v\[a diplomdtica para 
solucionar crisis haitiana 
we would expect the translation set to include 
the words (among others): 
{ Boutros, Ghali, proposes, diplomatic, route, to, 
settle, Haitian, crisis} 
Hopefully, this translation set will be a good 
predictor of what the translator actually said. 
1.1 The MT subsystem 
The MT subsystem consists of 4 components: 
the Spanish morphological analyzer, the 
dictionary lookup component, the lexical 
transfer component, and the English 
morphological generator. These components are 
briefly described in this section. 
1.1.1 Spanish molphological nalyzer 
The morphology analyzer takes Spanish words 
as input and outputs a set of possible 
morphological analyses for those words. Each 
analysis consists of the root word and a set of 
feature structures representing the inl'ormation 
obtained t'rom inl'lectional morphology. 
Examples are given below. 
Word 
C(I\[}~S 
peqtte~a 
podrfa 
Feature structure 
((root card) (cat n) (number plural)) 
((root pequefio)(cat dj)(gender 1)) 
((root podrir) (cat v) 
(tense imperfect indicative) 
(person 3)(number singular)) 
1.1.2 Dictionaries and dictionao, lookup 
The dictionary lookup component takes a 
feature structure produced by the morphological 
analyzer, looks up the root-word/part-of-speech 
pair in the dictionary, and adds information to 
the existing feature structure. The words in the 
dictionary were derived l'rom doing a corpus 
analysis of a set of 20 Spanish test documents. 
All the unique words in this corpus, including 
proper uouns, were included in the dictionary 
(approximately 1,500 words). A few examples 
are shown below. 
activMad ((root actividad) (cat n) (trans 
activity energy) (gender 1)) 
comenzar ((root comenzar)(cat v)(trans begin 
start) (verbtype irregular 129)) 
cuestion ((root cucstion) (cat n) (lrans ?lUeStion 
dispute problem issue) 
(gender 1)) 
1.1.3 The lexical trcmffer component 
At the cud of the dictionary lookup phase, \[br 
each word in the Spanish sentence we have a 
feature structure containing the information in 
the dictionary entry along with the parameter 
values that were gained from morphological 
analysis. One feature, trans, contains the 
possible English translations o1' that Spanish 
word. The lexical transl'er component converts 
this Spanish feature structure to one or more 
English feature structures; one feature structure 
is created lbr each value in the trans field. For 
example, the feature structure associated with an 
instance of actividad encountered in some text 
1062 
will be 'transferred' to two English feature 
structures: one for activity and one for energy. 
Similarly, encountering a cuestion in some text, 
will result in the creation of four feature 
structures; those representing the English words 
question, diaT)ute, problem, and issue. In 
addition, the transfer component converts other 
lbatures in the Spanish feature structure to 
features recognizable lo the English 
morl)hological generator. 
1.1.4 The English morphological generator 
We used an English Morphological genenttor 
developed at the Colnputing Research 
Laboratory at New Mexico State University by 
Steve Beale. The morphological generator takes 
feature structures as input and produces 
correctly inflected English words. Examples of 
the feature structures used as input and their 
associated output are illustrated below: 
((root run) (cal v) (hum arertmning 
phlral)(forrn l)rogressive)) 
((root run) (cat v) (tense will bermming 
future) (f(wm progressive)) 
((root nlan) (cat n) (nurnbcr men 
p\] tlral)) 
1.2 Evaluation 
Sut)pose we wish to have a user dictate an 
English translation of a Spanish sentence flint 
appears on a computer screen. This Spanish 
sentence is input to the MT system and the 
output is a set o1' English words. In the ideal 
case, tlle words in the English sentence the 
translator dictates are contained in lhis set. If 
one could offer a sort of guarantee that the 
words o1' any reasonable translation of the 
Spanish sentence are contained within this set, 
then incorporating the MT subsystem into a 
speech recognition system would be relatively 
straight forward; the vocabulary at any given 
moment would be restricted to this word set. I1, 
on the other hand,  such a gt la l 'at l tee CtUlllOt be  
made then this approach will not work. The 
evahmtion of the natural hmguage subsystem is
designed to test whether easonable translations 
are contained within this set of words. 
The test lnaterial consisted of 10 Spanish 
newspaper articles. Tim articles were translated 
into English by two independent translators. The 
following table shows that roughly 1/3 of the 
words in tim translations the professional 
translators produced are not in lhe set ol: words 
produced by the natural anguage subsystem (T1 
and T2 are the two different English 
translations): 
Table 1 : % of words in translal ion ot in word set 
I)oculnent T 1 T 2 
l l l l l l l|)er 
1 3o.4 26.78 
2 30.08 33.16 
3 37.88 32.66 
4 32.03 39.21 
5 27.69 23.79 
6 31.3 27.79 
7 32.85 30.25 
8 34.84 31.32 
9 43.8 40.05 
10 34.95 34.5 
Average: 32.77 
The next experiment augmented the word set 
constructed by the approach described above 
with lhe 800 most frequent words in a 2 million 
word corpus Hf English. The results are 
illustrated in the lbllowing table. 
Tal)le 2 : % of words in translation that are not in ihe 
word set: frequent wordlist & illorp 
1 12.7 
2 16.89 
3 19.22 
4 - 10.68 
5 13.85 
6 13.33 
7 15.41 
8 19.1 
9 17.47 
10 19.42 
Average: 15.46% 
mlogical analysis _
14.21 
15.05 
18.62 
16.05 
I2.53 
12.39 
14.01 
16.38 
15.25 
16.61 
The reason this combined method was tested 
was that often English open class lexical items 
are added to the translation. For example in one 
document, the phrase sohtcionar crMs haitiana 
is translated as "resolution of Haitian crisis", 
and the English of does not have a direct 
correlate in the Spanish phrase. Wlfile lifts 
combined method appears to work moderately 
well, it still does not have sufficient coverage to 
function as a method for generating the 
1063 
complete recognition vocabulary. That is, it 
cannot guarantee that the words o1' any 
reasonable translation of a Spanish sentence 
would be contained in the set o1' English words 
generated from that sentence. Since we cannot 
use an MT system to constrain the recognition 
vocabulary we evaluated a different method--  
one that uses topic recognition. 
2. Topic recognition method 
The basic idea behind the topic recognition 
approach is to identify the topic of the source 
language text and then use that topic to alter the 
language model for speech recognition. 
2.1 Topic recognition of  source text 
We used a na'fve Bayes classifier to identify the 
topic of Spanish online newspaper texts. We 
eliminated the common words in the text under 
the rubric that these words are unlikely to serve 
as cues to the topic of the text. For example in 
English, the, of, with, and a provide little 
information as to the topic of the text. We 
constructed this common word list by 
computing the most frequent words in a one 
million word corpus of Spanish newspaper text. 
This list was edited to remove potential topic 
cues. For example, Pinochet was the 46 m most 
frequent word and Clinton was the 65 th most 
frequent, but they serve as potential topic cues. 
We evaluated this topic identification technique 
by examining its performance on identifying 
four topics: Pinochet, the crisis in Paraguay, the 
crisis in Kosovo, and Clinton's ixnpeachment. 
For each topic we had a 500k training corpus 
(roughly 60,000-75,000 words). The test data 
for each topic consisted of 20 articles from web- 
based newspapers. The average size of these 
articles was 335 words. The recognition results 
are shown in the following table: 
Table 3 : Accuracy of topic recognitiou 
Words used Pinochet Paraguay Kosovo Clinton 
in 
recognition 
all 100 100 100 100 
100 100 100 95 100 
50 95 100 95 100 
25 90 95 9O 95 
We also evaluated an enhanced version of the 
algorithm on a corpus of 20 newsgroups. ~ For 
this evaluation we used a different method of 
creating a common word list. For each work 
encountered in any training document we 
computed the entropy o1' the distribution of a 
topic given the word, and picked up 100 words 
having the highest entropy. No manual editing 
of this list was done. High entropy for a given 
word meant hat this word could not be a good 
topic cue. In this evaluation for each value of 
the number of words used in recognition we 
carried out two sets of experiments. In the first, 
the first 500 documents of each topic were used 
as training data, and the last 500 as test data; in 
the second, the last 500 documents were used as 
training data and the first 500 as test. The 
recognitioin results are presented in the 
following table. 
Table 4:  Topic recognition results for 20 
newsgroups : 100 common words excluded 
Words used in Recognition rate 
recognition 
all 76.76 
100 53.15 
50 48.41 
25 44.23 
2.2 Using topic language models 
In the previous section we have described a 
robnst topic recognition system and describe 
how the system perl'ormed in identifying the 
topic of Spanish texts. Once we have identified 
the topic of the text to he translated we use that 
topic to identify which language models we 
wish to use in recognizing the text. We have 
constructed topic language models using IBM's 
ViaVoice Topic Factory, which allows allows 
developers to construct specialized language 
models that augment the main recognition 
language model. To construct hese models we 
manually collected half million word corpora 
for both the crisis in Kosovo and Clinton's 
impeachment. These corpora were collected 
from a variety of online news sites including 
1 from Tom M. Mitchell's website 
http://www.cs.cmu.cdu/afs/cs/projcct/thco- 11/ 
www/naive-bayes.html 
1064 
CNN, the Washington Post, the New York 
Times, the New York l)aily News, and the 
Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. One significant 
question is whether a language model as small 
as a half a million words will have any impact 
on the error rate for speech recognition. We 
evaluated this approach by comparing the error 
rate in dictating 8 texts. The results are shown ill 
the table below. (The 'without' row is using the 
recognizer without our topic system and the 
'with' row uses it with topic identification.) 
Table 4: Dictation error rates 
Icxt # without 
8.59 
8.67 
10.16 
with 
5.62 
6.15 
4.46 
4 8.88 4.75 
5 12.07 5.26 
6 13.47 6.15 
7 8.17 4.93 
8 9.8 3.27 
avorltero, 9.98 5.07 
As this table shows the topic-based method 
reduces the average rror rate by approximately 
49%. This is rather remarkable given the 
simplicity of the method and the extremely 
small training corpus t'or the hmguage model. 
Conclusion 
In tiffs paper we reviewed two methods for 
reducing speech recognition errors rates. The 
first method used a word-for-word MT system 
to constrain recognition vocabulary. Results o1' 
an evah, ation of this method suggest hat an MT 
system cannot adequately predict what words 
will be used in an actual translation and a more 
sophisticated method of incorporating MT into a 
recognizer is needed. For example, we could 
extend our MT system to construct a set of 
possible translations for the entire source 
language sentence. We could then use tiffs set o1' 
English sentences to train a small language 
model, which would be used to recognize the 
sentences the translator produced. 
Alternatively, we could use a translation 
memory approach to MT to construct he set of 
English sentences (Webb 1992). The second 
method we described recognized the topic of the 
source document and used a language model 
associated with that topic for speech 
recognition. Using this approach, tim error rate 
was reduced from 9.98 to 5.07%. This means, 
for example, that for a short, I page, 500 word 
document, this method has saved the translator 
the time it would take to go back and manually 
correct 25 errors. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was partially funded by NSF grant 
DMI-9860308 to Onyx Consulting, Inc. in Las 
Cruces, New Mexico. We would like to thank 
Sergei Nirenburg and Jim Cowie t'or their 
assistance. 
References 
Itochberg, M. Renals, S., Robinson, A. and Cook, G. 
(1995) Recent inq~rovements to the Abbot Large 
Vocabulary CSR System. Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, 
and Signal Processing, 69-72. 
Kcizer, Gregg. 1998. The gift of gab: CNET 
compares lhe top speech recognition apps. (http:// 
204.162.80.182/Contenl/Reviews/Comparc/ 
Speech/). 
Poor, Richard. 1998. Speech recognition: watch what 
you say. PC Magazine on-line (http:// 
home.zdnet.com/pcmag/features/sl~ecch/ 
index.html). 
P, cnals, S and ltochberg, M. (1996) Efficient 
cwdualion of llle LVCSR search space using the 
NOWAY decoder. Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Speech and Language Processing, 
149-152. 
Ringger, Eric K. (1995) A robust loose coupling for 
speech recognition and natural language 
understanding. Teclmical Report 592. University 
of Rochester Computer Science Department. 
Robinson, T. and Christie, J. (1998) Time-first 
search for large vocabulary speech recognition. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing. 
Siegler, M. and Stern R. (1995) On the effects of 
speech rate in large vocabulary speech recognition 
systems. Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal 
Processing. 
Webb, L. (1992) Advantages and disadvantages of 
translation memory: a cost/benefit analysis. 
Monterey Institute of International Studies MA 
Thesis. 
1065 
