Broadening the Scope of the EAGLES/ISLE Lexical 
Standardization Initiative 
 
Nicoletta CALZOLARI 
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale, CNR  
Area della Ricerca, Via Moruzzi 1 
Pisa, Italy, 56100 
glottolo@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Alessandro LENCI 
Dipartimento di Linguistica, Universit? di Pisa 
Via S. Maria 36 
Pisa, Italy, 56100 
alessandro.lenci@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Francesca BERTAGNA 
Dipartimento di Linguistica, Universit? di Pisa 
Via S. Maria 36 
Pisa, Italy, 56100 
francesca.bertagna@ilc.cnr.it 
Antonio ZAMPOLLI 
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale, CNR  
Area della Ricerca, Via Moruzzi 1 
Pisa, Italy, 56100 
pisa@ilc.cnr.it 
Abstract  
ISLE is a continuation of the long standing EAGLES initiative and it is supported by EC and NSF under the 
Human Language Technology (HLT) programme. Its objective is to develop widely agreed and urgently 
demanded standards and guidelines for infrastructural language resources, tools, and HLT products. 
EAGLES itself is a well-known trademark and point of reference for HLT projects and products and its 
previous results have already become de facto widely adopted standards. Multilingual computational 
lexicons, natural interaction and multimodality, and evaluation are the three areas targeted by ISLE. In the 
first section of the paper we describe the overall goals and methodology of EAGLES/ISLE, in the second 
section we focus on the work of the Computational Lexicon Working Group, introducing its work strategy 
and the preliminary guidelines of a standard framework for multilingual computational lexicons, based on a 
general schema for the ?Multilingual ISLE Lexical Entry? (MILE). 
 
1 Introducing EAGLES/ISLE 
ISLE (International Standards for Language 
Engineering) is a continuation of the long 
standing European EAGLES (Expert Advisory 
Group for Language Engineering Standards) 
initiative (Calzolari et al, 1996), carried out 
through a number of subsequent projects 
funded by the European Commission (EC) 
since 1993. ISLE is an initiative under the 
Human Language Technology (HLT) 
programme within the EU-US International 
Research Co-operation with the aim to develop 
and promote widely agreed and urgently 
demanded HLT standards, common guidelines 
and best practice recommendations for 
infrastructural language resources (Zampolli, 
1998), (Calzolari, 1998), tools that exploit 
them, and language engineering products.  
Object of EAGLES/ISLE are large-scale 
language resources (such as text corpora, 
computational lexicons, speech corpora, 
multimodal resources), means of manipulating 
such knowledge via computational linguistic 
formalisms, mark-up languages and various 
software tools and means of assessing and 
evaluating  resources, tools and products 
(EAGLES EWG final report, 1996). 
EAGLES was set up to determine which 
aspects of our field are open to short-term de 
facto  standardisation and to encourage the 
development of such standards for the benefit 
of consumers and producers of language 
technology, through bringing together 
representatives of major collaborative 
European R&D projects, and of HLT industry, 
in relevant areas. In this respect, more than 150 
leading industrial and academic players in the 
HLT field have actively participated in the 
definition of this initiative and have lent 
invaluable support to its execution.  
Successful standards are those which respond 
to commonly perceived needs or aid in 
overcoming common problems. In terms of 
offering workable, compromise solutions, they 
must be based on some solid platform of 
accepted facts and acceptable practices.  
The current ISLE project1 targets the three 
areas of : 
-multilingual computational lexicons2, 
-natural interaction and multimodality 
(NIMM)3,  
-evaluation of HLT systems4.  
For multilingual computational lexicons, ISLE 
goals are: i) extending EAGLES work on 
lexical semantics, necessary to establish inter-
language links; ii) designing and proposing 
standards for multilingual lexicons; iii) 
developing a prototype tool to implement 
lexicon guidelines and standards; iv) creating 
exemplary EAGLES-conformant sample 
lexicons and tagging exemplary corpora for 
validation purposes; v) developing 
standardised evaluation procedures for 
lexicons.  
For NIMM, ISLE work is targeted to develop 
guidelines for: i) the creation of NIMM data 
resources; ii) interpretative annotation of 
NIMM data, including spoken dialogue in 
NIMM contexts; iii) metadata descriptions for 
large NIMM resources; iv) annotation of 
discourse phenomena.  
For evaluation, ISLE is working on: i) quality 
models for machine translation systems; ii) 
maintenance of previous guidelines - in an ISO 
based framework (ISO 9126, ISO 14598). 
Three Working Groups, and their sub-groups, 
carry out the work, according to the EAGLES 
                                                 
1 Coordinated by A. Zampolli for EU and M. Palmer for 
US, see 
http://www.ilc.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/isle/ISLE_Home_Pag
e.htm. 
2 EU chair: N. Calzolari; US chairs: M. Palmer and R. 
Grishman.  
3 EU chair: N. O. Bernsen; US chair: M. Liberman. 
4 EU chair: M. King; US chair: E. Hovy. 
methodology, with experts from both the EU 
and US, acting as a catalyst in order to pool 
concrete results coming from major 
international/national/industrial projects. 
Relevant common practices or upcoming 
standards are being used where appropriate as 
input to EAGLES/ISLE work. Numerous 
theories, approaches, and systems are being 
taken into account as any recommendation for 
harmonisation must take into account the needs 
and nature of the different major contemporary 
approaches.  
Results are widely disseminated, after due 
validation in collaboration with EU and US 
HLT R&D projects, National projects, and 
industry.  
In the following we concentrate on the 
Computational Lexicon Working Group 
(CLWG), trying to describe its specific 
methodology and its goal of establishing a 
general and consensual standardized 
environment for the development and 
integration of multilingual resources. The 
general vision adheres to the idea of enhancing 
the sharing and reusability of multilingual 
lexical resources, by promoting the definition 
of a common parlance for the community of 
multilingual HLT and computational lexicon 
developers. The CLWG pursues this goal by 
proposing a general schema for the encoding of 
multilingual lexical information, the MILE 
(Multilingual ISLE Lexical Entry). This has to 
be intended as a meta-entry, acting as a 
common representational layer for multilingual 
lexical resources.  
We describe the preliminary proposals of 
guidelines for the MILE, highlighting some 
methodological principles applied in previous 
EAGLES. 
2 The Computational Lexicon 
Working Group 
Existing EAGLES results in the Lexicon and 
Corpus areas are currently adopted by an 
impressive number of European - and recently 
also National ? projects and has became the 
?de-facto standard? for LR in Europe. This is a 
very good measure of the impact ? and of the 
need ? of such a standardisation initiative in 
the HLT sector. To mention just a few key 
examples:  
- the LE PAROLE/SIMPLE resources 
(morphological/syntactic/semantic  lexicons 
and corpora for 12 EU languages (Zampolli, 
1997) (Ruimy et al, 1998) (Lenci et al, 
1999) (Bel et al, 2000) rely on EAGLES 
results (Sanfilippo et al, 1996) (Sanfilippo 
et al, 1999), and are now being enlarged to 
real-size lexicons through many National 
Projects, thus building a really large 
infrastructural platform of harmonised 
lexicons in Europe, sharing the same model;   
- the ELRA Validation Manuals for Lexicons 
(Underwood and Navarreta, 1997) and 
Corpora (Burnard et al, 1997) are based on 
EAGLES guidelines;  
- morpho-syntactic encoding of lexicons and 
tagging of corpora in a very large number of 
EU, international and national projects ? and 
for more than 20 languages ? is conformant 
to EAGLES recommendations (Monachini 
and Calzolari, 1996) (Monachini and 
Calzolari, 1999) (Leech and Wilson, 1996).  
Standards must emerge from state -of-the-art 
developments. The process of standardisation, 
although by its own nature not intrinsically 
innovative, must ? and actually does ? proceed 
shoulder to shoulder with the most advanced 
research. Since ISLE involves many bodies 
active in EU-US NLP and speech projects, 
close collaboration with these projects is 
assured and, significantly, free manpower has 
been contributed by the projects, as a sign of 
both their commitment and of the crucial 
importance they place on reusability issues. 
Lexical semantics has always represented a 
sort of wild frontier in the investigation of 
natural language. In fact, the number of open 
issues in lexical semantics both on the 
representational, architectural and content level 
might induce an actually unjustified negative 
attitude towards the possibility of designing 
standards in this difficult territory. Rather to 
the contrary, standardisation must be conceived 
as enucleating and singling out the areas in the 
open field of lexical semantics, that already 
present themselves with a clear and high 
degree of stability, although this is often 
hidden behind a number of formal differences 
or representational variants, that prevent the 
possibility of exploiting and enhancing the 
aspects of commonality and the already 
consolidated achievements.  
With no intent of imposing any constraints on 
investigation and experimentation, the ISLE 
CLWG rather aims at selecting mature areas 
and results in computational lexical semantics 
and in multilingual lexicons, which can also be 
regarded as stabilised achievements, thus to be 
used as the basis for future research. Therefore, 
consolidation of a standards proposal must be 
viewed, by necessity, as a slow process 
comprising, after the phase of putting forward 
proposals, a cyclical phase involving ISLE 
external groups and projects with: i) careful 
evaluation and testing of recommendations in 
concrete applications; ii) application, if 
appropriate, to a large number of European 
languages; iii) feedback on and readjustment of 
the proposals until a stable platform is reached; 
dissemination and promotion of consensual 
recommendations. 
The process of standard definition undertaken 
by CLWG represents an essential interface 
between advanced research in the field of 
multilingual lexical semantics, and the 
practical task of developing resources for HLT 
systems and applications. It is through this 
interface that the crucial trade-off between 
research practice and applicative needs will 
actually be achieved. 
In what follows we briefly describe the two-
step strategy adopted in the journey towards 
standards design: a first activity of survey of 
existing multilingual resources both in the 
European and American research and industrial 
scenarios. A second ongoing phase aiming at 
individuating hot areas on the domains of 
multilingual lexical resources, which call ? and 
de facto  can access to ? a process of 
standardisation. 
2.1 Preliminary Step: the Survey Phase 
Following the well established EAGLES 
methodology, the first priority was to do a 
wide-range survey of bilingual/multilingual (or 
semantic monolingual) lexicons, so as to reach 
a fair level of coverage of existing lexical 
resources. With respect to this target, one of 
the first objectives is to discover and list the 
(maximal) set of (granular) basic notions 
needed to describe the multilingual level. The 
Survey of existing lexicons (Calzolari, 
Grishman and Palmer, 2001) has been 
accompanied by the analysis of the 
requirements of a few multilingual 
applications, and by the parallel analysis of 
typical cross-lingually complex phenomena5. 
The main issue is how to state in the most 
proper way the translation correspondences 
among entries in the multilingual lexicon. The 
passage from source language (SL) to target 
language (TL) makes it necessary to express 
very complex and articulated transfer 
conditions , which have to take into account as 
difficult and pervasive phenomena as argument 
switching, multi-word expressions, 
collocational patterns, etc.  
The function of an entry in a multilingual 
lexicon is to supply enough information to 
allow the system to identify a distinct sense of 
a word or phrase in SL, in many different 
contexts, and reliably associate each context 
with the most appropriate translation. The first 
step is to determine, of all the information that 
can be associated with SL lexical entries, what 
is the most relevant to a particular task. We 
decided to focus the work of survey and 
subsequent recommendations around two 
major broad categories of application: Machine 
Translation and Cross-Language Information 
Retrieval. They have partially 
different/complementary needs, and can be 
considered to represent the requirements of 
other application types. It is necessary in fact 
to ensure that any guidelines meet the 
requirements of industrial applications and that 
they are implementable. 
In the Survey, some Korean and Japanese 
examples were present in the case study 
dedicated to relevant cross-linguistic 
phenomena, (e. g. sense distinctions according 
to variation in syntactic frames/semantic type/ 
                                                 
5 Contributors are: Atkins, Bel, Bertagna, Bouillon, 
Calzolari, Dorr, Fellbaum, Grishman, Habash, Lange, 
Lehmann, Lenci, McCormick, McNaught, Ogonowski, 
Palmer, Pentheroudakis, Richardson, Thurmair, 
Vanderwende, Villegas, Vossen, Zampolli.   
domain information, differences in predicate 
argument structure, argument incorporation, 
conflation, head switching etc). 
2.2 Towards the Recommendation Phase: 
designing the MILE Architecture  
Since the architecture of the PAROLE-
SIMPLE lexicons has been selected to provide 
the necessary bootstrapping basis for the 
stepwise refinement cycle leading to MILE, we 
briefly provide here some information about 
these resources. The design of the SIMPLE 
lexicons (Bel et al, 2000) complies with the 
EAGLES Lexicon/Semantics Working Group 
guidelines (Sanfilippo et al, 1999), and the set 
of recommended semantic notions. 
The SIMPLE lexicons are built as a new layer 
connected to the PAROLE syntactic layer, and 
encode structured ?semantic types? and 
semantic (subcategorization) frames. They 
cover 12 languages (Catalan, Danish, Dutch, 
English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, 
Italian, Portuguese, Spanish, Swedish). The 
common model is designed to facilitate future 
cross-language linking: they share the same 
core ontology and the same set of semantic 
templates.  
The ?conceptual core? of the lexicons consists 
of the basic structured set of ?semantic types? 
(the SIMPLE ontology) and the basic set of 
notions to be encoded for each Semantic Unit 
(SemU): domain information, lexicographic 
gloss, argument structure, selectional 
restrictions/preferences on the arguments, 
event type, links of the arguments to the 
syntactic subcategorization frames as 
represented in the PAROLE lexicons, ?qualia? 
structure, following the Generative Lexicon 
(Pustejovsky, 1995), semantic relations, etc.. 
SIMPLE and PAROLE lexicons are layered 
resources, with links between the 
morphological and syntactic layers expressed 
in PAROLE and the semantic information 
present in SIMPLE. 
In its general design, also MILE is envisaged 
as a highly modular and layered architecture as 
described in Calzolari et al (2001). Modularity 
concerns the ?horizontal? MILE organization, 
in which independent and yet linked modules 
target different dimensions of lexical entries. 
On the other hand, at the ?vertical? level, a 
layered organization is necessary to allow for 
different degrees of granularity of lexical 
descriptions, so that both ?shallow? and ?deep? 
representations of lexical items can be 
captured. This feature is particularly crucial in 
order to stay open to the different styles and 
approaches to the lexicon adopted by existing 
multilingual systems. 
At the top level, MILE includes two main 
modules, mono-MILE, providing monolingual 
lexical representations, and multi-MILE, where 
multilingual correspondences are defined. With 
this design choice the ISLE-CLWG intends 
also to address the particularly complex and 
yet crucial issue of multilingual resource 
development through the integration of 
monolingual computational lexicons. As in the 
reference model, PAROLE/SIMPLE, Mono-
MILE is organized into independent modules, 
respectively providing morphological, 
syntactic and semantic descriptions. The latter 
surely represents the core and the most 
challenging part of the ISLE-CLWG activities, 
together with the two other crucial topics of 
collocations and multi-word expressions, 
which have often remained outside 
astandardization initiatives, and nevertheless 
have a crucial role at the multilingual level. 
This bias is motivated by the necessity of 
providing an answer to the most urgent needs 
and desiderata of next generation HLT, as also 
expressed by the industrial partners 
participating to the project. With respect to the 
issue of the representation of multi-word 
expressions in computational lexicons, the 
ISLE-CLWG is actively cooperating with the 
NSF sponsored XMELLT project (Calzolari et 
al.,  2002). 
Multi-MILE specifies a formal environment 
for the characterization of multilingual 
correspondences between lexical items. In 
particular, source and target lexical entries can 
be linked by exploiting (possibly combined) 
aspects of their monolingual descriptions. 
Moreover, in multi-MILE both syntactic and 
semantic lexical representations can also be 
enriched, so as to achieve the granularity of 
lexical description required to establish proper 
multilingual correspondences, and which is 
possibly lacking in the original monolingual 
lexicons. 
According to the ISLE approach, monolingual 
lexicons can thus be regarded as pivot lexical 
repositories, on top of which various language-
to-language multilingual modules can be 
defined, where lexical correspondences are 
established by partly exploiting and partly 
enriching the monolingual descriptions. This 
architecture guarantees the independence of 
monolingual descriptions while allowing for  
the maximum degree of flexibility and 
consistency in reusing existing monolingual 
resources to build new bilingual lexicons.  
The MILE architecture is intended to provide 
the common representational environment 
needed to implement such an approach to 
multilingual resource development, with the 
goal of maximizing the reuse, integration and 
extension of existing monolingual 
computational lexicons. 
In the process of specifying the various 
components of MILE, the ISLE-CLWG has 
adopted a two-track strategy:  
1) identifying the lexical dimensions and 
the various types of information which 
are relevant to establish multilingual 
correspondences; 
2) idefining a suitable formal data model 
to encode this information as well as 
the operations required at the 
multilingual level. 
To tackle point 1) the survey of the available 
computational lexicons (see section 2.1) has 
been complemented with a more 
lexicographic-based effort, to identify the types 
of information used in bilingual dictionaries to 
establish translation equivalents. To this 
purpose, the CLWG has organized two ?task 
forces? with the responsibility respectively of 
creating a sample of lexical entries and 
investigating the use of the so-called sense 
indicators in traditional bilingual dictionaries. 
The work on sense indicators has been carried 
out mainly by S. Atkins and P. Bouillon: sense 
indicators are the  ?clues? given by the 
lexicographer to the bilingual dictionary users 
in order to guide them to the most appropriate 
choice of equivalence in the foreign language. 
The source word with its syntactic category, 
the target words and the sense indicators were 
automatically extracted from an English-
French dictionary and then the sense indicators 
have been classified on the basis of lexical 
relevant facts (cf. Atkins et al, 2002). 
The aim of these activities has been twofold: 
on one hand, we wanted to be able to highlight 
the various types of information useful to 
determine the transfer conditions; on the other, 
we had to explore and evaluate the full 
expressive potentialities provided by the 
reference computational model (i.e. the 
PAROLE-SIMPLE architecture). 
3.2 The MILE Data Structure and 
Lexicographic Environment 
 
The CLWG is setting up a lexicographic 
environment consisting of the following four 
main components: i) the MILE Entry Skeleton, 
ii)  the MILE Lexical Data Categories, iii) the 
MILE Shared Lexical Objects, iv) the ISLE 
Lexicographic Station. 
The MILE Entry Skeleton, formalized as an 
XML DTD, is an Entity Relationship model 
that will define the general constraints for the 
construction of multilingual entries, as well as 
the grammar to build the whole array of lexical 
elements needed for a given lexical 
description. 
The MILE Lexical Data Categories will 
provide the lexical objects (syntactic and 
semantic features, semantic relations, syntactic 
constructions, predicates and arguments etc..) 
that are the basic components of MILE-
conformant lexical entries. Lexical Data 
Categories will be organized in a hierarchy and 
will be defined using RDF schema (Brickley 
and Guha, 2000) to formalize their properties 
and make their ?semantics? explicit. 
The MILE Shared Lexical Objects will 
instantiate the MILE Lexical Data Categories, 
to be used to build in an easy and 
straightforward way lexical entries. These will 
include main syntactic constructions, basic 
operations and conditions to establish 
multilingual links, macro-semantic objects, 
such as lexical conceptual templates acting as 
general constraints for the encoding of 
semantic units. 
For instance, at the multilingual level it is 
possible to identify a first set of basic 
operations that are at the basis of multilingual 
transfer tests and actions. This would include: 
i) adding to a monolingual lexical entry a new 
syntactic position (required for a given 
translation correspondence); ii) adding to a 
monolingual semantic description a new 
semantic feature (required for a given 
transla tion correspondence); iii) constraining 
the source-target correspondence to apply only 
if an existing syntactic position is realized by a 
certain type of phrase, etc. 
Lexical  objects will be identified by an URI 
and will act as a common resources for lexical 
representation, to be in turn described by RDF 
metadata. The defined lexical objects will be 
used by the lexicon (or applications) 
developers  to build and target lexical data at a 
higher level of abstraction. Thus, they have to 
be seen as a step in the direction of simplifying 
and improving the usability of the MILE 
recommendations. 
The ISLE Lexicographic Station is a 
development platform used to automatically 
generate a prototype tool starting from the 
MILE DTD. The aim of this prototype tool is 
to i) exemplify the MILE entry ii)  make 
extensive use of already existing monolingual 
resources, and iii) eventually test the guidelines 
in a real scenario. This situation led us to 
define a lexicographic station development 
platform that guarantees the portability of the 
final prototype to the final specifications as 
well as to existing monolingual resources 
which will serve as the basic data for MILE  
(for a detailed description, cf. Villegas and Bel, 
2002). 
Both at monolingual and multilingual level 
(but with particular emphasis on the latter), 
ISLE intends to start up the incremental 
definition of a more Object-Oriented layer for 
lexical description and to foster the vision of 
open and distributed lexicons, with elements 
possibly residing in different sites of the web.  
3 Enlargement to Asian Languages  
An enlargement of the group to involve also 
Asian languages is going on and 
representatives of Chinese, Japanese, Korean, 
and Thai languages have contributed to ISLE 
work and participated in some ISLE 
workshops.  
The cooperation between Asia and Europe has 
to be pursued also through new common 
initiatives, as the expression of interest for the 
creation of an Open Distributed Lexical 
Infrastructure that has been submitted to the 
European Commission for the 6th Framework 
Programme for Research.  
This expression of interest is supported by 
many non-EU participants, as the newly 
formed Asian Federation of Natural Language 
Processing Associations (AFNLPA), the 
Department of Computer Science of the 
University of Tokyo, the Korean KAIST and 
KORTERM, the Taiwanese Institute of 
Linguistics of the Academia Sinica. 
The Open Distributed Lexical Infrastructure, a 
natural development of the ISLE model, can be 
seen as a new paradigm of distributed lexicon 
creation and maintenance and it would be a 
step of great importance for the fulfilment of 
the vision of the Semantic Web (Berners-Lee, 
1998). The creation of such infrastructure has 
to be consensual and in this regard needs the 
collaboration of a group of languages as large 
as possible (for example the AFNLPA brings 
into the initiative many Asian languages, such 
as Chinese, Hindi, Indonesian, Japanese, 
Korean, Malay, Tamil, Thai and Urdu). A 
prerequisite in order to reach interoperability is 
the existence of best practices and standards 
that have been consensually agreed on or have 
been submitted to the international community 
as de-facto  standards. 
 
4 Conclusions 
In this paper we presented overall goals and 
methodological principles of the 
standardization activity of EAGLES/ISLE. In 
particular, we describe the work of the 
Computational Lexicon Working Group and its 
effort towards recommendations, focussing on 
the MILE, the multilingual lexical meta-entry 
proposed as the standard representational 
format for multilingual computational lexical 
resources. Lexical representation is articulated 
over different information layers, each 
factoring out different, but possibly inter-
related, linguistic facets of information, 
relevant in order to establish multilingual 
lexical links. We also pointed out the necessity 
to involve a broader group of languages in 
order to ensure the achievement of a real 
consensual standard. 
Acknowledgements 
We thank all the members of the ISLE CLWG 
for their active participation and contribution to 
this enterprise. 
References 
Atkins S., Bel N., Bertagna F., Bouillon P., 
Calzolari N., Fellbaum C., Grishman R., 
Lenci A., MacLeod C., Palmer M., Thurmair 
R., Villegas M., Zampolli A. (2002) From 
Resources to Applications. Designing The 
Multilingual ISLE Lexical Entry. In 
Proceedings of LREC 2002, Las Palmas, 
Canary Islands, Spain. 
Bel N., Busa, F., Calzolari, N., Gola, E., Lenci, 
A., Monachini, M., Ogonowski, A., Peters, 
I., Peters, W., Ruimy, N., Villegas, M., 
Zampolli A. (2000) Simple: A General 
Framework for the Development of 
Multilingual Lexicons. In: LREC 
Proceedings. Athens. 
Berners-Lee T. (1998) Semantic Web road 
map. Personal note. Available at: 
http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/Semantic.ht
ml. 
Burnard L., Baker P., McEnery A., Wilson A. 
(1997) An analytic framework for the 
validation of language corpora. Report of 
the Elra Corpus Validation Group.  
Calzolari N (1998)  An Overview of Written 
Language Resources in Europe: a few 
Reflections, Facts, and a Vision. In: Rubio, 
A., Gallardo, N., Castro, R., Tejada A. (eds.) 
Proceedings of the First International 
Conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation. Granada 217-224. 
Calzolari N., Grishman R., Palmer M. (eds.) 
(2001)  Survey of major approaches towards  
Bilingual/Multilingual Lexicons. ISLE 
Deliverable D2.1-D3.1. Pisa  
Calzolari N., Fillmore C.J., Grishman R., Ide 
N., Lenci A., MacLeod C., Zampolli A. 
(2002)  Towards Best Practice for Multiword 
Expressions in Computational Lexicons. In 
Proceedings of LREC 2002, Las Palmas, 
Canary Islands, Spain. 
Calzolari N., Lenci A., Zampolli A., Bel N., 
Villegas M., Thurmair G. (2001)  The ISLE 
in the Ocean. Transatlantic Standards for 
Multilingual Lexicons (with an eye to 
Machine Translation). In Proceedings of 
Machine Translation Summit VIII, Santiago 
de Compostela, Spain. 
Calzolari N., Mc Naught J., Zampolli A (1996)  
Eagles Final Report: Eagles Editors? 
Introduction. Pisa.  
Eagles (1996)  Evaluation of Natural Language 
Processing Systems. Final Report. CST, 
Copenhagen. Also at http://issco-
www.unige.ch/projects/ewg96/ewg96.html. 
Brickley D., Guha R. (2000) Resource 
Description Framework (RDF) Schema 
Specification 1.0, W3C Candidate 
Recommendation. Available online at 
http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-schema. 
Leech G., Wilson A. (1996) Recommendations 
for the morphosyntactic annotation of 
corpora.  Lancaster. 
Lenci A., Busa F., Ruimy N., Gola E., 
Monachini M., Calzolari N., Zampolli A. 
(1999)  Linguistic Specifications. Simple 
Deliverable D2.1. ILC and University of 
Pisa. 
Monachini M., Calzolari N. (1996)  Synopsis 
and comparison of morphosyntactic 
phenomena encoded in lexicons and corpora. 
A common proposal and applications to 
European languages. ILC-CNR, Pisa. 
Monachini M., Calzolari N. (1999)  
Standardization in the Lexicon. In: H. van 
Halteren (ed.): Syntactic Wordclass Tagging. 
Kluwer, Dordrecht 149-173. 
Pustejovsky J. (1995)  The Generative Lexicon. 
Cambridge, MA, MIT Press. 
Ruimy N., Corazzari O., Gola E., Spanu A., 
Calzolari N., Zampolli A. (1998) The 
European LE-Parole Project: The Italian 
Syntactic Lexicon. In: Proceedings of the 
First International Conference on Language 
resources and Evaluation. Granada 241-248. 
Sanfilippo A. et al (1996) Eagles 
Subcategorization Standards. See 
http://www.icl.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/syntax/s
yntax.html 
Sanfilippo A. et al (1999) Eagles 
Recommendations on Semantic Encoding.. 
See http://www.ilc.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/rep2  
Underwood N., Navarretta C. (1997) A Draft 
Manual for the Validation of Lexica. Final 
ELRA Report. Copenhagen. 
Villegas M., Bel N. (2002) From DTDs to 
relational dBs. An automatic generation of a 
lexicographical station out off ISLE 
guidelines. In Proceedings of LREC 2002, 
Las Palmas, Canary Islands, Spain. 
Zampolli A. (1997) The PAROLE project in 
the general context of the European actions 
for Language Resources. In: 
Marcinkeviciene, R., Volz, N. (eds.): Telri 
Proceedings of the Second European 
Seminar: Language Applications for a 
Multilingual Europe. IDS/VDU, 
Manheim/Kaunas. 
Zampolli A. (1998) Introduction of the 
General Chairman. In: Rubio, A., Gallardo, 
N. Castro, R., Tejada A. (eds.): Proceedings 
of the First International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation. 
Granada, Spain. 
 
Encoding information on adjectives in a lexical-semantic net 
for computational applications 
Antonietta ALONGE 
Istituto di Linguistica 
Computazionale, CNR 
Area della Ricerca di Pisa 
Via Alfieri 1, Loc. S. Cataldo 
Ghezzano 56010 (PI) - ITALY 
antoalonge@libero.it 
Francesca BERTAGNA 
Consorzio Pisa Ricerche 
Via S. Maria 40 
Pisa 56100 - ITALY 
F.Bertagna@ilc.pi.cnr.it 
Nicoletta CALZOLARI 
Istituto di Linguistica 
Computazionale, CNR 
Area della Ricerca di Pisa 
Via Alfieri 1, Loc. S. Cataldo 
Ghezzano 56010 (PI) - ITALY 
glottolo@ilc.pi.cnr.it 
Adriana ROVENTINI 
Istituto di Linguistica 
Computazionale, CNR 
Area della Ricerca di Pisa 
Via Alfieri 1, Loc. S. Cataldo 
Ghezzano 56010 (PI) - ITALY 
adriana@ilc.pi.cnr.it 
Antonio ZAMPOLLI 
Istituto di Linguistica 
Computazionale, CNR 
Area della Ricerca di Pisa 
Via Alfieri 1, Loc. S. Cataldo 
Ghezzano 56010 (PI) - ITALY 
pisa@ilc.pi.cnr.it 
Abstract 
The goal of this paper is to describe how the 
EuroWordNet framework for representing 
lexical meaning is being modified within an 
Italian National Project in order to include 
information on adjectives. The focus is on 
the 'new' semantic relations being encoded 
and on the revisions we have made to the 
EuroWordNet Top Ontology structure. We 
also briefly discuss the utility of the 
information which is being encoded for 
computational pplications. 
Int roduct ion 
The Princeton WordNet (henceforth WN) is a 
lexical semantic network in which the meanings 
of words are represented in terms of their 
conceptual and lexical relations to other words. 
The basic notion around which it is developed is
that of a synset (synonyms et), i.e. a set of 
words with the same Part-of-Speech (PoS) that 
can be interchanged in a certain context. Various 
conceptual and lexical relations are then 
encoded between synsets of the same PoS: e.g., 
hyponymy, antonymy, meronymy, etc. (Miller et 
al. 1990; Fellbaum 1998b). 
Within the EuroWordNet (henceforth EWN) 
project I a similar (multilingual) lexical resource 
was developed, retaining the basic underlying 
design of WN, but enriching the set of lexical- 
semantic relations to be encoded for nouns and 
verbs in various ways 2, in order to obtain a 
maximally re-usable resource for computational 
applications. Thus, a) cross-PoS (xPos) relations 
were added so that different surface realizations 
of similar concepts within and across languages 
could be matched (e.g., the noun research and 
the verb to research could be linked as 
1 EWN was a project in the EC Language 
Engineering (LE-4003 and LE-8328) programme. In 
a first phase, the partners involved were the 
University of Amsterdam (coordinator); the Istituto 
di Linguistica Computazionale, CNR, Pisa; the 
Fundacion Universidad Empresa (a cooperation of 
UNED, Madrid, Politecnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, 
and the University of Barcelona); the University of 
Sheffield; and Novell Linguistic Development 
(Antwerp), changed to Lemout & Hauspie during the 
project. In a further phase, the database was extended 
with German, French, Estonian and Czech. Complete 
information on EWN can be found at its web site: 
http://www.hum.uva.nl/~ewn/. 
2 Adjectives and adverbs were encoded in EWN only 
as targets of relations from nouns and verbs. 
&9 42
'XPOS NEAR__SYNONYMS' in EWN); b) some 
relations were identified which provide detailed 
information on semantic omponents lexicalized 
within word roots (e.g., to hammer could be 
linked to the noun hammer by means of an 
'INVOLVED_INSTRUMENT' relation); c) some 
labels were distinguished which could be added 
to relations to make their semantic entailments 
more explicit and precise (cf. Alonge et al 
1998). The links among the wordnets of 
different languages were realized by means of an 
Interlingual-Index (ILI), constituted by an 
unstructured list of the Princeton WN (version 
1.5) synsets. In addition, a hierarchy of 
language-independent concepts, reflecting 
fundamental semantic distinctions (e.g., Object 
and Substance, Dynamic and Static, Cause, 
Manner, etc.), was built: the Top Ontology 
(TO). The TO consists of language-independent 
features which may (or may not) be lexicalized 
in various ways, or according to different 
patterns, in different languages (Rodriguez et al 
1998). Via the ILI, all the concepts in the 
monolingual wordnets are directly or indirectly 
linked to the TO. The following picture shows 
the EWN data structure (see also Vossen 1999): 
While in WN all PoSs are represented, in EWN 
detailed information was encoded only for nouns 
and verbs and no analysis was carried out with 
respect to lexical-semantic relations which could 
be used to describe the semantics of adjectives 
and adverbs. In an Italian National Project we 
are building a large wordnet, ltalWordNet 
(henceforth IWN) 3, by extending the network 
built for Italian in EWN. Thus, we are both 
increasing the coverage for nouns and verbs and 
adding adjectives and some adverbs 4.To be able 
to encode information on adjectives we have 
enriched the set of the EWN lexical-semantic 
relations, aiming at encoding data which can be 
useful for computational applications. Moreover, 
we have revised the TO in order to account for 
the semantics of the new lexical categories being 
encoded. 
In this paper we describe the main changes made 
to the EWN framework in order to encode 
information on adjectives in IWN. Firstly, we 
provide a brief overview of the WN treatment of 
adjectives. Then, we discuss the set of relations 
being encoded for this category in IWN. Finally, 
we show the integration made to the EWN TO. 
We then conclude the paper by adding some 
remarks on the utility of the data being encoded 
for computational applications. 
1 Adjectives in WN 
In WN adjectives are divided into two major 
classes: descriptive adjectives and relational 
adjectives. A descriptive adjective is "one that 
ascribes a value of an attribute to a noun" 
(Fellbaum et al 1993:27). Descriptive adjectives 
combine with nouns to express ome qualities of 
the thing, person or concept they designate. 
Typically, in this group we find adjectives that 
designate the physical dimension of an object, 
its weight, abstract values etc. Besides these 
referent-modifying adjectives, we also find 
reference-modifying adjectives (cf. Bolinger 
1967; Chierchia & McConnel-Ginet 1990 name 
them intensional adjectives). Typical examples 
of the latter are former, future, present. 
3 ItalWordNet will be the reference l xical resource 
among various integrated language resources and 
software tools for the automatic treatment of he 
Italian written and spoken language which are being 
developed within the SI-TAL ('Integrated System for 
the Automatic Treatment of Language') National 
Project. 
4 Actually, we shall only encode adverbs derived 
from adjectives by adding the suffix -mente, for 
which a derivation relation with an adjective will be 
encoded. 
43
Relational adjectives, on the other hand, mean 
something like "relating/pertaining to, associated 
with", and usually have a morphologically 
strong link with a noun. Typical examples are 
musical, atomic, chemical 5. 
Synonymy is the basic relation encoded for all 
the PoSs (since it is used to build synsets). 
While in WN the noun and verb networks are 
then mainly developed around the superordinate 
(hyper/hyponymy) relationship, the organization 
of descriptive adjectives can "be visualized in 
terms of barbell-like structures, with a direct 
antonym in the centre of each disk surrounded 
by its semantically similar adjectives (which 
constitute the indirect antonyms of the adjectives 
in the opposed disk)" (Fellbaum 1998a: 212). 
The main relation encoded for these adjective 
synsets is antonymy, claimed to be the most 
prominent relation, both from a psycholinguistic 
point of view and from a more strictly lexical- 
semantic one, in the definition of the semantics 
of descriptive adjectives. Hyponymy is 
substituted by a 'similarity' relation. 
Relational adjectives, on the contrary, are not 
organized in this way, because their semantics 
cannot be described by using these relations. 
Indeed, they only point to the noun to which 
they pertain (e.g. atomic is linked to atom). 
Finally, information on the selectional 
preferences of both descriptive and relational 
adjectives is sometimes encoded (e.g., between 
high and degree), by using an 'is_attribute_of' 
relation. 
2 The IWN relations for adjectives 
As for the other lexical categories, also in IWN 
the basic relation encoded for adjectives is 
synonymy, on the basis of which synsets are 
built. Following EWN, we also encode a 
NEAR._SYNONYMY relation when two synsets are 
very close in meaning but their members cannot 
be put in the same synset (and no other relation 
results appropriate to link them; see Alonge et 
s Note that some adjectives have both a descriptive 
sense and a relational one. For example, musicale 
(musical) can modify the noun voce (voice) when we 
want to say that a voice is sweet-sounding and 
melodious, but can also be combined with the noun 
strumento (instrument) when we want to indicate that 
an instrument can be used to produce music. 
al. 1998 for a discussion of this relation, and 
Alonge et al, in prep., for a complete and 
detailed discussion of the linguistic design of 
IWN). Then, we encode a number of additional 
relations, which have been identified by taking 
into consideration i) theoretical works; ii) the 
EAGLES recommendations on semantic 
encoding (cf. Sanfilippo et al 1999); iii) the data 
available in our sources; iv) possible use of data 
encoded in computational pplications. 
2.1 Hyponymy 
Together with synonymy, the hyponymy relation 
constitutes the 'bone structure' of both WN and 
EWN. However, as we have seen, in WN the 
possibility of encoding hyponymy for adjectives 
is denied and the basic relation encoded for 
adjectives is antonymy, while EWN did not 
really deal with adjectives and a complete 
network for them was not built. 
Within IWN we have reconsidered the 
possibility of encoding hyponymy for adjectives. 
By analysing data coming from machine- 
readable dictionaries we find subsets of 
adjectives which have a genus + differentia 
definition, like nouns or verbs. That is, these 
adjectives seem to be organised into classes 
sharing a superordinate. This is the case, e.g., of 
adjectives indicating a 'containing' property 
(acquoso - watery; alcalino - alkaline), or a 
'suitable-for' property (difensivo - defensive; 
educativo - educational), etc. In IWN we have 
decided, therefore, to encode hyponymy also for 
these sets of adjectives. The taxonomies which 
can be built on the basis of this relation are 
different from those built for nouns or verbs, 
since they are generally very flat, consisting 
almost always of two levels only (an exception 
is the color adjectives taxonomy). However, by 
encoding a hyponymy relation for these 
adjectives, we obtain classes for which it will be 
possible to make various inferences. For 
instance, it will be possible to infer semantic 
preferences of certain classes: e.g., all the 
adjectives occurring in the taxonomy of 
contenente (containing) will occur as attributes 
of concrete nouns; adjectives found in the 
taxonomy of affetto (affected by an illness) will 
never be predicated of nouns referring to 
objects, etc. Furthermore, it will also be possible 
to infer information on syntactic haracteristics 
/I/11 44
of adjectives found in the same taxonomy: e.g., 
the hyponyrns of atto (suitable for) are always 
found in predicative position (and do not accept 
any complements); the hyponyms of privo 
(lacking) may occur both in attributive and in 
predicative position (and may take certain 
prepositional complements), etc. 
As it was done for all the relations identified in 
EWN, we have built substition tests or 
diagnostic frames based on normality 
judgements (cf. Cruse 1986). Inserting two 
words in the test sentences built evokes a 
'normality'/ 'abnormality' judgement on the 
basis of which each relation can be determined. 
These tests are used by encoders both to verify 
the existence of relations between synsets and to 
encode them in a consistent way (for a complete 
lists of the tests built see Alonge et al, in prep.) 
2.2 Antonymy 
As in WN, also in IWN the antonymy relation 
remains an important relation to describe the 
semantics of various adjectives. Following 
theoretical work (Lyons 1977; Cruse 1986), we 
have further distinguished between 
COMPLEMENTARY ANTONYMY and GRADABLE 
ANTONYMY 6. The former relation links 
adjectives referring to opposing properties/ 
concepts: when one holds the other is excluded 
(alive~dead). The latter relation is used for those 
antonym pairs which refer to gradable properties 
(long~short). In case it is not clear if two 
opposing adjectives refer to complementary or
gradable properties, we can still use an 
underspecified ANTONYMY relation. Also this 
information can be useful for computational 
applications ince word pairs presenting one of 
the two kinds of opposition may occur in 
different contexts (cf. Cruse 1986). 
2.3 Other  relations 
In WN a relation between adjectives and nouns 
is encoded for relational adjectives which point 
to a noun to which they 'pertain': atomic~atom, 
industrial~industry, etc. This relation will be 
encoded also in IWN, by using the label 
PERTAINS TO. 
Another relation 'inherited' from WN can be 
useful to distinguish both adjective senses and 
their semantic preferences7: 
altol (tall) IS A VALUE OF statura (stature) 
alto2 (high) IS_A_VALUEOF altezza (height). 
Other relations are then being encoded which are 
not in WN, but are encoded for nouns and verbs 
in EWN. In WN each PoS forms a separate 
system of language-internal relations and 
conceptually close concepts are totally separated 
only because they differ in PoS. In EWN, instead 
of using as main classificatory criterion the 
traditional distinction among PoSs, drawn upon 
heterogeneous criteria, a purely semantic 
distinction was adopted (following Lyons 1977). 
Thus, a distinction was drawn among I st order 
entities (loes - referred to by concrete nouns), 
2 "d order entities (2oes - referred to by verbs, 
adjectives or nouns indicating properties, states, 
processes or events), and 3 rd order entities (3oes 
referred to by abstract nouns indicating 
propositions existing independently of time and 
space). By drawing this distinction it was 
possible to relate lexical items that, either within 
a language or across different languages, refer to 
close concepts, although they belong to different 
PoSs. Thus, as said above, the possibility to 
encode 'near-synonymy' between synsets of the 
same order (but different PoSs) was provided. 
Furthermore, other cross-PoS relations were 
identified which allow to obtain a better 
description of word meanings. In IWN we 
maintain the same distinction among semantic 
orders and encode for adjectives ome relations 
which can be encoded for the other 2oes. In 
particular, we encode the 'INVOLVED' and 
'CAUSE' relations. 
The INVOLVED relation links a 2oes with a loe  
or 3oe referring to a concept incorporated within 
6 A similar distinction is also made within the 
SIMPLE EC project (LE-8346), whose goal is adding 
semantic information to the set of harmonized 
lexicons built within the PAROLE project for twelve 
European languages. Of course, the sub-classification 
ofantonymy can also be used for nouns and verbs. 
7 Furthermore, these relations being encoded between 
an adjectival synset and a nominal or verbal one are 
also useful to distinguish adjective classes as 
described by Dixon (1991), and reported in 
Sanfilippo et al (1999). Indeed, such classes are 
often indicated by the nouns linked to adjectives. 
45 45
the meaning of the 2oe 8. Examples for adjectives 
are given in the following: 
filoso (= pieno di fili) (thready, filamentous) 
HAS_HYPERONYM pieno (full) 
INVOLVED filo (thread) 
imberbe (= privo di barba) (beardless) 
HAS_HYPERONYM privo (lacking) 
INVOLVED barba (beard). 
Another relation which can be encoded is the 
CAUSE relation: 
depuratorio (= atto a depurare) (depurative, 
purifying) 
HAS_HYPERONYM atto, adatto 
(suitable for) 
CAUSES non-factive 9 depurare 
(to purify) 
compensativo (= che serve a compensare) 
(compensatory) 
HAS._HYPERONYM alto, adatto 
(suitable for) 
CAUSES non-factive compensare 
(to compensate) 
A new relation, not present either in WN or in 
EWN, will be encoded for a class of adjectives 
indicating the possibility of some events 
occurring: 
giudicabile (= che pub essere giudicato) (triable) 
LIABLE_TO giudicare (to judge) 
inaccostabile, inavvicinabile (= che non pub essere 
avvicinato) (which cannot be approached) 
LIABLETO awicinare, accostare 
(to approach) negative. 
8 E.g., to lapidate has as INVOLVED_INSTRUMENT 
stone; to work has as INVOLVED_AGENT worker (see 
Alonge et al 1998). 
9 As said above, in EWN various features were 
encoded to make implications of relations explicit: 
conjunction and disjunction (for multiple relations of 
the same kind encoded for a synset); non-factivity (to 
indicate that a causal relation does not necessarily 
apply); intention (added to a cause relation to indicate 
intention to cause a certain result); negation (to 
explicitly encode the impossibility of a relation 
occurring). These features are also used in IWN. 
The table below gives an overview of the main 
relations being encoded for adjectives in IWN 
(for the other relations being encoded for 
adjectives ee Alonge et al, in prep.): 
GRAD ANTONYMY 
COMP ANTONYMY 
HYPONYMY 
PERTAINS TO 
IS A VALUE_OF 
INVOLVED 
CAUSE 
LIABLE_TO 
adj/adj 
adj/adj 
adj/adj 
adj/noun 
adj/noun 
adj/noun 
adj/verb; 
adj/noun 
adj/verb; 
adj/noun 
beautiful/u~ly 
alive/dead 
watery/containing 
chemical/chemistry 
tail/stature 
dental/tooth 
depurative/ 
to depurate 
triable/to judge 
3 The IWN Top Ontology 
In the EWN TO all the entities belonging to the 
2 nd order have been organized into two different 
classification schemes, which represent the first 
division below 2 nd Order Entity: 
? Situation Type: the event-structure or 
Aktionsart (or lexical aspect) of a situation; 
? Situation Components: the most salient 
semantic components that characterize 
situations. 
The Situation Types provide a classification of 
2oes in terms of the event-structure (or 
Aktionsart) of the situation they refer to: a basic 
distinction was drawn between Static and 
Dynamic. The Situation Components represent a 
more conceptual and intuitive classification of 
word meanings because they can be viewed like 
the most salient semantic components of a 
concept. Examples of Situation Components 
are: Manner, Existence, Communication, Cause. 
Situation Type represents disjoint features that 
cannot be combined, whereas it is possible to 
assign any combination of Situation 
Components to a word meaning. Here below the 
Top Concepts identified for 2oes are shown: 
46 46
2 ND ORDER ENTITY 
SITUATION COMPONENT 
Cause 
Communication 
Condition 
Existence 
Experience 
Location 
Manner 
Mental 
Modal 
Physical 
Possession 
Purpose 
Quantity 
Social 
Time 
SITUATION TYPE 
Dynamic 
BoundedEvent 
UnboundedEvent 
Static 
Property 
Relation 
In order to be able to draw generalizations on 
adjective meanings by using the TO, we 
partially modified this scheme. First of all, we 
moved the PROPERTY and RELATION nodes 
under the SITUATION COMPONENT node. This 
was done for two interconnected reasons: first of 
all, because this distinction is not directly linked 
to Aktionsart (lexical aspect), while the 
distinctions under SITUATION TYPE are 
Aktionsart distinctions, i.e. they are connected 
with the "the procedural characteristics (i.e. the 
'phasal structure', time extension' and 'manner 
of development') ascribed to any given situation 
referred to by a verb phrase" (Bache 1982: 70) ~?. 
Secondly, adjectives may refer to PROPERTIES or 
RELATIONS, but they may be either stative or not 
(cfr. e.g. Lakoff 1966; Quirk et al 1985; Peters 
et al 1999). Thus, in our system it has to be 
possible to specify that an adjective xpresses a 
PROPERTY while being DYNAMIC. In any case, 
since many adjectives may have both a 
DYNAMIC sense and a STATIC one, we have also 
the possibility to under-specify this information 
Io Of course, in EWN all 2oes (and therefore also 
nouns or adjectives) can be classified according to 
their Aktionsart. 
by linking adjectives directly to the SITUATION 
TYPE node. 
Adjectives may indicate many different types of 
properties: temporal (passeggiata mattutina -
morning walk), psychological (canzone triste - 
sad song), social (uomo ricco - rich man), 
physical (superficie legnosa - wooden surface), 
physiological (bambino magro - thin child), 
perceptive (minestra calda hot soup), 
quantitative (magra r icompensa - poor reward) 
and intensity properties (vino for te  - strong 
wine). In the EWN TO there are already nodes 
which may be used to represent these 
distinctions (TIME, MENTAL, SOCIAL, PHYSICAL, 
QUANTITY) but we needed to better specify or 
also add some features. For example, we have 
added, under the already present node 
PHYSICAL, the node MATERIAL, to represent, 
among others, some Italian adjectives ending in 
-oso  (for example legnoso - wooden, acquoso -
watery) which indicate the property of 
containing a certain material. Moreover, we 
added the node PHYSIOLOGICAL (to classify 
adjectives corresponding to tired, hungry, sick, 
etc.) under PHYSICAL. For adjectives denoting an 
intensity, we then added the node INTENSITY 
directly under the SITUATION COMPONENT node. 
One of the main problem we had was that no 
Top Concept in the EWN TO could be used to 
classify the reference-modifying adjectives (cf. 
above). These are a very particular kind of 
adjectives, because they do not indicate a 
property of the referent of the noun they modify. 
So, aiming at showing the distinction between 
referent-modifiers and reference-modifiers, we 
created two new Top Concepts under the node 
PROPERTY: ATTRIBUTE and FUNCTIONAL, where 
the latter can be used for reference-modifying 
adjectives (according to the definition provided 
by Chierchia & McConnel-Ginet 1990 for the 
category referred to by these adjectives: "a 
function f rom propert ies to properties"). 
Like all descriptive adjectives, also the 
reference-modifiers classified under the node 
FUNCTIONAL can be linked to other SITUATION 
COMPONENTS. Functional adjectives for which 
the temporal aspect prevails (ex former, 
presente - present) can be classified under the 
node TIME; adjectives referring to some 
'epistemological' property (potenziale 
potential, necessario - necessary) can be linked 
&7 47
tO MODAL 11; etc. A particular case of functional 
adjectives are the 'argumental' ones. They 
introduce a comparison between different 
entities (e.g., simile - similar, diverso - different, 
etc.). A comparison presupposes a relation 
between different entities o these adjectives can 
be linked to both PROPERTY and RELATION. 
Since in the EWN TO these two Top Concepts 
were two different kinds of SITUATION TYPE, 
they were mutually exclusive; now, in the IWN 
revised TO they can be conjoined. 
Here below the IWN Top Concepts for 2 "a Order 
Entities are shown: 
2 N? ORDER ENTITY 
SITUATION COMPONENT 
Cause 
Communication 
Condition 
Existence 
Experience 
Location 
Manner 
Mental 
Modal 
Physical 
Material 
Physiological 
Possession 
Purpose 
Quantity 
Social 
Time 
Intensity 
Property 
Attribute 
Functional 
Relation 
SITUATION TYPE 
Dynamic 
BoundedEvent 
UnboundedEvent 
Static 
Concluding remarks 
Although the ANTONYMY, PERTAINS_TO, and 
ISATTRIBUTEOF relations, already encoded in 
the Princeton WN, are fundamental relations to 
describe the adjective semantics, and they can be 
11 Since this node is used for situations involving the 
possibility or likelihood of other situations. 
useful for computational applications which 
exploit our resource, we believe that the 'new' 
relations being encoded may provide equally 
relevant information, especially because many 
adjectives cannot be defined by means of the 
WN relations. Let's take into consideration just 
a few examples. 
The adjective depresso is ambiguous in that it 
has (at least) three readings: 
1) which has been lowered, flattened (said of a 
land); 
2) being in bad physical or moral conditions (said 
of an area, a country); 
3) affected by depression (said of a person). 
For these three senses of the adjective we would 
encode different relations, extractable from our 
sources: 
depressol IS_CAUSEDBY deprimere (to lower) 
IS A VALUE_OF terreno (land) 
depresso2 
depress% 
HAS_HYPERONYM colpito (affected) 
IS_CAUSEDBY depressionel 
(depression - economic sense) 
HAS_HYPERONYM affetto 
(affected, suffering from sthg.) 
IS_CAUSED_BY depressione2 
(depression - medical sense) 
The relations encoded could, e.g., help 
disambiguate he occurrences of the adjective in 
contexts uch as: Gianni era depresso (Gianni 
was depressed) or Quella regione ~ depressa 
(That area is depressed). Indeed, by checking the 
semantic information encoded for the two senses 
of depressione linked to depresso, it's possible 
to provide the right interpretation for the 
sentences under analysis; on the other hand, the 
first sense of the adjective would be excluded 
because of the IS A VALUE OF relation 
encoded. In this case, also the TO links could be 
helpful: actually, depresso2 would be linked to 
SOCIAL and CONDITION, while depresso3 would 
be linked to MENTAL and EXPERIENCE. 
Many adjectives found in our sources do not 
seem to have (lexicalized) antonyms, nor cannot 
be defined by using the PERTAINS_TO or 
IS A VALUE OF relations. These are often 
linked to nouns or verbs, by various relations: 
/ IQ  48
piumato = coperto di piume (plumed = covered with 
plumage) 
HAS HYPERONYM coperto 
INVOLVED piuma 
distillabile =che pub essere distillato (distillable = 
which can be distilled) 
LIABLE TO distillare. 
For these and many other adjectives the 'new' 
relations identified in IWN are necessary, given 
that we often cannot encode other relations for 
them. The relations encoded provide 
fundamental semantic information on them, 
which can, for instance, be used to infer 
semantic preferences (e.g., only certain loes can 
be modified by piumato, etc.). The inclusion of 
this information in a large database which is 
mainly intended for computational pplications 
can be very useful, mainly because it may help 
in resolving ambiguities and may be used to 
draw inferences of different nature. 
References 
Alonge A., Calzolari N., Vossen P., Bloksma L., 
CasteUon I., Marti T., Peters W. (1998) The 
Linguistic Design of the EuroWordNet Database. 
In "Special Issue on EuroWordNet. Computers and 
the Humanities" N. Ide, D. Greenstein, P. Vossen 
(eds.), 32, 2-3, pp. 91-115. 
Alonge A., Bertagna F., Calzolari N., Magnini B., 
Roventini A. (in prep.) ItalWordNet: a Large 
Semantic Database for Italian. 
Bache C. (1982) Aspect and Aktionsart: towards a 
Semantic Distinction. Journal of Linguistics, 18, 1. 
Bolinger D. (1967)Adjectives in English: Attribution 
and Predication. Lingua, 18, pp. 1-34. 
Chierchia G. and McConnel-Ginet S. (1990) An 
Introduction to Semantics. The MIT Press, 
Cambridge. 
Cruse D. A. (1986) Lexical Semantics. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
Dixon R. M. W. (1991) A new Approach to English 
Grammar on Semantic Principles. Clarendon 
Press, Oxford. 
Fellbaum C. (1998a) A Semantic Network of English: 
the Mother of all WordNets. In "Special Issue on 
EuroWordNet. Computers and the Humanities" N. 
Ide, D. Greenstein, P. Vossen (eds.), 32, 2-3, pp. 
209-220. 
Fellbaum C. (1998b) WordNet, An Electronic Lexical 
Database, The MIT Press, Cambridge. 
Fellbaum C., Gross D., Miller K.J. (1993)Adjectives 
in WordNet, Five Papers on WordNet. 
Lakoff G. (1966) Stative Adjectives and Verbs in 
English. Computation Laboratory, Harvard 
University Report No. NSF-17. 
Lyons J. (1977) Semantics. Cambridge University 
Press, London. 
Miller G., Beckwith R., Fellbaum C., Gross D., 
Miller K.J (1990) Introduction to WordNet: An On- 
line Lexical Database. International Journal of 
Lexicography, Vol 3, No.4, pp. 235-244. 
Quirk R., Greenbaum S., Leech G. Svartvik J. (1985) 
A Comprehensive Grammar of the English 
Language. Longman, London. 
Peters I., Peter W. and Gaizauskas R. (1999) The 
Representation f Adjectives in SIMPLE. Ms. 
Richardson S. D., Dolan W. B., Vanderwende L. 
(1998) MindNet : Acquiring and Structuring 
Semantic Information from Text. In "COLING- 
ACL Proceedings", Montreal, pp. 1098-1102. 
Rodriguez H., Climent S., Vossen P., Bloksma L., 
Roventini A., Bertagna F., Alonge A., Peters W. 
(1998) The Top-Down Strategy for Building 
Euro WordNet: Vocabulary Coverage, Base 
Concepts and Top Ontology. In "Special Issue on 
EuroWordNet. Computers and the Humanities", N. 
Ide, D. Greenstein, P. Vossen (eds.), 32, 2-3, pp. 
117-152. 
Vossen P. (ed.) (1999) EuroWordNet General 
Document. In "The EWN CD-Rom" (see also: 
http://www.hum.uva.nl/~ewn). 
Sanfilippo A., Calzolari N., Ananiadou S., 
Gaizauskas R., Saint-Dizier P., Vossen P. (eds.) 
(1999) Preliminary Recommendations  Lexical 
Semantic Encoding. EAGLES LE3-4244 Final 
Report. 
49 49
International Standards for Multilingual Resource Sharing: The
ISLE Computational Lexicon Working Group
Nicoletta Calzolari, Alessandro Lenci, Antonio Zampolli
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale, CNR, Pisa
Consorzio Pisa Ricerche
Universit? di Pisa, Dipartimento di Linguistica
[glottolo,lenci,eagles]@ilc.pi.cnr.it
Abstract
The ISLE project is a continuation
of the long standing EAGLES
initiative, carried out under the Human
Language Technology (HLT)
programme in collaboration between
American and European groups in the
framework of the EU-US International
Research Co-operation, supported by
NSF and EC. We concentrate in this
paper on the current position of the
ISLE Computational Lexicon Working
Group. We provide a short description
of the EU SIMPLE lexicons built on
the basis of previous EAGLES
recommendations. We then point at a
few basic methodological principles
applied in previous EAGLES phases,
and describe a few principles to be
followed in the definition of a
Multilingual ISLE Lexical Entry
(MILE).
1 Introduction: the EAGLES
initiative
1.1. What is EAGLES/ISLE?
The ISLE project is a continuation of the
long standing EAGLES initiative (Calzolari et
al., 1996), carried out through a number of
subsequent projects funded by the European
Commission (EC) since 1993. EAGLES stands
for Expert Advisory Group for Language
Engineering Standards and was launched within
EC Directorate General XIII's Linguistic
Research and Engineering (LRE) programme,
continued under the Language Engineering (LE)
programme, and now under the Human
Language Technology (HLT) programme as
ISLE, since January 2000. ISLE stands for
International Standards for Language
Engineering, and is carried out in collaboration
between American and European groups in the
framework of the EU-US International Research
Co-operation, supported by NSF and EC. ISLE
was built on joint preparatory EU-US work of
the previous 2 years towards setting up a
transatlantic standards oriented initiative for
HLT.
The objective of the project is to support
HLT R&D international and national projects,
and HLT industry by developing, disseminating
and promoting widely agreed and urgently
demanded HLT standards and guidelines for
infrastructural language resources (see Zampolli,
1998, and Calzolari, 1998), tools that exploit
them and LE products. The aim of
EAGLES/ISLE is thus to accelerate the
provision of standards, common guidelines, best
practice recommendations for:
? very large-scale language resources (such as
text corpora, computational lexicons, speech
corpora (Gibbon et al, 1997), multimodal
resources);
? means of manipulating such knowledge, via
computational linguistic formalisms, mark-
up languages and various software tools;
? means of assessing and evaluating
resources, tools and products (EAGLES,
1996).
The basic idea behind EAGLES work is for
the group to act as a catalyst in order to pool
concrete results coming from current major
International/ National/industrial projects.
Relevant common practices or upcoming
standards are being used where appropriate as
input to EAGLES/ISLE work, particularly in the
areas of computational lexicons, text, speech,
and multimodal annotation, and evaluation.
Numerous theories, approaches, and systems are
being taken into account, where appropriate, as
any recommendation for harmonisation must
take into account the needs and nature of the
different major contemporary approaches.
EAGLES is also drawing strong inspiration
from the results of major projects whose results
have contributed to advancing our understanding
of harmonisation issues.
1.2 A quick Overview of the ISLE
Work
The current ISLE project (see
http://www.ilc.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/isle/ISLE_H
ome_Page.htm) targets the three areas of
multilingual computational lexicons, natural
interaction and multimodality (NIMM), and
evaluation of HLT systems. These areas were
chosen not only for their relevance to the HLT
call but also for their long-term significance.
? For multilingual computational lexicons,
ISLE is working to: extend EAGLES work
on lexical semantics, necessary to establish
inter-language links; design and propose
standards for multilingual lexicons; develop
a prototype tool to implement lexicon
guidelines and standards; create exemplary
EAGLES-conformant sample lexicons and
tag exemplary corpora for validation
purposes; and develop standardised
evaluation procedures for lexicons.
? For NIMM, a rapidly innovating domain
urgently requiring early standardisation,
ISLE work is targeted to develop guidelines
for: the creation of NIMM data resources;
interpretative annotation of NIMM data,
including spoken dialogue in NIMM
contexts; and annotation of discourse
phenomena.
? For evaluation, ISLE is working on: quality
models for machine translation systems; and
maintenance of previous guidelines - in an
ISO based framework (ISO 9126, ISO
14598).
Three Working Groups, and their sub-
groups, carry out the work, according to the
already proven EAGLES methodology, with
experts from both the EU and US, working and
interacting within a strongly co-ordinated
framework. International workshops are used as
a means of achieving consensus and advancing
work. Results will be widely disseminated and
published, after due validation in collaboration
with EU and US HLT R&D projects, National
projects, and industry.
1.3. The Computational Lexicon
Working Group
We concentrate in the following on the
current position of the ISLE Computational
Lexicon Working Group (CLWG).
EAGLES work towards de facto standards
has already allowed the field of Language
Resources to establish broad consensus on key
issues for some well-established areas ? and
will allow similar consensus to be achieved for
other important areas through the ISLE project
? providing thus a key opportunity for further
consolidation and a basis for technological
advance. EAGLES previous results have already
become de facto standards. To mention several
key examples: the LE PAROLE/SIMPLE
resources (morphological/syntactic/semantic
lexicons and corpora for 12 EU languages,
Ruimy et al, 1998, Lenci et al, 1999, Bel et al,
2000) rely on EAGLES results (Sanfilippo, A. et
al., 1996 and 1999), and are now being enlarged
at the national level through many National
Projects; the ELRA Validation Manuals for
Lexicons (Underwood and Navarretta, 1997)
and Corpora (Burnard et al, 1997) are based on
EAGLES guidelines; morpho-syntactic tagging
of corpora in a very large number of EU,
international and national projects ? and for
more than 20 languages ? is conformant to
EAGLES recommendations (Leech and Wilson,
1996).
The first priority of the CLWG in the first
phase of the ISLE project was to do a
comprehensive survey of existing multilingual
lexicons. To this end the European and the
American members decided, among others, i) to
prepare a grid for lexicon description to classify
the content and structure of the surveyed
resources on the basis of a number of agreed
parameters of description, and ii) to provide a
list of cross-lingual lexical phenomena that
could be used to focus the survey. The inventory
(survey) of what exists and is available
(semantic and bilingual/multilingual lexicons,
printed bilingual dictionaries) is now being
completed, and will be made soon available on
the Web. Each participant engaged for surveying
a number of resources. A list of the main
applications that use lexical resources was also
established, to focus the survey and subsequent
recommendations around them. Each summary
of a particular bilingual or multilingual
dictionary includes: i) a description of the
surveyed dictionary structure (on the basis of the
common grid), ii) for one or two examples from
the cross-lingual lexical phenomena, an
explanation of how these examples are handled
by this dictionary.
2 The structure of the prospective
Multilingual ISLE Lexical Entry
The main goal of the CLWG is the definition
of a Multilingual ISLE Lexical Entry
(henceforth MILE). This is the main focus of the
second year of the project, the so called
?recommendation phase?.
2.1 Basic EAGLES principles
We remind here just a few basic
methodological principles derived from and
applied in previous EAGLES phases. They have
proven useful in the process of reaching
consensual de facto standards in a bottom-up
approach and will be at the basis also of ISLE
work.
The MILE is envisaged as a highly modular
and possibly layered structure, with different
levels of recommendations. Such an architecture
has been proven useful in previous EAGLES
work, e.g in the EAGLES morphosyntactic
recommendations (Monachini and Calzolari,
1996), which embody three levels of linguistic
information: obligatory, recommended and
optional (optional splits furthermore into
language independent and language dependent).
This modularity would enhance: the flexibility
of the representation, the easiness of
customisation and integration of existing
resources (developed under different theoretical
frameworks or for different applications), the
usability by different systems which are in need
of different portions of the encoded data, the
compliance with the proposed standards also of
partially instantiated entries.
The MILE recommendations should also be
very granular, in the sense of reaching a
maximal decomposition into the minimal basic
information units that reflect the phenomena we
are dealing with. This principle was previously
recommended and used to allow easier
reusability or mappability into different
theoretical or system approaches (Heid and
McNaught, 1991): small units can be assembled,
in different frameworks, according to different
(theory/application dependent) generalisation
principles. Such basic notions must be
established before considering any system-
specific generalisations, otherwise our work
may be too conditioned by system-specific
approaches. For example, ?synonymy? can be
taken as a basic notion; however, the notion of
?synset? is a generalisation, closely associated
with the WordNet approach. ?Qualia relations?
are another example of a generalisation, whereas
?semantic relation? is a basic notion. Modularity
is also a means to achieve better granularity.
On the other side, past EAGLES experience
has shown it is useful in many cases to accept
underspecification with respect to
recommendations for the representation of some
phenomenon (and hierarchical structure of the
basic notions, attributes, values, etc.), i) to allow
for agreement on a minimal level of specificity
especially in cases where we cannot reach wider
agreement, and/or ii) enable mappability and
comparability of different lexicons, with
different granularity, at the minimal common
level of specificity (or maximal generality). For
example, the work on syntactic
subcategorisation in EAGLES proved that it was
problematic to reach agreement on a few
notions, e.g. it seemed unrealistic to agree on a
set of grammatical functions. This led to an
underspecified recommendation, but
nevertheless one that was useful.
One of the first objectives of the CLWG will
be to discover and list the (maximal) set of
(minimal/more granular) basic notions needed
to describe the multilingual level. This task will
be facilitated by the survey of existing lexicons,
accompanied by the analysis of the requirements
of a few multilingual applications, and by the
parallel analysis of typical multilingual complex
phenomena. Most or part of these basic notions
should be already included in previous EAGLES
recommendations, and, with different
distribution, in the existing and surveyed
lexicons. We have therefore to revisit earlier
linguistic layers (previous EAGLES work,
essentially monolinguistic) to see what we need
to change/add or what we can reuse for the
multilingual layer. The multilingual layer thus
depends on monolingual layers.
2.2 The MILE architecture
The MILE is intended as a meta-entry, acting
as a common representational layer for
multilingual lexical resources. The key-ideas
underlying the design of a meta-entry can be
summarized as follows. Different theoretical
frameworks appear to impose different
requirements on how lexical information should
be represented. One way of tackling the issue of
theoretical compatibility stems from the
observation that existing representational
frameworks mostly differ in the way pieces of
linguistic information are mutually implied,
rather than in the intrinsic nature of this
information. To give a concrete example, almost
all theoretical frameworks claim that lexical
items have a complex semantic organization, but
some of them try to describe it through a
multidimensional internal structure (cf. the
qualia structure in the Generative Lexicon,
Pustejovsky 1995), others by specifying a
network of semantic relations (cf. WordNet,
Miller et al 1990), and others in terms of
argumental frames (cf FrameNet, Baker et al
1998; Lexical Conceptual Structures, Jackendoff
1992; etc.). A way out of this theoretical
variation is to augment the expressive power of
the lexical representation language both
horizontally, i.e. by distributing the linguistic
information over mutually independent "coding
layers", and vertically, by further specifying the
information conveyed by each such layer. This
solution will contribute to solve the issues raised
by theoretical variation by defining a common
level onto which different types of resources
will be mapped without loss of information.
This appears to be a necessary condition to
guarantee an efficient re-use and interchange of
lexical data, often coming from resources
developed according to very different
architectural and theoretical criteria.
With respect to this issue, the MILE is
designed to meet the following desiderata:
? factor out linguistically independent (but
possibly correlated) primitive units of
lexical information;
? make explicit information which is
otherwise only indirectly accessible by NLP
systems;
? rely on lexical analysis which have the
highest degree of inter-theoretical
agreement;
? avoid framework-specific representational
solutions.
All these requirements serve the main purpose
of making the lexical meta-entry open to task-
and system-dependent parameterization.
The MILE is modular along at least three
dimensions:
? modularity in the macrostructure and
general architecture of MILE
? modularity in the microstructure
? modularity in the specific microstructure of
the MILE word sense.
A. Modularity in the macrostructure and
general architecture of the MILE ? The
following modules should be at least envisaged,
referring to the macrostructure of a multilingual
system:
1. Meta-information - versioning of the
lexicon, languages, updates, status, project,
origin, etc. (see e.g. OLIF (Thurmair, 2000),
GENELEX).
2. Possible architecture(s) of bilingual/
multilingual lexicon(s): we must analyse the
interactions of the different modules, and the
general structure in which they are inserted, both
in the interlingua- and transfer-based
approaches, and in possibly hybrid solutions. An
open issue is also the relation between the
source language (SL) and target language (TL)
portions of a lexicon.
B. Modularity in the microstructure of the
MILE ? The following modules should be at
least envisaged, referring to the global
microstructure of MILE:
1. Monolingual linguistic representation -
this includes the morphosyntactic, syntactic, and
semantic information characterizing the MILE
in a certain language. It generally corresponds to
the typology of information contained in
existing lexicons, such as PAROLE-SIMPLE,
(Euro)WordNet (EWN), COMLEX, and
FrameNet. Following the general organizations
of computational lexicons like PAROLE-
SIMPLE, which in turn instantiates the
GENELEX framework (GENELEX, 1994), at
the monolingual level the MILE sorts out the
linguistic information into three layers,
respectively for morphological, syntactic and
semantic dimensions. Typologies of information
to be part of this module include (not an
exhaustive list):
? Phonological layer
? phonemic transcription
? prosodic information
? Morphological layer
? Grammatical category
? Inflectional class
? Modifications of the lemma
? Mass/count, 'pluralia tantum'
? Syntactic layer
? Idiosyncratic behaviour with respect to
specific syntactic rules (passivisation,
middle, etc.)
? Auxiliary
? Attributive vs. predicative function,
gradability
? Subcategorization frames
? Grammatical functions of the positions
? Morphosyntactic and/or lexical features
? Information on control and raising
properties
? Semantic layer
? Characterization of senses through links
to an ontology
? Domain information
? Argument structure, semantic roles,
selectional preferences on the arguments
? Event type
? Link to the syntactic positions
? Basic semantic relations between word
senses (i.e. synonymy, hyponymy,
meronymy)
? Description of word-sense in terms of
more specific, semantic/world-
knowledge relations among word-senses
(such as EWN relations, SIMPLE
Qualia Structure, FrameNet Frame
Elements, etc.)
? Information about regular polisemous
alternation
? Information concerning cross-part of
speech relations (e.g. intelligent -
intelligence; writer - to write)
The expressive power of the semantic layer is of
the utmost importance for the multilingual layer.
A general issue discussed in ISLE concerns
whether consensus has to be pursued at the
generic level of ?type? of information or also at
the level of its ?values? or actual ways of
representation. The answer may be different for
different notions, e.g. try to reach the more
specific level of agreement also on values for
types of meronymy, but not for types of
ontology.
2. Collocational information - This module
includes more or less typical and/or fixed
syntagmatic patterns including the lexical head
defined by the MILE, which can contribute to
characterise its use, or to perform more subtle
and/or domain specific characterisations. It
includes at least:
? Typical collocates
? Support verb construction
? Phraseological or multiwords constructions
? Compounds
? Corpus-driven examples
This module ? not yet dealt with in the
previous EAGLES - is critical in a multilingual
context both to characterise a word-sense in a
more granular way and to make it possible to
perform a number of operations, such as WSD
or translation in a specific context. Here,
synergies with the NSF-XMELLT project on
multi-word expressions are exploited. First
proposals for the representation of support verbs
and noun-noun compounds in multilingual
computational lexicons are laid out, and now
tested on some language pairs.
3. Multilingual apparatus ? This
represents the focal part of the CLWG activities,
which will concentrate its main effort in
proposing a general framework for the
expression of multilingual transfers. Some of the
main issues at stake here are:
? identify a typology of the most common
cases of problematic transfer (actually this
task has been partially performed during the
survey phase of the project);
? identify which conditions must be
expressible and which transformation
actions are necessary, in order to establish
the correct multilingual mappings;
? select which types of information these
conditions must access in the modules (1)
and (2) above;
? identify the various methods of establishing
SL --> TL equivalence
? examine the variability of granularity
needed when translating in different
languages, and the architectural implications
of this.
C. Modularity in the specific
microstructure of the MILE word-sense (word-
sense is the basic unit at the multilingual level) ?
Senses should also have a modular structure (i.e.
the above distinction between modules (B.1.)
and (B.2.) must be intended at word-sense
level):
1. Coarse-grained (general purpose)
characterisation in terms of prototypical
properties, captured by the formal means in
(B.1.) above, which serves to partition the
meaning space in large areas and is sufficient for
some NLP tasks.
2. Fine-grained (domain or text
dependent) characterisation mostly in terms of
collocational/syntagmatic properties (B.2.),
which is especially useful for specific tasks,
such as WSD and translation. Different types of
information may have a sort of different
operational specialisation.
3 Methodological and organisational
issues
As in previous EAGLES, it is considered
helpful to base the recommendations on the
requirements stemming from a few application
systems. The CLWG agreed to focus on two
major broad categories of application: machine
translation (MT) and cross-lingual information
retrieval (CLIR).
As said above, the CLWG has agreed that we
should base any multilingual description on
monolingual descriptions. MILE should
therefore include previous EAGLES
recommendations for other layers. We must
evaluate the usefulness of these layers with
respect to multilingual tasks, focusing in
particular on MT and CLIR tasks. Obviously an
additional module is needed, where
correspondences between languages are defined,
including conditions on syntactic structures
involving lexical entries. The linking module
(transfer) may not be the same for different
applications: it may be simpler for CLIR, which
may be a subset of the one needed for MT. For
CLIR, an ontology or semantic hierarchy is
however required.
We are also adopting an approach that would
lead to a formalisation of the information
contained in traditional bilingual dictionaries,
such as restrictions on translation, collocations
and examples.
The CLWG agreed the following were
appropriate tasks to concentrate on, in order to
discover basic notions for MILE:
1. Analyse information given to the human
user in bilingual/monolingual dictionaries
that allows selection of correct equivalence.
2. Analyse (if these can be obtained)
instructions/guidelines supplied to
lexicographers for writing bilingual entries.
3. Investigate, in corpus concordances, which
are the clues that allow to
disambiguate/decide on proper sense for
translation.
4. Elaborate a typology of transfer
conditions/actions and investigate lexical
requirements.
5. Look at multilingual lexical requirements
for approaches based on interlingual
concepts/ontologies.
6. Rank our typology in terms of scale of
difficulty of disambiguation
3.1. Types of information to be
addressed
Regarding the various types of information to
be addressed, the following "workflow" was
agreed:
1. notion already exists in previous work
(EAGLES, PAROLE/SIMPLE, EWN, etc.):
? evaluate the notion to see if it is
generally adequate
? evaluate its usefulness for multilingual
purposes
2. notion does not exist as recommendation
and is not otherwise used in applications
(e.g. collocation type), or there are notions
from other layers that we have not already
considered:
? decide which method is needed to do
work on it
? prioritise: what is used already in
multilingual lexicons (but not covered in
EAGLES, e.g. covered in OLIF) and
also then look at what needed in near
future
? record what needs further development.
A starting point will be the previous
EAGLES recommendations, as instantiated in
PAROLE/SIMPLE, for which ? as said above -
there is a unique DTD for all the 12 languages
involved. This will be revised and augmented
after work done on various types of information.
ISLE will also implement a lexicographic tool,
with which a sample of lexical entries will be
encoded according to the MILE structure.
Assignments for in-depth analysis of the
information types were done, and work is now
carried out by the various CLWG members.
Results of on-going work will provide: (i.) a list
of types of information that should be encoded
in each module; (ii.) linguistic specifications and
criteria; (iii.) a format for their representation in
multilingual lexicons; (iv.) their respective
weight/importance in a multilingual lexicon
(towards a layered approach to
recommendations).
4 Conclusions
Lexicon construction is a costly enterprise,
and a major goal is to set up general initiatives
to ease and optimise this process. The crescent
needs of lexical data, both of general and of
domain-specific nature, makes lexicon
development an always incremental and
potentially open effort, often to be carried out in
distributed environments and through the joint
work of multiple actors. It is therefore necessary
to facilitate lexicon versioning and authoring,
the fast integration and scalability of the
resources, the fast integration of domain and
general linguistic knowledge, as well as the
integration of the work of human lexicographers
with the information automatically extracted
from corpora and dictionaries. The main purpose
of the ISLE CLWG is to provide a satisfactory
answer to these needs, by establishing a general
infrastructure for lexical resources sharing. Its
backbone is represented by the MILE, a lexical
meta-entry, whose definition is now the focus of
the CLWG activities. The MILE is a modular
architecture for the representation of
multilingual lexical data, and aims at becoming
a common parlance for the representation and
encoding of lexical data.
References
Baker, Collin F., Fillmore, Charles J., and Lowe,
John B. (1998). "The Berkeley FrameNet project";
in Proceedings of the COLING-ACL, Montreal,
Canada.
Bel N., Busa, F., Calzolari, N., Gola, E., Lenci, A.,
Monachini, M., Ogonowski, A., Peters, I., Peters,
W., Ruimy, N., Villegas, M., Zampolli, A. (2000).
SIMPLE: A General Framework for the
Development of Multilingual Lexicons. LREC
Proceedings, Athens.
Burnard, L., Baker, P., McEnery, A. & Wilson, A.
(1997). An analytic framework for the validation
of language corpora. Report of the ELRA Corpus
Validation Group.
Calzolari, N. (1998). An Overview of Written
Language Resources in Europe: a few Reflections,
Facts, and a Vision, in A. Rubio, N. Gallardo, R.
Castro, A. Tejada (eds.), Proceedings of the First
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation, Granada, pp.217-224.
Calzolari, N., Mc Naught, J., Zampolli, A. (1996).
EAGLES Final Report: EAGLES Editors?
Introduction. EAG-EB-EI, Pisa.
EAGLES (1996). Evaluation of Natural Language
Processing Systems. Final Report, Center for
Sprogteknologi, Copenhagen. Also available at
http://issco-
www.unige.ch/projects/ewg96/ewg96.html.
GENELEX Consortium, (1994). Report on the
Semantic Layer, Project EUREKA GENELEX,
Version 2.1.
Gibbon, D., Moore R., Winski, R. (1997). Handbook
of Standards and Resources for Spoken Language
Systems, Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, New York.
Heid, U., McNaught, J. (1991). EUROTRA-7 Study:
Feasibility and Project Definition Study on the
Reusability of Lexical and Terminological
Resources in Computerised Applications. Final
report.
Jackendoff, R. (1992), Semantic Structures,
Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
Leech, G., Wilson, A. (1996). Recommendations for
the morphosyntactic annotation of corpora, Eag-
tcwg-mac/r, ILC-CNR, Pisa.
Lenci, A., Busa, F., Ruimy, N., Gola, E., Monachini,
M., Calzolari, N., Zampolli, A. (1999). Linguistic
Specifications. SIMPLE Deliverable D2.1. ILC
and University of Pisa.
Miller G.A, Beckwidth R., Fellbaum C., Gross D.,
and Miller K.J. (1990), "Introduction to WordNet:
An On-line Lexical Database", International
Journal of Lexicography, III, No.4: 235-244.
Monachini, M., Calzolari, N. (1996). Synopsis and
comparison of morphosyntactic phenomena
encoded in lexicons and corpora. A common
proposal and applications to European languages,
Eag-clwg-morphsyn/r, ILC-CNR, Pisa.
Pustejovsky, J. (1995). The Generative Lexicon.
Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
Ruimy, N., Corazzari, O., Gola, E., Spanu, A.,
Calzolari, N., Zampolli, A. (1998). The European
LE-PAROLE Project: The Italian Syntactic
Lexicon, in Proceedings of the First International
Conference on Language resources and
Evaluation, Granada: 241-248.
Sanfilippo, A. et al (1996). EAGLES
Subcategorization Standards. See
http://www.icl.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/syntax/syntax.
html
Sanfilippo, A. et al (1999). EAGLES
Recommendations on Semantic Encoding. See
http://www.ilc.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/rep2
Thurmair, G. (2000). OLIF Input Document, June
2000. See http://www.olif.net/main.htm
Underwood, N. & Navarretta, C. (1997). A Draft
Manual for the Validation of Lexica. Final ELRA
Report, Copenhagen.
Zampolli, A. (1998). Introduction, in A. Rubio, N.
Gallardo, R. Castro, A. Tejada (eds.), Proceedings
of the First International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation, Granada.
