Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2011: the 12th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 2?7,
Portland, Oregon, June 17-18, 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Spoken Dialog Challenge 2010: 
 Comparison of Live and Control Test Results 
Alan W Black1, Susanne Burger1, Alistair Conkie4, Helen Hastie2, Simon Keizer3,  Oliver 
Lemon2, Nicolas Merigaud2, Gabriel Parent1, Gabriel Schubiner1, Blaise Thomson3, Jason 
D. Williams4, Kai Yu3, Steve Young3 and Maxine Eskenazi1 
1Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA 
2Dept of Mathematical and Computer Science, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, UK 
3Engineering Department, Cambridge University, Cambridge, UK 
4AT&T Labs ? Research, Florham Park, NJ, USA 
awb@cs.cmu.edu 
 
 
Abstract 
The Spoken Dialog Challenge 2010 was an 
exercise to investigate how different spo-
ken dialog systems perform on the same 
task.  The existing Let?s Go Pittsburgh Bus 
Information System was used as a task and 
four teams provided systems that were first 
tested in controlled conditions with speech 
researchers as users. The three most stable 
systems were then deployed to real callers.  
This paper presents the results of the live 
tests, and compares them with the control 
test results. Results show considerable 
variation both between systems and be-
tween the control and live tests.  Interest-
ingly, relatively high task completion for 
controlled tests did not always predict 
relatively high task completion for live 
tests.  Moreover, even though the systems 
were quite different in their designs, we 
saw very similar correlations between word 
error rate and task completion for all the 
systems.  The dialog data collected is 
available to the research community. 
1 Background 
The goal of the Spoken Dialog Challenge (SDC) is 
to investigate how different dialog systems per-
form on a similar task.  It is designed as a regularly 
recurring challenge. The first one took place in 
2010. SDC participants were to provide one or 
more of three things: a system; a simulated user, 
and/or an evaluation metric.   The task chosen for 
the first SDC was one that already had a large 
number of real callers. This had several advan-
tages. First, there was a system that had been used 
by many callers. Second, there was a substantial 
dataset that participants could use to train their sys-
tems.  Finally, there were real callers, rather than 
only lab testers.  Past work has found systems 
which appear to perform well in lab tests do not 
always perform well when deployed to real callers, 
in part because real callers behave differently than 
lab testers, and usage conditions can be considera-
bly different [Raux et al2005, Ai et al2008].  De-
ploying systems to real users is an important trait 
of the Spoken Dialog Challenge. 
The CMU Let?s Go Bus Information system 
[Raux et al2006] provides bus schedule informa-
tion for the general population of Pittsburgh.  It is 
directly connected to the local Port Authority, 
whose evening calls for bus information are redi-
rected to the automated system.  The system has 
been running since March 2005 and has served 
over 130K calls. 
The software and the previous years of dialog 
data were released to participants of the challenge 
to allow them to construct their own systems.  A 
number of sites started the challenge, and four sites 
successfully built systems, including the original 
CMU system. 
An important aspect of the challenge is that 
the quality of service to the end users (people in 
Pittsburgh) had to be maintained and thus an initial 
robustness and quality test was carried out on con-
tributed systems.  This control test provided sce-
narios over a web interface and required 
researchers from the participating sites to call each 
of the systems.  The results of this control test were 
published in [Black et al 2010] and by the individ-
ual participants [Williams et al 2010, Thomson et 
al. 2010, Hastie et al 2010] and they are repro-
2
duced below to give the reader a comparison with 
the later live tests. 
Important distinctions between the control 
test callers and the live test callers were that the 
control test callers were primarily spoken dialog 
researchers from around the world.  Although they 
were usually calling from more controlled acoustic 
conditions, most were not knowledgeable about 
Pittsburgh geography.     
As mentioned above, four systems took part 
in the SDC.  Following the practice of other chal-
lenges, we will not explicitly identify the sites 
where these systems were developed. We simply 
refer to them as SYS1-4 in the results.  We will, 
however, state that one of the systems is the system 
that has been running for this task for several 
years. The architectures of the systems cover a 
number of different techniques for building spoken 
dialog systems, including agenda based systems, 
VoiceXML and statistical techniques. 
2 Conditions of Control and Live tests 
For this task, the caller needs to provide the depar-
ture stop, the arrival stop and the time of departure 
or arrival in order for the system to be able to per-
form a lookup in the schedule database. The route 
number can also be provided and used in the 
lookup, but it is not necessary. The present live 
system covers the East End of Pittsburgh.  Al-
though the Port Authority message states that other 
areas are not covered, callers may still ask for 
routes that are not in the East End; in this case, the 
live system must say it doesn?t have information 
available.  Some events that affect the length of the 
dialog include whether the system uses implicit or 
explicit confirmation or some combination of both, 
whether the system has an open-ended first turn or 
a directed one, and whether it deals with requests 
for the previous and/or following bus (this latter 
should have been present in all of the systems). 
Just before the SDC started, the Port Author-
ity had removed some of its bus routes. The sys-
tems were required to be capable of informing the 
caller that the route had been canceled, and then 
giving them a suitable alternative. 
SDC systems answer live calls when the Port 
Authority call center is closed in the evening and 
early morning.  There are quite different types and 
volumes of calls over the different days of the 
week.  Weekend days typically have more calls, in 
part because the call center is open fewer hours on 
weekends.  Figure 1 shows a histogram of average 
calls per hour for the evening and the early morn-
ing of each day of the week. 
 
calls per weekday / ave per hour
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Fr-
19-
0
Sa-
0-8
Sa-
16
-
0
Su-
0-8
Su-
16
-
0
Mo
-
0-7
Mo
-
19
-
0
Tu
-
0-7
Tu
-
19-
0
We
-
0-7
We
-
19
-
0
Th
-
0-7
Th
-
19-
0
Fr-
0-7
 
Figure 1: average number of calls per hour on weekends 
(dark bars) and weekdays. Listed are names of days and 
times before and after midnight when callers called the 
system. 
 
The control tests were set up through a simple 
web interface that presented 8 different scenarios 
to callers. Callers were given a phone number to 
call; each caller spoke to each of the 4 different 
systems twice.  A typical scenario was presented 
with few words, mainly relying on graphics in or-
der to avoid influencing the caller?s choice of vo-
cabulary.  An example is shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Typical scenario for the control tests.  This 
example requests that the user find a bus from the cor-
ner of Forbes and Morewood (near CMU) to the airport, 
using bus route 28X, arriving by 10:45 AM. 
 
3
3 Control Test Results 
The logs from the four systems were labeled for 
task success by hand.  A call is successful if any of 
the following outputs are correctly issued: 
 
? Bus schedule for the requested departure and 
arrival stops for the stated bus number (if giv-
en). 
? A statement that there is no bus available for 
that route. 
? A statement that there is no scheduled bus at 
that time. 
 
We additionally allowed the following boundary 
cases: 
 
? A departure/arrival stop within 15 minutes 
walk. 
? Departure/arrival times within one hour of re-
quested time. 
? An alternate bus number that serves the re-
quested route. 
 
In the control tests, SYS2 had system connection 
issues that caused a number of calls to fail to con-
nect, as well as a poorer task completion.  It was 
not included in the live tests.  It should be pointed 
out that SYS2 was developed by a single graduate 
student as a class project while the other systems 
were developed by teams of researchers.  The re-
sults of the Control Tests are shown in Table 1 and 
are discussed further below. 
 
Table 1. Results of hand analysis of the four systems in 
the control test 
 The three major classes of system response 
are as follows.  no_info: this occurs when the sys-
tem gives neither a specific time nor a valid excuse 
(bus not covered, or none at that time).  no_info 
calls can be treated as errors (even though there 
maybe be valid reasons such as the caller hangs up 
because the bus they are waiting for arrives).  
donthave: identifies calls that state the requested 
bus is not covered by the system or that there is no 
bus at the requested time. pos_out: identifies calls 
where a specific time schedule is given.  Both 
donthave and pos_out calls may be correct or er-
roneous (e.g the given information is not for the 
requested bus,  the departure stop is wrong, etc). 
4 Live Tests Results 
In the live tests the actual Pittsburgh callers had 
access to three systems: SYS1, SYS3, and SYS4.  
Although engineering issues may not always be 
seen to be as relevant as scientific results, it is im-
portant to acknowledge several issues that had to 
be overcome in order to run the live tests. 
Since the Pittsburgh Bus Information System 
is a real system, it is regularly updated with new 
schedules from the Port Authority. This happens 
about every three months and sometimes includes 
changes in bus routes as well as times and stops. 
The SDC participants were given these updates 
and were allowed the time to make the changes to 
their systems. Making things more difficult is the 
fact that the Port Authority often only releases the 
schedules a few days ahead of the change. Another 
concern was that the live tests be run within one 
schedule period so that the change in schedule 
would not affect the results.   
The second engineering issue concerned 
telephony connectivity. There had to be a way to 
transfer calls from the Port Authority to the par-
ticipating systems (that were run at the participat-
ing sites, not at CMU) without slowing down or 
perturbing service to the callers.  This was 
achieved by an elaborate set of call-forwarding 
mechanisms that performed very reliably.  How-
ever, since one system was in Europe, connections 
to it were sometimes not as reliable as to the US-
based systems.  
 
 SYS1 SYS3 SYS4 
Total Calls 678 451 742 
Non-empty calls 633 430 670 
no_ info 18.5% 14.0% 11.0% 
donthave 26.4% 30.0% 17.6% 
donthave_corr 47.3% 40.3% 37.3% 
donthave_incorr 52.7% 59.7% 62.7% 
pos_out 55.1% 56.0% 71.3% 
pos_out_corr 86.8% 93.8% 91.6% 
pos_out_incorr 13.2% 6.2% 8.4% 
 
Table 2. Results of hand analysis of the three systems in 
the live tests.  Row labels are the same as in Table 1. 
 SYS1 SYS2 SYS3 SYS4 
Total Calls 91 61 75 83 
no_ info 3.3% 37.7% 1.3% 9.6% 
donthave 17.6% 24.6% 14.7% 9.6% 
donthave_corr 68.8% 33.3% 100.0% 100.0% 
donthave_incorr 31.3% 66.7% 0.0% 0.0% 
pos_out 79.1% 37.7% 84.0% 80.7% 
pos_out_corr 66.7% 78.3% 88.9% 80.6% 
pos_out_incorr 33.3% 21.7% 11.1% 19.4% 
4
We ran each of the three systems for multiple two 
day periods over July and August 2010.  This de-
sign gave each system an equal distribution of 
weekdays and weekends, and also ensured that 
repeat-callers within the same day experienced the 
same system. 
One of the participating systems (SYS4) 
could support simultaneous calls, but the other two 
could not and the caller would receive a busy sig-
nal if the system was already in use.  This, how-
ever, did not happen very often. 
Results of hand analysis of real calls are 
shown in Table 4 alongside the results for the Con-
trol Test for easy comparison.  In the live tests we 
had an additional category of call types ? empty 
calls (0-turn calls) ? which are calls where there 
are no user turns, for example because the caller 
hung up or was disconnected before saying any-
thing.  Each system had 14 days of calls and exter-
nal daily factors may change the number of calls. 
We do suspect that telephony issues may have pre-
vented some calls from getting through to SYS3 on 
some occasions.   
Table 3 provides call duration information for 
each of the systems in both the control and live 
tests. 
 
 
 Length (s) Turns/call Words/turn 
SYS1 control 155 18.29 2.87 (2.84) 
SYS1 live 111 16.24 2.15 (1.03) 
SYS2 control 147 17.57 1.63 (1.62) 
SYS3 control 96 10.28 2.73 (1.94) 
SYS3 live 80 9.56 2.22 (1.14) 
SYS4 control 154 14.70 2.25 (1.78) 
SYS4 live 126 11.00 1.63 (0.77) 
 
Table 3: For live tests, average length of each call, aver-
age number of turns per call, and average number of 
words per turn (numbers in brackets are standard devia-
tions). 
 
Each of the systems used a different speech 
recognizer.  In order to understand the impact of 
word error rate on the results, all the data were 
hand transcribed to provide orthographic transcrip-
tions of each user turn.   Summary word error sta-
tistics are shown in Table 4.   However, summary 
statistics do not show the correlation between word 
error rate and dialogue success.  To achieve this, 
following Thomson et al(2010), we computed a 
logistic regression of success against word error 
rate (WER) for each of the systems. Figure 3 
shows the regressions for the Control Tests and 
Figure 4 for the Live Tests.  
 
 SYS1 SYS3 SYS4 
Control 38.4 27.9 27.5 
Live 43.8 42.5 35.7 
 
Table 4: Average dialogue word error rate (WER). 
 
0 20 40 60 80 100
0.
0
0.
2
0.
4
0.
6
0.
8
1.
0
WER
Su
cc
es
s 
Ra
te
Sys4
Sys3
Sys1
 
Figure 3: Logistic regression of control test success vs 
WER for the three fully tested systems 
0 20 40 60 80 100
0.
0
0.
2
0.
4
0.
6
0.
8
1.
0
WER
Su
cc
e
ss
Sys1
Sys3
Sys4
 
Figure 4: Logistic regression of live success vs WER for 
the three fully tested systems 
 
5
In order to compare the control and live tests, 
we can calculate task completion as the percentage 
of calls that gave a correct result.  We include only 
non-empty calls (excluding 0-turn calls), and treat 
all no_info calls as being incorrect, even though 
some may be due to extraneous reasons such as the 
bus turning up (Table 5). 
 
 SYS1 SYS3 SYS4 
Control 64.9% (5.0%) 89.4% (3.6%) 74.6% (4.8%) 
Live 60.3% (1.9%) 64.6% (2.3%) 71.9% (1.7%) 
 
Table 5: Live and control test task completion (std. err).  
 
5 Discussion 
All systems had lower WER and higher task com-
pletion in the controlled test vs. the live test.  This 
agrees with past work [Raux et al2005, Ai et al
2008], and underscores the challenges of deploying 
real-world systems. 
For all systems, dialogs with controlled sub-
jects were longer than with live callers ? both in 
terms of length and number of turns.  In addition, 
for all systems, live callers used shorter utterances 
than controlled subjects.  Controlled subjects may 
be more patient than live callers, or perhaps live 
callers were more likely to abandon calls in the 
face of higher recognition error rates.   
Some interesting differences between the sys-
tems are evident in the live tests.  Looking at dia-
log durations, SYS3 used confirmations least often, 
and yielded the fastest dialogs (80s/call).  SYS1 
made extensive use of confirmations, yielding the 
most turns of any system and slightly longer dia-
logs (111s/call).  SYS4 was the most system-
directed, always collecting information one ele-
ment at a time.  As a result it was the slowest of the 
systems (126s/call), but because it often used im-
plicit confirmation instead of explicit confirmation, 
it had fewer turns/call than SYS1.   
For task completion, SYS3 performed best in 
the controlled trials, with SYS1 worst and SYS4 in 
between.  However in the live test, SYS4 per-
formed best, with SYS3 and SYS1 similar and 
worse.  It was surprising that task completion for 
SYS3 was the highest for the controlled tests yet 
among the lowest for the live tests.  Investigating 
this, we found that much of the variability in task 
completion for the live tests appears to be due to 
WER.  In the control tests SYS3 and SYS4 had 
similar error rates but the success rate of SYS3 was 
higher.  The regression in Figure 3 shows this 
clearly.   In the live tests SYS3 had a significantly 
higher word error rate and average success rate 
was much lower than in SYS4.   
It is interesting to speculate on why the rec-
ognition rates for SYS3 and SYS4 were different 
in the live tests, but were comparable in the control 
tests.  In a spoken dialogue system the architecture 
has a considerable impact on the measured word 
error rate.  Not only will the language model and 
use of dialogue context be different, but the dia-
logue design and form of system prompts will in-
fluence the form and content of user inputs.   Thus, 
word error rates do not just depend on the quality 
of the acoustic models ? they depend on the whole 
system design.  As noted above, SYS4 was more 
system-directed than SYS3 and this probably con-
tributed to the comparatively better ASR perform-
ance with live users.   In the control tests, the 
behavior of users (research lab workers) may have 
been less dependent on the manner in which users 
were prompted for information by the system.  
Overall, of course, it is user satisfaction and task 
success which matter. 
6 Corpus Availability and Evaluation 
The SDC2010 database of all logs from all systems 
including audio plus hand transcribed utterances, 
and hand defined success values is released 
through CMU?s Dialog Research Center 
(http://dialrc.org). 
One of the core goals of the Spoken Dialog 
Challenge is to not only create an opportunity for 
researchers to test their systems on a common plat-
form with real users, but also create common data 
sets for testing evaluation metrics.  Although some 
work has been done on this for the control test data 
(e.g. [Zhu et al2010]), we expect further evalua-
tion techniques will be applied to these data. 
One particular issue which arose during this 
evaluation concerned the difficulty of defining pre-
cisely what constitutes task success.  A precise de-
finition is important to developers, especially if 
reinforcement style learning is being used to opti-
mize the success.  In an information seeking task 
of the type described here, task success is straight-
forward when the user?s requirements can be satis-
fied but more difficult if some form of constraint 
relaxation is required.   For example, if the user 
6
asks if there is a bus from the current location to 
the airport ? the answer ?No.? may be strictly cor-
rect but not necessarily helpful.  Should this dia-
logue be scored as successful or not?  The answer 
?No, but there is a stop two blocks away where 
you can take the number 28X bus direct to the air-
port.? is clearly more useful to the user.  Should 
success therefore be a numeric measure rather than 
a binary decision?  And if a measure, how can it be 
precisely defined?  A second and related issue is 
the need for evaluation algorithms which deter-
mine task success automatically.   Without these, 
system optimization will remain an art rather than 
a science. 
7 Conclusions 
This paper has described the first attempt at an ex-
ercise to investigate how different spoken dialog 
systems perform on the same task.  The existing 
Let?s Go Pittsburgh Bus Information System was 
used as a task and four teams provided systems 
that were first tested in controlled conditions with 
speech researchers as users. The three most stable 
systems were then deployed ?live? with real call-
ers. Results show considerable variation both be-
tween systems and between the control and live 
tests.  Interestingly, relatively high task completion 
for controlled tests did not always predict rela-
tively high task completion for live tests.  This 
confirms the importance of testing on live callers, 
not just usability subjects. 
 The general organization and framework 
of the evaluation worked well.  The ability to route 
audio telephone calls to anywhere in the world us-
ing voice over IP protocols was critical to the suc-
cess of the challenge since it provides a way for 
individual research labs to test their in-house sys-
tems without the need to port them to a central co-
ordinating site. 
 Finally, the critical role of precise evalua-
tion metrics was noted and the need for automatic 
tools to compute them.  Developers need these at 
an early stage in the cycle to ensure that when sys-
tems are subsequently evaluated, the results and 
system behaviors can be properly compared.  
Acknowledgments 
Thanks to AT&T Research for providing telephony 
support for transporting telephone calls during the 
live tests.  This work was in part supported by the 
US National Science foundation under the project 
?Dialogue Research Center?.   
References  
Ai, H., Raux, A., Bohus, D., Eskenzai, M., and Litman, 
D.  (2008)  ?Comparing spoken dialog corpora col-
lected with recruited subjects versus real users?, Proc 
SIGDial, Columbus, Ohio, USA.  
Black, A., Burger, S., Langner, B., Parent, G., and Es-
kenazi, M. (2010) ?Spoken Dialog Challenge 2010?, 
SLT 2010, Berkeley, CA.  
Hastie, H., Merigaud, N., Liu, X and Oliver Lemon. 
(2010) ? ?Let?s Go Dude?, Using The Spoken Dia-
logue Challenge to Teach Spoken Dialogue Devel-
opment?, SLT 2010, Berkeley, CA. 
Raux, A., Langner, B., Bohus, D., Black, A., Eskenazi, 
M.  (2005)  ?Let?s go public! Taking a spoken dialog 
system to the real world?, Interspeech 2005, Lisbon, 
Portugal. 
Raux, A., Bohus, D., Langner, B., Black, A., and Eske-
nazi, M. (2006) ?Doing Research on a Deployed 
Spoken Dialogue System: One Year of Let's Go! Ex-
perience?, Interspeech 2006 - ICSLP, Pittsburgh, PA.  
Thomson B., Yu, K. Keizer, S., Gasic, M., Jurcicek, F.,  
Mairesse, F. and Young, S. ?Bayesian Dialogue Sys-
tem for the Let?s Go Spoken Dialogue Challenge?, 
SLT 2010, Berkeley, CA. 
Williams, J., Arizmendi, I., and Conkie, A. ?Demonstra-
tion of AT&T ?Let?s Go?: A Production-Grade Statis-
tical Spoken Dialog System.? SLT 2010, Berkeley, 
CA. 
Zhu, Y., Yang, Z., Meng, H., Li, B., Levow, G., and 
King, I. (2010) ?Using Finite State Machines for 
Evaluating Spoken Dialog Systems?, SLT 2010, 
Berkeley, CA. 
7
INLG 2012 Proceedings of the 7th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 128?130,
Utica, May 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Generating Natural Language Summaries  for Multimedia  Duo Ding, Florian Metze, Shourabh Rawat, Peter F. Schulam, Susanne Burger School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburgh, PA, USA 15213 {dding, fmetze, srawat, pschulam, sburger}@cs.cmu.edu   Abstract 
In this paper we introduce an automatic sys-tem that generates textual summaries of Inter-net-style video clips by first identifying suitable high-level descriptive features that have been detected in the video (e.g. visual concepts, recognized speech, actions, objects, persons, etc.). Then a natural language genera-tor is constructed using SimpleNLG to com-pile the high-level features into a textual form. The generated summary contains information from both visual and acoustic sources, intend-ing to give a general review and summary of the video. To reduce the complexity of the task, we restrict ourselves to work with videos that show a limited number of ?events?. In this demo paper, we describe the design of the system and present example outputs generated by the video summarization system. 
1 Introduction The Internet alows us to browse millions of vide-os. For some of them, the content is well organized with human-generated tags and labels (e.g. wed-ding ceremony, birthday party, etc.), but the rate at which content is uploaded daily makes it unrealis-tic to expect that user-provided labels will be suffi-cient for organizing this information in the future. We believe that automatically generating a brief summary (or ?abstract?) of videos is both an attrac-tive solution to this problem and an exciting chal-lenge for the natural language generation community. Converting audio and video output into natural language to create a human readable summary that facilitates effective browsing, sup-ports classification decisions, or helps differentiat-ing videos from one another without having to watch them in their entirety has both academic and practical value. 
In this paper, we introduce an automatic video summary generation system that uses a natural language realization engine (Gatt and Reiter, 2009) to create sentences based on state-of-the-art video classification features. These features are comput-ed on a large corpus from the TrecVID evaluation (Bao, et al 2011). In a recent user study (Ding, et al 2012), we compared automatically generated and manually generated summaries with respect to several tasks. The study shows, for example, that more specific information (e.g. ?food? instead of ?some object?) and temporal information (some-thing happened first and then?) is helpful in im-proving the quality of machine-generated summaries. This is a first step to implement an au-tomatic system which is not only able to describe videos using natural language, but accomplishes more sophisticated tasks such as differentiating videos, finding supporting evidence for video clas-sification and other tasks. 2 Related Work Significant work has been done in the field of vid-eo summarization. A large part of it is based on the idea that the summarization should be a graphical representation such as visually rich storyboards. These storyboards intended to help users to effi-ciently browse the videos, e.g. in the Open-Video Archive (Marchionini, Song et al 2009). Christel, et al (2006) are mainly focusing on the research in user interface designs for video browsing and summarization. Li, et al (2010) introduced a max-imal marginal relevance algorithm working across video genres to improve the quality of the informa-tive summary for a video, which exploits both au-dio and video information. Truong et al (2007) worked on techniques targeting video data from various domains that were developed to summarize and organize the information and present surro-gates to the users. Tan et al (2011) recently have 
128
worked on using recognition techniques to obtain audio-visual concept classifiers to generate textual descriptions of videos. They manually defined a template for each concept and built a rule-based language generation system to create textual de-scriptions. But the template approach, which is directly related to specific events, cannot be adapted to new events. In our work, we use Sim-pleNLG to generate video-specific summaries, which can be applied to any new event. 3 System Description 3.1 Architecture 
 Figure 1. System Architecture.  Figure 1 shows the overall system architecture. The raw data of the videos is extracted and normal-ized to a format that can be read by the feature da-tabase, which stores all the features from the videos. The ranker contains a set of algorithms that rank the features from a video and conduct content determination. For example, when there is a long list of visual conceptual features, the ranker will sort all the features based on their relevance to the specific event?s signature and return a ranked list to the planner. The planner is the ?commander? of the system; it receives the ranked features and passes them to the language generator. For each set of the features, the language generator uses Sim-pleNLG to compile a sentence stating the scenario of the video. Eventually, the planner combines all the sentences into a summarization passage pre-senting the information detected from the video.  3.2 Feature Extraction 
High-level features are extracted from the video using the techniques described in (Bao, et al 2011). Visual conceptual features are detected with SVM classifiers trained on the SIN task in TRECVID 2011 using MOSIFT and CSIFT fea-tures to describe keyframes. Other features are also extracted, including event labels, event signatures and the event kit, etc. Event signatures are relevant features describing a certain event, similar to a fin-gerprint, and the event kit is a textual description of important objects and actions that make up the event. For features that make use of temporal in-formation, we use a GMM based segmenter to cut the audio of each video into small clips (1-3 se-conds) and give a label to each clip. 3.3 Language Generation Taking a series of features, each of the sentence generators composes these features into a human readable sentence using the SimpleNLG generation tool. We use SimpleNLG at the lexical level (i.e. orthography, morphology and simple grammar) and at the phrase and sentence level (i.e. phrase element coordination, clause subordinates). For each set of features, the system generates a sen-tence specifically mentioning these features.  The VID generator deals with visual concepts, i.e. the probabilities of the occurrence of 346 visual concepts extracted from the video. A list of visual features (e.g. food, people, room) will be processed as follows: SPhraseSpec p = nlgFactory.createClause(); p.setSubject(?the system"); p.setVerb(?observe?); p.setObject("food, people, room"); p.setFeature(Feature.TENSE, Tense.PAST); p.addComplement(?in the video?) to generate a sentence like: The system observed food, people and room in the video. Another sentence generator is the ?temporal in-formation generator?, which takes the temporal information and produces a sentence describing what is happening in the video. We first segment the audio into small clips lasting three seconds each, and assign an audio semantic label to each clip (e.g. music, crowd, cheer, speech). Using tem-poral information, we generate a sentence like: 
129
From the video, the system heard the sound of music at first, then cheer, and then speech. When the system generates several sentences, we compose them into a summary paragraph of the video. For example, we combine the subordinate clauses using the conjunction ?because?: The video summarization system thinks this vid-eo is about Birthday Party because it found 3 Or More People Meeting in Room.  In this sentence, ?Birthday Party? is the event label for the given video, and ?3 Or More People?, ?Meeting?, ?Room? are the visual concepts ex-tracted from the video. 4 Demo System Interface We demonstrate the video summarization system in a dynamic web page. A screen shot of the demo page can be seen in Figure 2. The top gallery shows several videos for selection. The user can choose a video by clicking on it, and the selected video will play in the main area of the page. Once a video is selected and playing, a summary para-graph will be automatically generated and dis-played underneath the video, presenting the video?s information in natural language. 
 Figure 2. A screen shot of the user interface. The demo and the interface are currently being tested internally, in order to stabilize and improve all components, and to prepare for task-based and free-form evaluations on platforms such as Ama-zon Mechanical Turk, which will serve to further develop the NLG system. While the NLG is cur-rently mostly hard-coded, the availability of an evaluation framework will allow us to learn pa-rameters from data, and increase the amount of automation successively. In future work we will also explore and extend the feature sets by extract-
ing additional visual, acoustic, textual features from the video. We also plan to employ more so-phisticated NLG techniques (e.g. microplanning and document structuring) to generate more com-plex and authentic natural language sentences. Acknowledgments This work is partly supported by the Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA) via Department of Interior National Business Center contract number D11PC20068. The U.S. Govern-ment is authorized to reproduce and distribute re-prints for Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright annotation thereon. Disclaimer: The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as nec-essarily representing the official policies or en-dorsements, either expressed or implied, of IARPA, DoI/NBC, or the U.S. Government. References  Lei Bao, Shoou-I Yu, Zhen-zhong Lan, Arnold Over-wijk, Qin Jin, Brian Langner, Michael Garbus, Su-sanne Burger, Florian Metze, Alexander Hauptmann. Informedia @TRECVID2011. TRECVID2011, NIST. Michael G. Christel. 2006. Evaluation and User Studies with Respect to Video Summarization and Browsing. In Proc. ?Multimedia Content Analysis, Manage-ment, and Retrieval?, part of the IS&T/SPIE Sympo-sium on Electronic Imaging. Duo Ding, Florian Metze, Shourabh Rawat, Peter Franz Schulam, Susanne Burger, Ehsan Younessian, Lei Bao, Michael G. Christel, Alexander Hauptmann. 2012. Beyond Audio and Video Retrieval: Towards Multimedia Summarization. In Proc. 2012 Interna-tional Conference on Multimedia Retrieval.  Albert Gatt and Ehud Reiter. 2009. SimpleNLG: A real-isation engine for practical applications. In Proc. 12th European Workshop on Natural Language Gnera-toin-2009, pages 90-93. Yingbo Li, Bernardo Merialdo. 2010.Multi-video Sum-marization Based on AV-MMR. In Proc. 2010 Int?l Workshop on Content-Based Multimedia Indexing. Gary Marchionini, Yaxiao Song, and Robert Ferrell. 2009. Multimedia Surrogates for Video Gisting: To-ward Combining Spoken Words and Imagery. Infor-mation Processing & Management 45(6), 615-630. Ba Tu Truong and Svetha Venkatesh. 2007. Video Ab-straction: A Systematic Review and Classification. ACM Trans. (TOMCCAP) 3(1), 1-37. Chun Chet Tan, Yu-Gang Jiang, Chong-Wah Ngo. 2011. Towards Textually Describing Complex Video Contents with Audio-Visual Concepts Classifiers. In Proc. ACM Multimedia-2011. 
130
