Unigram Language Model for Chinese Word Segmentation 
        Aitao Chen 
Yahoo! Inc. 
701 First Avenue 
Sunnyvale, CA 94089 
aitao@yahoo-inc.com 
Yiping Zhou 
Yahoo! Inc. 
701 First Avenue 
Sunnyvale, CA 94089 
zhouy@yahoo-inc.com
Anne Zhang 
Yahoo! Inc. 
701 First Avenue 
Sunnyvale, CA 94089
annezhangya@   
yahoo.com 
Gordon Sun 
Yahoo! Inc. 
701 First Avenue 
Sunnyvale, CA 94089 
gzsun@yahoo-inc.com
Abstract
This paper describes a Chinese word 
segmentation system based on unigram 
language model for resolving segmen-
tation ambiguities. The system is aug-
mented with a set of pre-processors and 
post-processors to extract new words in 
the input texts. 
1 Introduction
The Yahoo team participated in all four closed 
tasks and all four open tasks at the second inter-
national Chinese word segmentation bakeoff. 
2 System Description 
The underlying algorithm in our word segmenta-
tion system is the unigram language model in 
which words in a sentence are assumed to occur 
independently. For an input sentence, we exam-
ine all possible ways to segment the new sen-
tence with respect to the segmentation 
dictionary, and choose the segmentation of the 
highest probability, which is estimated based on 
the unigram model. 
Our system also has a few preprocessors and 
postprocessors. The main preprocessors include 
recognizers for extracting names of people, 
places and organizations, and recognizer for 
numeric expressions. The proper name recog-
nizers are built based on the maximum entropy 
model, and the numeric expression recognizer is 
built as a finite state automaton. The conditional 
maximum entropy model in our implementation 
is based on the one described in Section 2.5 in 
(Ratnaparkhi, 1998), and features are the same 
as those described in (Xue and Shen, 2003). 
One of the post-processing steps is to com-
bine single characters in the initial segmentation 
if each character in a sequence of characters oc-
curs in a word much more frequently than as a 
word on its own. The other post-processing pro-
cedure checks the segmentation of a text frag-
ment in the input text against the segmentation 
in the training data. If the segmentation pro-
duced by our system is different from the one in 
the training data, we will use the segmentation 
in the training data as the final segmentation. 
More details on the segmentation algorithm and 
the preprocessors and postprocessors can be 
found in (Chen, 2003). 
Our system processes a sentence independ-
ently. For an input sentence, the preprocessors 
are applied to the input sentence to extract nu-
meric expressions and proper names. The ex-
tracted numeric expressions and proper names 
are added to the segmentation dictionary, if they 
are not already in the dictionary. Then the input 
sentence is segmented into words. Finally the 
post-processing procedures are applied to the 
initial segmentation to produce the final seg-
mentation. Our system processes texts encoded 
in UTF-8; and it is used in all 8 tasks. 
3 Results 
Table 1 presents the results of the 10 official 
runs we submitted in all 8 tasks. 
Run id R P F R-
oov 
R-in
as-closed 0.955 0.934 0.947 0.468 0.978 
as-open 0.958 0.938 0.948 0.506 0.978 
138
cityu-closed 0.949 0.931 0.940 0.561 0.980 
cityu-open 0.952 0.937 0.945 0.608 0.980 
pku-closed 0.953 0.946 0.950 0.636 0.972 
pku-open-a 0.964 0.966 0.965 0.841 0.971 
msr-closed-a 0.969 0.952 0.960 0.379 0.985 
msr-closed-b 0.968 0.953 0.960 0.381 0.984 
msr-open-a 0.970 0.957 0.963 0.466 0.984 
msr-open-b 0.971 0.961 0.966 0.512 0.983 
Table 1: Summary of Yahoo official results. 
The first element in the run id is the corpus 
name, as referring to the Academia Sinica cor-
pus, cityu the City University of Hong Kong 
corpus, pku the Peking University Corpus, and 
msr the Microsoft Research corpus. The second 
element in the run id is the type of task, closed
or open. The second column shows the recall, 
the third column the precision, and the fourth 
column F-score. The last two columns present 
the recall of the out-of-vocabulary words and the 
recall of the words in the training data, respec-
tively.
3.1 Closed Tasks 
For the AS closed task run as-closed, we 
manually identified about 15 thousands person 
names and about 4 thousands place names from 
the AS training corpus. We then built a person 
name recognizer and a place name recognizer 
from the AS training data. All the name recog-
nizers we built are based on the maximum en-
tropy model. We also built a rule-based numeric 
expression recognizer implemented as a finite 
state automaton. 
The segmentation dictionary consists of the 
words in the training data with occurrence fre-
quency compiled from the training data. For 
each character, the probability that a character 
occurs in a word is also computed from the 
training data only. 
Each line of texts in the testing data set is 
processed independently. From an input line, 
first the person name recognizer and place name 
recognizer are used to extract person and place 
names; the numeric expression recognizer is 
used to extract numeric expressions. The ex-
tracted new proper names and new numeric ex-
pressions are added to the segmentation 
dictionary with a constant occurrence frequency 
of 0.5 before the input text is segmented. After 
the segmentation, a sequence of single charac-
ters is combined into a single unit if each of the 
characters in the sequence occurs much more 
frequently in a word than as a word on its own. 
The threshold of a character occurring in a word 
is set to 0.80. Also the quad-grams down to uni-
grams in the segmentation are checked against 
the training data. When a text fragment is seg-
mented in a different way by our system than in 
the training data, we use the segmentation of the 
text fragment in the training data as the final 
output. 
The runs cityu-closed and pku-closed are 
produced in the same way. We first manually 
identified the person names and place names in 
the training data, and then built name recogniz-
ers from the training data. The name recognizers 
and numeric expression recognizer are used first 
to extract proper names and numeric expressions 
before segmentation. The post-processing is also 
the same. 
Two runs, named msr-closed-a and msr-
closed-b, respectively, are submitted using the 
Microsoft Research corpus for the closed task. 
Unlike in the other three corpora, the numeric 
expressions are much more versatile, and there-
fore, more difficult to write regular expressions 
to identify them. We manually identified the 
numeric expressions, person names, place 
names, and organization names in the training 
data, and then built maximum entropy model-
based recognizers for extracting numeric expres-
sions and names of people, place, and organiza-
tions. Also the organization names in this corpus 
are not segmented into words like in the other 
three corpora. The organization name recognizer 
is word-based while the other three recognizers 
are character-based. The only difference be-
tween these two runs is that the run msr-closed-
b includes an organization name recognizer 
while the other run msr-closed-a does not. 
3.2 Open Tasks 
For the AS open task, we used a user diction-
ary and a person name recognizer and a place 
name recognizer, both trained on the combined 
AS corpus and the CITYU corpus. However, the 
base dictionary and word frequency counts are 
compiled from only the AS corpus. For the open 
run, we used the annotated AS corpus we ac-
quired from Academia Sinica. Also the phrase 
segmentation table is built from the AS training 
data only. The AS open run as-open was pro-
duced with the new person and place name rec-
ognizers and with the user dictionary. The 
139
performance of the open run is almost the same 
as that of the close run. 
The training data used in the CITYU open 
task is the same as in the closed task. We built a 
person name recognizer and a place name rec-
ognizer from the combined AS and CITYU cor-
pora. In training a recognizer, we only kept the 
sentences that contain at least one person or 
place name. The run cityu-open was produced 
with new person name and place name recog-
nizers trained on the combined corpora but with-
out user dictionary. The base dictionary and 
frequency counts are from the CITYU training 
data. We prepared a user dictionary for the 
CITYU open run but forgot to turn on this fea-
ture in the configuration file. We repeated the 
CITYU open run cityu-open with user diction-
ary. The recall is 0.959; precision is 0.953; and 
F-score is 0.956. 
For the PKU open task run pku-open-a, we 
trained our segmenter from the word-segmented 
People?s Daily corpus covering the period of 
January 1 through June 30, 1998. Our base dic-
tionary with word frequency counts, character 
counts, and phrase segmentation table are built 
from this larger training corpus of about 7 mil-
lion words. The words in this corpus are anno-
tated with part-of-speech categories. Both the 
names of people and the names of places are 
uniquely tagged in this corpus. We created a 
training set for person name recognizer by com-
bining the sentences in the People?s Daily cor-
pus that contain at least one person name with 
the sentences in the MSR training corpus that 
contain at least one person name. The person 
names in the MSR corpus were manually identi-
fied. From the combined training data for person 
names, we built a person name recognizer based 
on the maximum entropy model. The place 
name recognizer was built in the same way. The 
PKU open run pku-open-a was produced using 
the segmenter trained on the 6-month People?s 
Daily corpus with the new person and place 
name recognizer trained on the People?s Daily 
corpus and the MSR corpus. A user dictionary 
of about 100 thousand entries, most being 
proper names, was used in the PKU open run. 
The training data used for the MSR open 
runs is the same MSR training corpus. Our base 
dictionary, together with word frequency counts, 
and phrase segmentation table are built from the 
MSR training data only. The numeric expression 
recognizer is the same as the one used in the 
closed task. The person name recognizer and 
place name recognizer are the same as those 
used in the PKU open task. We built an organi-
zation name recognizer from the People?s Daily 
corpus where organization names are marked. 
For example, the text fragment ?[??/ns ???
/j]nt? is marked by a pair of brackets and tagged 
with ?nt? in the annotated People?s Daily cor-
pus. We extracted all the sentences containing at 
least one organization name and built a word-
based recognizer. The feature templates are the 
same as in person name or place name recog-
nizer. We submitted two MSR open task runs, 
named msr-open-a and msr-open-b, respec-
tively. The only difference between these two 
runs is that the first run msr-open-a did not in-
clude an organization name recognizer, while 
the run msr-open-b used the organization name 
recognizer built on the annotated People?s Daily 
corpus. Both runs were produced with a user 
dictionary, the new person name recognizer and 
new place name recognizer. The increase of F-
score from 0.963 to 0.966 is due to the organiza-
tion name recognizer. While the organization 
name recognizer correctly identified many or-
ganization names, it also generated many false 
positives. So the positive impact was offset by 
the false positives. 
At about 12 hours before the due time, we 
learned that multiple submissions for the same 
task are acceptable. A colleague of ours submit-
ted one PKU open run with the run id ?b? and 
one MSR open run with the run id ?c? in the 
bakeoff official results using a different word 
segmentation system without being tuning for 
the bakeoff. These two open runs are not dis-
cussed in this paper. 
4 Discussions 
The differences between our closed task runs 
and open task runs are rather small for both the 
AS corpus and the CITYU corpus. Our CITYU 
open run would be substantially better had we 
used our user dictionary. The open task run us-
ing the PKU corpus is much better than the 
closed task run. We performed a number of ad-
ditional evaluations in both the PKU closed task 
and the PKU open task. Table 2 below presents 
the evaluation results with different features ac-
tivated in our system. The PKU training corpus 
140
was used in all the experiments presented in Ta-
ble 2.  
Run Features R P F 
1 base-dict 0.9386 0.9095 0.9238 
2 1+num-expr 0.9411 0.9161 0.9285 
3 2+person+place 0.9440 0.9249 0.9343 
4 3+single-char 0.9404 0.9420 0.9412 
5 4+consistency-
checking 
0.9529 0.9464 0.9496 
Table 2: Results with different features applied 
in PKU closed task. 
    Table 3 presents the results with different fea-
tures applied in the PKU open task. The 6-
month annotated People?s Daily corpus was 
used in all the experiments shown in Table 3. 
Run Features R P F 
1 base-dict 0.9523 0.9503 0.9513 
2 1+user-dict 0.9534 0.9565 0.9549 
3 2+num-expr 0.9547 0.9605 0.9576 
4 3+person+place 0.9562 0.9647 0.9604 
5 4+single-char 0.9487 0.9650 0.9568 
6 5+consistency-
checking 
0.9637 0.9664 0.9650 
Table 3: Results with different features applied 
in PKU open task. 
In the features column, base-dict refers to the 
base dictionary built from the training data only; 
user-dict the additional user dictionary; num-
expr the numeric expression recognizer imple-
mented as a finite state automaton; person the 
person name recognizer; place the place name 
recognizer; single-char combining a sequence of 
single characters when each one of them occurs 
in words much more frequently than as a word 
on its own; and lastly consistency-checking 
checking segmentations against the training 
texts and choosing the segmentation in the train-
ing texts if the segmentation of a text fragment 
produced by our system is different from the one 
in the training data. The tables show the results 
with more and more features included. Each run 
in the both tables includes one or two new fea-
tures over the previous run.  The last run num-
bered 5 in Table 2 is our official PKU closed run 
labeled pku-closed in Table 1; and the last run 
numbered 6 in Table 3 is our official PKU open 
run labeled pku-open-a in Table 1. 
The F-score for our closed PKU task run is 
0.950 with all available features, while using the 
larger People?s Daily corpus as training data and 
its dictionary alone, the F-score is 0.9513. So a 
larger training data contributed significantly to 
the increase in performance in our PKU open 
task run. The user dictionary, the numeric ex-
pression recognizer, the person name recognizer, 
and the place name recognizer all contributed to 
the better performance of our PKU closed run 
and open run. Selectively combining sequence 
of single characters appreciably improved the 
precision while marginally decreased the recall 
in the PKU closed run. However, in the open 
task run, combining single characters did not 
result in better performance, probably because 
the new words recovered by combining single 
characters are already in our user dictionary for 
the open run. Finally consistency checking sub-
stantially improved the performance for both the 
closed run and the open run. 
5 Conclusion 
We presented a word segmentation system that 
uses unigram language model to select the most 
probable segmentation among all possible can-
didates for an input text. The system is aug-
mented with proper name recognizers, numeric 
expression recognizers, and post-processing 
modules to extract new words. Overall the rec-
ognizers and the post-processing modules sub-
stantially improved the baseline performance. 
The larger training data set used in the PKU 
open task also significantly increased the per-
formance of our PKU open run. The additional 
user dictionary is another major contributor to 
our better performance in the open tasks over 
the closed tasks. 
References 
Aitao Chen. 2003. Chinese Word Segmentation Us-
ing Minimal Linguistic Knowledge. In: Proceed-
ings of the Second SIGHAN Workshop on 
Chinese Language Processing. 
Nianwen Xue and Libin Shen. 2003. Chinese Word 
Segmentation as LMR Tagging. In: Proceedings of 
the Second SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Lan-
guage Processing. 
Adwait Ratnaparkhi. 1998. Maximum Entropy Mod-
els for Natural Language Ambiguity Resolution.
Dissertation in Computer and Information Sci-
ence, University of Pennsylvania. 
141
