 ABSTRACT
Spoken user interfaces are conventionally either dialogue-
based or menu-based. In this paper we propose a third
approach, in which the task of invoking responses from the
system is treated as one of retrieval from the set of all possi-
ble responses. Unlike conventional spoken user interfaces
that return a unique response to the user, the proposed inter-
face returns a shortlist of possible responses, from which
the user must make the final selection. We refer to such
interfaces as Speech-In List-Out or SILO interfaces. Exper-
iments show that SILO interfaces can be very effective, are
highly robust to degraded speech recognition performance,
and can impose significantly lower cognitive load on the
user as compared to menu-based interfaces.
Keywords
Speech interfaces, information retrieval, spoken query
1. INTRODUCTION
Spoken input based user interfaces can be broadly cate-
gorized as dialogue-based interfaces and menu-selection
interfaces. In dialogue-based interfaces, the system engages
in a dialogue with the user in an attempt to determine the
user?s intention. In menu-based interfaces users traverse a
tree of menus, each node of which presents a list of possible
choices for the user. In both kinds of interfaces, the speech
recognizer must typically convert the user?s speech to an
unambiguous text string, which is then used by the UI to
determine the action it must take next. Both kinds of inter-
faces eventually respond to the user with a unique output.
In this paper we advocate a third, and different approach
to spoken user interfaces. We note that in a majority of
applications for which speech interfaces may be used, the
goal of the interaction between the user and the system is to
evoke a specific response from a limited set of possible
responses. In our approach, we view the set of possible
responses as documents in an index, and the task of obtain-
ing a specific response as that of retrieval from the set. Spo-
ken input from the user is treated as a query, which is used
to retrieve a list of potentially valid responses that are dis-
played to the user. The user must then make the final selec-
tion from the returned list. We call spoken user interfaces
based on this approach ?Speech-In List-Out? or SILO inter-
faces.
While much has been written on text-based retrieval of
spoken or multimedia documents, the topic of information
retrieval (IR) using spoken queries has not been addressed
much. The usual approach to spoken query based IR has
been to use the recognizer as a speech-to-text convertor that
generates a text string (Chang et. al, 2002; Chen et. al.,
2000) or a phoneme sequence (Kupiec et. al. 1994) which is
used to query the index. This approach is critically depen-
dent on accurate recognition of the spoken query.
In our system, however, we do not require direct con-
version of the spoken input to an unambiguous text string.
Instead, the spoken query is converted to a probabilistically
scored ?bag of words? derived from the entire hypothesis
space of the recognizer, that serves as the query to the
index. This system is able to perform effectively even when
the actual text string output by the recognizer is erroneous.
The proposed SILO approach has several advantages
over dialogue-based or menu-based interfaces. The latter
require users to know or guess what to say at each stage in
an interaction. Interactions typically follow a sequence of
steps, and the allowed responses from the user vary with
the state of the interaction. On the other hand, since the
SILO interface essentially performs information retrieval
based on the query, restrictions on the allowed language are
few, if any. Additionally, the SILO interface responds in a
single step to the user, without requiring repeated refine-
ment of the request. This simplicity of operation makes the
SILO interface measurably simpler to use than menu-based
interfaces.
Speech recognition systems often make mistakes, espe-
cially under noisy recording conditions. Recognition errors
can result in incorrect responses from user interfaces. To
improve the robustness of the UI to recognition errors, dia-
logue and menu-based systems use various techniques such
as rejection, confirmatory responses and error-correcting
dialogues. SILO interfaces do not use such techniques, and
are more reliant on getting the responses right in the first
place. This is possible in SILO interfaces because the spo-
ken query based IR technique used in them is inherently
robust to recognition errors.
The rest of this paper is arranged as follows: in Section
2 we describe the basic operation of the SILO interface. In
Section 3 we describe the spoken query based IR algorithm
used by the SILO interface. In Section 4 we describe some
example applications that use the SILO interface and
present experiments evidence of the effectiveness of SILO.
Finally in Section 5 we present our conclusions.
2. THE OPERATION OF THE SILO INTERFACE
Figure 1. demonstrates the difference between the con-
ventional spoken user interfaces and the SILO interface.
Figure 1a. shows the typical operation of a conventional
dialog or menu-based interface. The user initiates the inter-
action typically using a push-to-talk or press-to-talk button.
Thereafter the system goes through a cycle of processing
A Speech-In List-Out Approach to Spoken User Interfaces
Vijay Divi1, Clifton Forlines2, Jan Van Gemert2, Bhiksha Raj2, Bent Schmidt-Nielsen2, Kent Wittenburg2, Joseph 
Woelfel2, Peter Wolf2, Fang-Fang Zhang2
1. Massachussetts Institute of Tehcnology, Cambridge, MA, USA
2. Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories, Cambridge, MA, USA
vdivi@mit.edu, {forlines, gemert, bent, wittenburg, woelfel, wolf, fzhang}@merl.com
the user?s spoken input, and responding to it in some man-
ner, either with a menu, or some intermediate response of a
dialogue. After a number of cycles through this loop, the
system eventually responds with the desired action.
Conventional interfaces are predicated on the theory
that it is advantageous to obtain information about the
desired final response in an incremental manner, through
controlled exchanges in which the number of possible inter-
pretations of the user?s input is limited. In addition, dia-
logue-based interfaces also attempt to make the interaction
between the user and the system conversational.
The design of the SILO interface, on the other hand, is
based on the following premises: a) when the set of possi-
ble responses by the system is limited and can be enumer-
ated, simple information retrieval techniques are sufficient
to shortlist the possible final responses to the user. The
shortlist may bear no resemblance to the structured lists that
are derived by a menu or dialogue-based system, but will
nevertheless contain the desired response provided the IR
technique used is sufficiently robust. b) It is best to push the
final choice of response from such a list back to the user.
Figure 1b. shows the operation of the SILO interface.
The user initiates the interaction using a push-to-talk but-
ton. The system then records the user?s spoken input and
returns a ranked list of plausible responses based on the
input. The user finally selects the desired response through
a secondary selection, which may be performed using but-
tons, or even by voice. The entire operation is performed in
two steps, one in which the system retrieves a list of
choices, and the other in which the user selects from the
list.
3. INFORMATION RETRIEVAL IN SILO USING SPOKEN 
QUERIES
At the heart of the SILO interface is the MERL Spoken-
Query information retrieval engine (Wolf and Raj, 2002).
The standard approach to spoken query based IR
requires the unambiguous conversion of the spoken input to
text by the recognizer, and is likely to fail if the recognizer
makes errors, especially in recognizing keywords that iden-
tify the desired documents. The SpokenQuery IR engine
used in the SILO interface, however, does not require
unambiguous speech-to-text conversion. Spoken queries
Process
Spoken Input
Respond to
Input
Initiate
Interaction
Desired
Action
Spoken query
based Information
Retrieval
Initiate
Interaction
speech
speech
(a) Menu or dialog
based spoken user
interface
(b) SILO
Desired
ActionList
Selection
Figure  1. Operation of spoken user interfaces. (a) Conven-
tional dialog or menu-based interfaces. (b) SILO.
need not conform to any grammar and are permitted to be
free form.
Textual descriptions of the responses required from the
system are stored as documents in a document index. The
descriptions must uniquely identify the response. For exam-
ple, in a digital music retrieval system, the documents
might be the descriptive meta data associated with the
music. For a command and control system, they might be a
text description of possible actions to be taken by the appli-
cation.
Documents are represented in this index as word-count
vectors. Each entry in the vector represents the frequency of
occurrence of a specific word in the document. This repre-
sentation ignores the order in which words occur in the doc-
uments, retaining information only about their frequency of
occurrence. This particular representation is related to the
absence of linguistic constraints applied to spoken queries.
Since queries are permitted to be free form, word order can-
not be a consideration in the formation of the query, and
consequently in the document index.
Spoken queries are converted to a data structure that is
similar to the structures used to represent documents in the
index. The query structure is a vector of normalized
expected word counts in the spoken query. The expected
count for a word is simply the statistical expectation of the
number of times the word occurred in the spoken query and
is computed from the entire set of word sequence hypothe-
ses considered by the recognizer, not just the single text
string finally output by the recognizer. 
The recognizer represents the set of all considered
hypotheses as a graph that is commonly known as a word
lattice. Nodes in the graph represent words and arcs repre-
sent valid transitions between words. The scores associated
with nodes and arcs are the probabilities of the correspond-
ing words and transitions. The best-choice transcript gener-
ated by the recognizer is the most likely path through this
lattice (i.e. the path with the best score). 
The a posteriori probability of any node in the word lat-
tice is the ratio of the total probability scores of all paths
through the lattice that pass through that node, to the total
probability of all paths through the lattice and can be com-
puted through a forward-backward algorithm. Multiple
nodes in the word lattice may represent the same word. The
normalized expected count for a word is simply the total of
the a posteriori probabilities of all instances of that word in
the lattice. We call these ?normalized? counts since the
expected counts of all words sum to 1.0.
A useful feature of speech recognition systems is that
the actual words spoken by the user are usually included in
the recognition lattice for the utterance, often with high
probability, even when they are not included in the recog-
nizer?s final output. As a result, the true query word usually
have non-zero, and often relatively high, expected word
counts, regardless of their inclusion in the final recognizer
output.
For retrieval, the dot product of the document word-
count vectors and the expected word count vectors derived
from the spoken query is computed. The output of the
retrieval system is a list of the documents sorted by this
value.
Figure 2 shows the overall system architecture for the
SpokenQuery information retrieval system in SILO. 
The vocabulary of the speech recognizer used for query
construction minimally includes all keywords in the docu-
ments. In addition to these, the recognizer may include all
the rest of the words in the documents as well, or may
replace them with a smaller set of garbage words. Since
queries may be free form, the recognizer cannot use con-
strained grammars that impose strict restrictions on word
order. Instead, it uses an N-gram language model that high-
lights the keywords and key phrases, but does not strictly
disallow any particular sequence of words.
4. EXAMPLE SILO APPLICATIONS AND EXPERIMENTS
In this section we describe some applications for which
we have implemented SILO interfaces, and report three
experiments that evaluate different aspects of the SILO
interface. The targeted aspects are: a) the effectiveness of
the spoken input based IR technique used in the SILO inter-
face, b) the effectiveness of the SILO interface and c)
whether the SILO interface provides any advantage over
conventional UIs.
Document retrieval with spoken queries
Since the main component of the SILO interface is the
proposed SpokenQuery IR engine, our first application
demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed IR method
on a conventional document retrieval task. This application
is exactly the same as normal IR (e.g. Google, AltaVista,
etc.) except that the user speaks instead of types. As with
normal IR, the user may say any word that he/she judges to
specify the information. There is no grammar to memorize.
It is intended that the returned list of documents contain
appropriate documents near the top, however, as with any
IR engine, there is no guarantee that all returned documents
will be pertinent to the query.
For the experimental evaluation, a database of 262 tech-
nical reports from our laboratory formed the document
index. A total of 75 spoken queries were recorded from a
number of users. In order to establish ground truth, the true
relevance of each of the 262 documents to each of the que-
ries was judged by a team of humans. For each query, docu-
ments were assigned a relevance score of 0 (irrelevant), 1
(somewhat relevant), or 2 (definitely relevant). All queries
were evaluated by every evaluator and their average score,
scaled to lie between 1 and 10, was deemed to be the
ground truth.
Figure 3 shows the average relevance of the first 30
documents retrieved, for retrieval using a text transcription
of the queries, with the recognizer?s best output, and the
SpokenQuery IR engine respectively. The text transcription
is not affected by noise. For retrieval based on spoken
input, however, SpokenQuery is found to be significantly
better than retrieval based on the recognizer?s single best
output. While performance on noisy speech is generally
poor, the proposed method is observed to result in an equiv-
alent of 5dB improvement in noise level over retrieval
based on the recognizer?s output.
MediaFinder: retrieving music with spoken queries
We now evaluate the effectiveness of SILO as a user
interface. A UI is effective if the user is able to obtain the
desired response from the system in a small number of
steps. Since the SILO based UI returns lists of possible
responses, the interaction may be considered successful, if
the returned list contains the desired response. Further, we
deem it more effective if the desired response is ranked
higher in the list, since the user has to spend less time scan-
ning the list. If the returned list does not contain the desired
response, the user must repeat the interaction, and the
exchange is considered a failure.
The MediaFinder application is a spoken interface for
retrieving music from digital collections, and represents a
good example of an application where SILO can make a
significant difference in the effectiveness of the UI. Hand-
held mp3 players can hold thousands of songs, yet the inter-
face provided on these devices is usually minimal,
consisting of a small screen and some buttons. Users must
access music by navigating a hierarchy of menus with the
buttons. An effective spoken user interface can improve the
usability of such devices greatly.
MP3 files contain extensive metadata (ID3) that
describe their contents. In the case of music files, these
The Internet 
provides 
worldwide 
access to a 
huge number 
The Internet 
provides huge 
number of 
publicly 
available 
multi-media 
Compute
word
certainties
Spoken query
Recognition
Lattice
Speech
recognizer
Compute 
Word 
Counts
Document 
Word-Count Vector
Search by
comparing
vectors
Query Word-Probabilty 
Vector
Document index
Documents
Sorted 
List
Figure  2. A block diagram representation of the Spoken-
Query IR engine. The document indexer computes word
count vectors for documents and stores them in an index.
For retrieval, spoken queries are converted to a recognition
lattice by a recognizer. Normalized expected word count
vectors are computed from the lattice. Documents are
ranked by the dot product of their word count vectors and
the query vector, and retrieved in the order of their ranking.
0
50
100
150
200
250
0 5 10 15
Txt
BP
SQ
O
ve
ra
ll 
Pe
rf
or
m
an
ce
SNR(dB)
Figure  3. Average ranking of documents retrieved using i)
text transcriptions of spoken queries, ii) the text output of a
recognizer and iii) the proposed spoken query IR method.
would include the title of the album, the name of the singer
or composer, and often other details such as the musical
genre. This meta-data text is used to index MP3 files. To
search for a song, the user speaks a description of the
desired music. The description may include a combination
of words from the name of the song, the artist, the album, or
the genre in any order. A list of songs that match the spoken
query most closely are displayed on the screen. Using up,
down and select buttons, the user scrolls through the
returned list, and selects the desired song. If the requested
song is not in the displayed list, the speaker must repeat the
query, perhaps trying different words.
We conducted two different experiments on Medi-
aFinder: one to evaluate the ability of users to successfully
obtain the desired response from the application - in this
case the playback of a desired piece of music, and a second
to determine if there is any advantage to the SILO interface
over conventional interfaces.
In the first experiment users attempted to retrieve a
desired piece of music from collections of different sizes.
MediaFinder returns a list of up to 10 songs in response to a
query. A score of 100 is given to the interaction if the
desired song is at the top of the list. The score decreases lin-
early if the required response is lower in the list. If the
required response is not in the returned list, the score for the
interaction is 0. Figure 4 shows the average score for an
interaction, as a function of the size of the collection from
which songs are to be retrieved. Each point in the plot rep-
resents an average score across 100 queries from two users.
We note that the average score is greater than 90 in all
cases, indicating that the desired music is not only
retrieved, but is typically near the very top of the list in a
majority of the cases. This shows that the SILO interface
can indeed be used effectively for such tasks, and may even
effectively substitute other more complex interfaces.
In the second experiment we compared the cognitive
load imposed by the MediaFinder SILO interface to that
imposed by a conventional graphical menu-based interface
for the same task - selection of music from a digital collec-
tion in an automobile. We note here that digital music play-
ers are becoming increasingly common in automobiles, and
having an effective UI that imposes minimal cognitive load
is of tantamount importance in such devices.
Experiments were conducted using a simple driving
simulator that mimicked two important facets of driving:
steering and braking. Subjects steered, braked, and con-
trolled the searching interfaces with a steering wheel and its
gas and brake pedals. Steering was measured with a pursuit
tracking task in which the subject used the wheel to closely
frame a moving target. Braking was measured by recording
subjects? reaction time to circles that appeared on screen at
random intervals. The tests were conducted on fourteen
subjects (8 male, 6 female, 18-37 years old). Four were
non-native speakers and all but one were regular automo-
bile drivers.
The study shows that a) subjects made an average of
20.7% less steering error when using the SILO interface,
and b) Subjects took an average of 28.6% less time to
retrieve songs using the SILO interface. Both interfaces had
the same effect on braking response. The results indicate
that the SILO interface does indeed impose a significantly
lower cognitive load on the user, at least for such tasks.
It must be mentioned, however, that subjects were much
better at both steering and braking when they did not
attempt to retrieve music at all (suggesting, perhaps, that
when driving an automobile, people must simply just
drive).
5. DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSION
The SILO interface presents a different approach to user
interfaces, that treats the problem of obtaining a particular
final response from a system as one of retrieving one of the
elements from the set of all possible responses from the
system. The experiments demonstrate that the SILO inter-
face can be effectively used in applications where the
responses of the system can be enumerated, and textually
described, and that it can actually be easier to use in some
situations. 
REFERENCES
1. Chang, E., Seide, F., Meng, H., Chen, Z. Shi, Y., Li, Y.
A system for spoken query information retrieval on
mobile devices. IEEE Trans. on Speech and Audio Pro-
cessing, 10:8, pp. 531-541. November 2002.
2. Chen, B., Want, H.M., Lee, L.S. Retrieval of broadcast
news speech in Mandarin Chinese collected in Taiwan
using syllable-level statistical characteristics. Proc.
IEEE Intl. Conf. on Acoustics Speech and Signal Pro-
cessing (ICASSP2000). Istanbul, Turkey. 2000.
3. Kupiec, J., Kimber, D., Balasubramanian, V. Speech-
based retrieval using semantic co-occurrence filtering,
Proc. Human Language Technology Conf. 1994.
4. Wolf, P. and Raj, B. The MERL SpokenQuery Informa-
tion Retrieval System: A System for Retrieving Perti-
nent Documents from a Spoken Query. Proc. IEEE
Conference and Multimedia Expo (ICME2003). Lau-
sanne, Switzerland. August 2002.
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
6828 3414 1707 854 427 214 107 54
Index Size
Av
er
ag
e 
sc
or
e
Text Only
SILO
Figure  4. Average ranking of the correct response in a list
of responses returned by SILO, as a function of the size of
the index. A score of 0 indicates that the desired response
was not returned. 100 indicates that it was returned at the
top of the list.
