Unsupervised, corpus-based method for extending
a biomedical terminology
Olivier Bodenreider Thomas C. Rindflesch Anita Burgun
Lister Hill National Center
for Biomedical Communications
National Library of Medicine
Bethesda, Maryland, 20894 - USA
{olivier|tcr}@nlm.nih.gov
LIM - University of Rennes
Avenue du Pr L?on Bernard
35043 Rennes Cedex - France
Anita.Burgun
@univ-rennes1.fr


Abstract
Objectives: To automatically extend
downwards an existing biomedical termi-
nology using a corpus and both lexical
and terminological knowledge. Methods:
Adjectival modifiers are removed from
terms extracted from the corpus (three
million noun phrases extracted from
MEDLINE), and demodified terms are
searched for in the terminology (UMLS
Metathesaurus, restricted to disorders and
procedures). A phrase from MEDLINE
becomes a candidate term in the Metathe-
saurus if the following two requirements
are met: 1) a demodified term created
from this phrase is found in the terminol-
ogy and 2) the modifiers removed to cre-
ate the demodified term also modify
existing terms from the terminology, for a
given semantic category. A manual re-
view of a sample of candidate terms was
performed. Results: Out of the 3 million
simple phrases randomly extracted from
MEDLINE, 125,000 new terms were
identified for inclusion in the UMLS.
83% of the 1000 terms reviewed manually
were associated with a relevant UMLS
concept. Discussion: The limitations of
this approach are discussed, as well as ad-
aptation and generalization issues.
1 Introduction
Although providing a reasonable coverage of the
clinical subdomain, Chute et al (1996) showed
that terminological resources such as the Interna-
tional Classificaton of Diseases, SNOMED Inter-
national or the UMLS Metathesaurus do not
capture all the concepts needed for representing
clinical concepts in patient records. In a subsequent
study, Chute and Elkin (1997) suggested that quali-
fiers (including adjectival modifiers) be available
as a separate axis, in order to both increase the ex-
pressivity of a terminology and reduce its com-
plexity by limiting the number of pre-coordinated
terms.
In this study, rather than reducing the complex-
ity, we use modification phenomena in order to
investigate a corpus-based methodology for auto-
matically discovering new terms for inclusion in a
controlled vocabulary. In other words, our objec-
tive is to acquire hyponyms for terms in an original
vocabulary that appear in the literature but are not
present in the original vocabulary.
2 Background
Terms play a major role in a variety of natural lan-
guage processing (NLP) applications, including
machine translation, text understanding, automatic
indexing, and information retrieval. Taking advan-
tage of the availability of large corpora, automatic
terminology acquisition methods were developed,
for example, by Bourigault and Jacquemin (1999).
Word affinities generally play a central role in
these methods. Grefenstette (1994) defines three
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                            the Biomedical Domain, Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 53-60.
                         Proceedings of the Workshop on Natural Language Processing in
orders of word affinities. ?First order affinities de-
scribe collocates of words, second-order affinities
show similarly used words, and third-order affini-
ties create semantic groupings among similar
words?. In term extraction, this analysis is often
applied to modifiers in order to establish groups of
terms modified by a given modifier or the list of all
possible modifiers for a given term.
Hersh et al (1996) demonstrated the feasibility
of applying natural language processing techniques
to a corpus of clinical narratives from an electronic
medical record (EMR) system. Although the terms
extracted were compared to existing terms in the
UMLS, the goal of this study was vocabulary dis-
covery, but not the automatic integration of newly
discovered terms into the terminology.
The automatic extension of an existing resource
based on a corpus has also been studied. For ex-
ample, Habert et al (1998) propose a method for
extending an existing specialized semantic lexicon.
Although related to these studies, our objective
is to automatically extend downwards an existing
biomedical terminology using a corpus and a com-
bination of lexical, syntactic, and terminological
knowledge.

In this study, the textual source, or corpus, is
MEDLINE? 1, the U.S. National Library of Medi-
cine?s (NLM) premier bibliographic database.
MEDLINE contains over eleven million references
to articles from more than 4,600 worldwide jour-
nals in life sciences with a concentration on bio-
medicine.
We use the Unified Medical Language System?
(UMLS?) Metathesaurus? 2 as the terminology to
be extended. The Metathesaurus, also developed
by NLM, is organized by concept or meaning. A
concept is defined as a cluster of terms represent-
ing the same meaning (synonyms, lexical variants,
acronyms, translations). For example, names for
the disease multiple sclerosis include multiple scle-
rosis, MS, ?multiple sclerosis, NOS?, disseminated
sclerosis, and scl?rose en plaques. The 13th edition
(2002) of the UMLS Metathesaurus contains over
1.5 million unique English terms drawn from more
than sixty families of medical vocabularies, and
organized in some 775,000 concepts.
                                                         
1
 www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/factsheets/medline.html
2
 umlsks.nlm.nih.gov
In order to address the large size of the
Metathesaurus, we limited our study to a signifi-
cant subdomain of clinical medicine: disorders and
procedures (currently about 615,000 unique terms,
corresponding to some 157,000 disorder concepts
and 95,000 medical procedure concepts).
In the UMLS, each concept is categorized by
semantic types (ST) from the semantic network.
McCray et al (2001) designed groupings of STs
that provide a partition the Metathesaurus and,
therefore, can be used to extract consistent sets of
concepts corresponding to a subdomain, such as
disorders or procedures.
Disorder and procedure terms were restricted to
terms suitable for natural language processing, ex-
cluding, for example, such terms as abdominal in-
jury, NOS. The notation ?NOS?, meaning ?not
otherwise specified?, is a marker for underspecifi-
cation often found in terminological resources.
When identified in the Metathesaurus, obsolete and
truncated terms were also excluded. 477,491
unique terms were selected for further processing.
3 Methods
The approach we propose for discovering candi-
dates for Metathesaurus concepts is to compare
phrases extracted from MEDLINE to current
UMLS phrases. We capitalize on differences in
modification structure between the MEDLINE
phrase and the UMLS phrase to determine candi-
dates for inclusion in the Metathesaurus. The cru-
cial difference is between a phrase containing
adjectival modification and a similar phrase ?de-
modified? by removing its adjectives.
A phrase from MEDLINE becomes a candidate
term in the Metathesaurus if the following two re-
quirements are met: 1) a demodified term created
from this phrase is found in the terminology and 2)
similarly modified terms exist in the terminology,
for a given semantic category. For example, the
phrase pancreatic bronchogenic cyst  is a candidate
term for a disorder in the Metathesaurus because
bronchogenic cyst  exists in the Metathesaurus
(concept: C0006281) and other Metathesaurus dis-
order terms are modified by the same adjective
pancreatic  (e.g., pancreatic hemorrhage).
3.1 Processing phrases from MEDLINE
Recently, Srinivasan et al (2002) performed a
shallow syntactic analysis on the entire MEDLINE
collection, using only titles and abstracts in Eng-
lish. Although their goal was to find Metathesaurus
concepts in MEDLINE citations, an interesting
side-effect of their analysis was the production of
some 175 million noun phrase types that are avail-
able for further research.
From these phrases, we selected the subset of
?simple? phrases, i.e., noun phrases excluding
prepositional modification or any other complex
feature. Examples of simple MEDLINE noun
phrases include abdominal aneurysmal aortitis  and
radical aggressive tumor resection. Out of some
forty million simple noun phrases, we randomly
selected a subset of three million phrases to be
used as our corpus, representative of the noun
phrases found in MEDLINE.
The phrases in our sample were then submitted
to an underspecified syntactic analysis described
by Rindflesch et al (2000) that draws on a stochas-
tic tagger (see Cutting et al (1992) for details) as
well as the SPECIALIST Lexicon, a large syntactic
lexicon of both general and medical English that is
distributed with the UMLS. Although not perfect,
this combination of resources effectively addresses
the phenomenon of part-of-speech ambiguity in
English.
The resulting syntactic structure identifies the
head and modifiers for the noun phrase analyzed.
Each modifier is also labeled as being adjectival,
adverbial, or nominal. Although all types of modi-
fication in the simple English noun phrase were
labeled, only adjectives and nouns were selected
for further analysis in this study. For example, the
term catastrophic cervical spinal cord injuries  was
analyzed as:
[[mod([catastrophic,adj]),
  mod([cervical,adj]),
  mod([spinal,adj]),
  mod([cord,noun]),
  head([injuries,noun])]]
A similar analysis was performed on UMLS
terms for disorders and procedures.
3.2 Comparing MEDLINE phrases to UMLS
phrases
The method we use can be summarized as follows.
Starting with a random subset of three million sim-
ple noun phrases from MEDLINE, we excluded
those that were already present in the UMLS by
mapping them to the Metathesaurus. We then per-
formed a shallow syntactic analysis of the phrases
in order to select those consisting of one or more
modifiers followed by a head noun.
Demodified terms were created by removing
every possible combinations of modifiers in the
terms. The same process was applied to disorder
and procedure terms in the Metathesaurus in order
to obtain a list of allowable adjectival modifiers for
these two categories. Such modifiers in the
Metathesaurus serve as a filter for MEDLINE
phrases, since finding a similarly modified term in
the UMLS is one of the two requirements for can-
didate terms. Demodified terms created from acci-
dental arterial perforations  include arterial
perforations, accidental perforations, and perfora-
tions.
Demodified terms derived from MEDLINE
phrases whose modifiers are all allowable are then
mapped to the Metathesaurus. In this example,
both accidental  and arterial  are adjectives found in
the Metathesaurus in disorder or procedure terms.
The second requirement for candidate terms is that
at least one associated demodified term be mapped
to a concept in the Metathesaurus. Two terms from
our example map to Metathesaurus concepts: arte-
rial perforations  and perforations. The term acci-
dental perforations  does not map to any concept
and is therefore eliminated from further process-
ing. The last step ensures that, in case of multiple
demodified terms, the finest-grained is selected.
Arterial perforations  is selected over perforations
for this reason.
Figure 1 illustrates the sequence of methods
used in the study and the interactions between
processing MEDLINE phrases and Metathesaurus
terms. It also presents the number of MEDLINE
phrases and Metathesaurus terms present before
and after each of the six steps detailed below.
Step1. Mapping phrases to the UMLS
In order to identify MEDLINE phrases that already
exist in the Metathesaurus, all MEDLINE phrases
in our sample were mapped to the UMLS by first
attempting an exact match between input term and
Metathesaurus concept. If an exact match failed,
normalization was then attempted. This process
makes the input and target terms potentially com-
patible by eliminating such inessential differences
as inflection, case and hyphen variation, as well as
word order variation. Duplicate names were re-
moved from each set prior to mapping to the
UMLS.
Step 2. Identifying (adj+, noun*, head) phrases
Since this method is based on adjectival modifica-
tion, the syntactic analysis was used to restrict the
original sets of MEDLINE phrases and Metathe-
saurus terms to phrases and terms having the fol-
lowing structure: (adj+, noun*, head).
The phrase is required to start with an adjectival
modifier, possibly followed by other adjectives and
end with a head noun, possibly preceded by other
nouns. This specification excludes both simple
terms (e.g., one isolated noun) and complex terms,
not suitable for our analysis.
Step 3. Creating demodified terms
When adjectival modifiers are identified in a term
O, a set of demodified terms {T1, T2,?,Tn} is cre-
ated by removing from term O any combinations
of adjectival modifiers found in it. While the struc-
ture of the demodified terms remains syntactically
correct, the semantics of some terms may be
anomalous, especially when adjectives other than
the leftmost are removed. Since most of them are
semantically valid, we found it convenient to keep
all demodified terms for further analysis. Demodi-
fied terms with incorrect semantics will be filtered
out later in the experiment, since they will not map
to an existing concept.
The number of demodified terms is 2m ? 1, m
being the number of adjectival modifiers. For ex-
ample, the term chronic sciatic constriction injury
starts with the two adjectival modifiers chronic  and
sciatic, so that the following three demodified
terms are generated sciatic constriction injury,
chronic constriction injury, and constriction injury.
Although there is no need to demodify UMLS
terms in this study, the removal of adjectival modi-
fiers was used to establish a list of adjectives oc-
curring in disorder and procedure terms. These
adjectives constitute the list of allowable modifiers
for the two categories of terms studied.
Step 4. Searching for similarly modified terms
in the Metathesaurus
In this study, one requirement for candidate terms
is that a similarly modified term be present in the
terminology. The list of allowable modifiers com-
puted from Metathesaurus terms at the previous
step provides a simple way to implement this con-
straint. For a given category, an allowable modifier
indicates that some terms from this category are
modified by this modifier, i.e., that a similarly
modified term exists in the Metathesaurus.
Practically, MEDLINE phrases whose adjecti-
val modifiers do not all belong to the list of allow-
able modifiers are excluded from further analysis,
because, by definition, there will be no similarly
modified term in the Metathesaurus.
Step 5. Searching for demodified terms in the
Metathesaurus
The second requirement for a MEDLINE phrase to
become a candidate term is that a demodified term
created from this phrase be found in the terminol-
ogy. Using only MEDLINE phrases whose adjec-
tival modifiers all belong to the list of allowable
modifiers, the demodified terms created from these
phrases are mapped to the UMLS using the proce-
dure previously described. MEDLINE phrases with
no demodified term mapped to a UMLS concept
are definitely excluded. Demodified terms map-
ping to concepts in categories other than disorders
or procedures are also eliminated.
As explained earlier, the compatibility of the
modifiers of the candidate terms is checked against
the list of allowable modifiers for the category of
the Metathesaurus concept(s) to which a demodi-
fied term mapped. In some cases, a cadidate term
is eliminated because the modified term maps to a
disorder concept, while its modifiers are compati-
ble with procedures (or the other way around).
Step 6. Hooking candidate terms to the termi-
nology
The remaining step consists of finding the appro-
priate hook in the terminology for the candidate
term. Based on the fact that modification is nor-
mally associated with a hyponymic relation, tenta-
tive parents for the candidate term will be those
that map to the demodified terms generated from
this term.
When only one demodified term maps to a
Metathesaurus concept, this concept is selected as
the tentative parent for the candidate term. When
several demodified terms map to Metathesaurus
concepts, the preference is given to the concept
that is likely to be closest to the term. As a surro-
gate for closeness, we use the following heuristics:
1) the fewer modifiers removed, the closer the
terms, and 2) the candidate term and the demodi-
fied term are closer if the modifier removed is the
leftmost modifier. In the rare cases where several
demodified terms are deemed equally close to the
candidate term, they are all selected as tentative
parents.
4 Evaluation
A subset of 1000 candidate terms was randomly
selected to evaluate this method. The existence of a
hyponymic relationship between the candidate
term and the Metathesaurus concept(s) selected as
valid mappings for the demodified terms created
from the candidate term was evaluated by a manual
review performed by the authors. A secondary ob-
jective of this evaluation was to gain insights about
how these methods could be tuned in order to pre-
vent inaccurate mappings and select the most use-
ful candidate terms.
The following classification was used to de-
scribe the quality of the hyponymic relationship
between the candidate term and the Metathesaurus
concept(s) selected: ?relevant? means that the
hooking of the candidate term to the terminology
was relevant, even if a more specific concept was
available; ?non relevant? means that none of the
Metathesaurus concepts selected was a correct
hook for the candidate term; ?more or less rele-
vant? means that the Metathesaurus concepts se-
lected were not irrelevant as hooks, but were
distant ancestors, i. e., too general for the relation-
ship to be fully informative. Finally, for polyse-
mous candidate terms, it was not possible to
evaluate the quality of the relationship with cer-
tainty.
5 Results
Out of the 3 million randomly selected simple
MEDLINE phrases, 125,464 phrases were selected
as candidate terms with (at least) one Metathesau-
rus concept to hook them to. Details about the
number of phrases selected at each step of the
processing are given in Figure 1.
The total number of adjectival modifiers found
in a MEDLINE phrase ranged from 1 to 7. Phrases
with one (42% of the phrases) or two (46% of the
phrases) modifiers predominated. The candidate
terms resulted from removing one modifier from
the original phrase in 66% of the cases, and two
modifiers in 30% of the cases. The modifier(s) re-
moved included the leftmost modifier in 95% of
the cases. The list of the most frequent modifiers in
existing terms and candidate terms for disorders
and procedures is given in Table 1.
In 78% of the cases, only one demodified term
was generated from the original phrase. Two de-
modified terms were generated in 17% of the
cases. In 61% of the cases, only the leftmost adjec-
tive was removed. The first two adjectives in the
phrase were removed in 29% of the cases.
Out of the 1000 candidate terms reviewed as
hyponyms of some Metathesaurus concept, 834
were considered relevant, 28 more or less relevant,
and 138 not relevant.
6 Discussion
This study confirms the observations made in two
previous studies taking advantage of adjectival
modification phenomena in various tasks related to
terminologies, in particular to suggest hyponymic
relations among medical terms [Bodenreider et al
(2001)] and to assess the consistency of a biomedi-
cal terminology [Bodenreider et al (2002)].
Although a larger-scale evaluation would be re-
quired to fully assess the results, the major finding
is that the method is effective at automatically
identifying many new terms for inclusion into an
extended terminological resource. However, the
evaluation revealed some limitations which are
analyzed below. Adaptation and generalization
issues will be addressed as well.
Limitations
The errors discovered during the manual review
illustrate some of the limitations of this method.
More exactly, these limitations are common to
many NLP applications. Although acronyms were
sometimes associated with their correct meaning in
the Metathesaurus, in the set of terms reviewed
manually, the presence of acronyms was responsi-
ble for 22% of the non-relevant associations. For
example, the MEDLINE term individual black
rats, whose two adjectival modifiers are allowable
disease modifiers, is wrongly identified as a hypo-
nym of recurrent acute tonsillitis  because the ac-
ronym RAT is associated (as a synonym) with the
disease recurrent acute tonsillitis  in the Metathe-
saurus. In some cases, failure to identify the correct
part of speech also resulted in inaccurate associa-
tions (e.g., controlling stress  to stress  where con-
trolling was actually not an adjective). Not all
truncated terms present in the Metathesaurus syno-
nyms of some concepts are identified as such.
When not identified, truncated terms are used for
the mapping, sometimes resulting in inaccurate
associations. For example, the candidate term uri-
nary protein is wrongly associated with the con-
cept protein measurement  because protein is
considered a synonym for the procedure protein
measurement  in the Metathesaurus.
Sometimes, the association is not inaccurate,
but the concept associated with the candidate term
is very general, and the relationship weakly infor-
mative. For example, once demodified, aplastic
syndrome  is associated with syndrome, a concept
close to the top of the hierarchy. Although aplastic
syndrome  is a valid hyponym of syndrome, it
would be more accurately categorized as a kind of
hematologic syndrome, which requires domain
knowledge unavailable here.
Finally, in some cases, because hyponymy is
the only relation considered, the association of a
candidate term with a Metathesaurus concept, al-
though relevant, is not necessarily the closest pos-
sible. For example, the term colonic vaginal fistula
is correctly associated with its hypernym vaginal
fistula, but fails to be identified as a synonym of
the concept fistula of vagina to large intestine.
Practically, in a completely automatic setting, the
use of this algorithm could result in creating sev-
eral concepts for the same meaning.
Tuning
This algorithm can be tuned from a strict mode,
allowing fewer phrases to automatically become
candidate terms, but with greater precision, to a
relaxed mode, selecting a larger number of candi-
date terms when recall is the priority. The latter
would require some supervision prior to integrating
the candidate terms into the terminology.
Almost all the limitations mentioned above can
be addressed. Terms containing acronyms could be
identified and eliminated before mapping to the
Metathesaurus. Part of speech taggers trained on a
terminology would more accurately identify the
part of speech of words that can be both adjectives
and nouns. Truncated Metathesaurus terms should
be systematically excluded from the index used for
mapping. Methods for identifying synonymy based
on derivational variation or other techniques could
also be investigated.
Moreover, additional refinement could be
brought to this method. For example, when de-
modified terms are created, the removal of adjec-
tives could be restricted to the leftmost, thus
maximally preserving the structure of the remain-
ing noun phrase, and therefore limiting the risks of
association with a semantically distant concept.
Finally, using statistical information about the
distribution of adjectival modifiers could provide a
surrogate for the strength of the association. For
example, knowing that many diseases can be acute,
if this adjective is found in the corpus as the modi-
fier of a disease concept, this association could be
accepted with a confidence proportional to the
relative frequency of this modifier for all diseases,
in the case of acute for a disease, a high confi-
dence.
Generalization
The method presented was voluntarily restricted to
the domain of disorders and procedures, to adjecti-
val modification, and to the biomedical literature.
Generalizing to other domains would pose no
problems as long as terms of their terminology is
amenable to natural language processing tech-
niques and modification phenomena. This would
include domains such as anatomy or physiology.
However, domains such as molecular biology, with
many gene and gene product names, and chemis-
try, with many chemical names would probably
yield fewer candidate terms.
Nominal modification is common in English
and in principle can be addressed with a methodol-
ogy similar to the one discussed here. Nominal
modifiers often express a quality more closely re-
lated semantically to the head than do adjectives.
Details in the methodology would be adjusted to
accommodate this characteristic.
Generalization to other corpora such as patient
records and electronic textbooks of medicine
would likely yield additional terms.

Finally, although this method relies on features
of the UMLS such as the semantic categorization
of the concepts, it could also be applied to other
terminologies that do not provide this feature, such
as the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH). In this
case, the concept hierarchy itself could be used as a
surrogate for the categorization. For example, if
the candidate term chronic rheumatic fever  is asso-
ciated with the MeSH term rheumatic fever, its
category is disease because the polyhierarchical
structure in which rheumatic fever  is involved ul-
timately converges to the top of the C hierarchy,
i.e., the term diseases.
References
Bodenreider, O., Burgun, A., and Rindflesch, T. C.
(2001). Lexically-suggested hyponymic relations
among medical terms and their representation in the
UMLS. Proceedings of TIA'2001 "Terminology and
Artificial Intelligence", 11-21.
Bodenreider, O., Burgun, A., and Rindflesch, T. C.
(2002). Assessing the consistency of a biomedical
terminology through lexical knowledge. Proceedings
of the Workshop on Natural Language Processing in
Biomedical Applications (NLPBA'2002), 77-83.
Bourigault, D., and Jacquemin, C. (1999). Term Extrac-
tion + Term Clustering: An Integrated Platform for
Computer-Aided Terminology. Proceedings of the
Ninth Conference of the European Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (EACL'99).
Chute, C. G., Cohn, S. P., Campbell, K. E., Oliver, D.
E., and Campbell, J. R. (1996). The content coverage
of clinical classifications. For The Computer-Based
Patient Record Institute's Work Group on Codes &
Structures. J Am Med Inform Assoc  3, 224-233.
Chute, C. G., and Elkin, P. L. (1997). A clinically de-
rived terminology: qualification to reduction. Proc
AMIA Annu Fall Symp, 570-574.
Cutting, D. R., Kupiec, J., Pedersen, J. O., and Sibun, P.
(1992). A practical part-of-speech tagger. Proceed-
ings of the Third Conference on Applied Natural
Language Processing, 133-140.
Grefenstette, G. (1994). Corpus-derived first, second
and third-order word affinities. Paper presented at:
EURALEX (Amsterdam).
Habert, B., Nazarenko, A., Zweigenbaum, P., and
Bouaud, J. (1998).  Extending an existing specialized
semantic lexicon. Proceedings of the First Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation, 663-668.
Hersh, W. R., Campbell, E. H., Evans, D. A., and
Brownlow, N. D. (1996). Empirical, automated vo-
cabulary discovery using large text corpora and ad-
vanced natural language processing tools. Proc
AMIA Annu Fall Symp, 159-163.
McCray, A. T., Burgun, A., and Bodenreider, O. (2001).
Aggregating UMLS semantic types for reducing con-
ceptual complexity. Medinfo  10, 216-220.
Rindflesch, T. C., Rajan, J. V., and Hunter, L. (2000).
Extracting molecular binding relationships from
biomedical text. In "Proceedings of the 6th Applied
Natural Language Processing Conference" (San
Francisco, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers), pp. 188-
195.
Srinivasan, S., Rindflesch, T. C., Hole, W. T., and
Aronson, A. R. (2002). Finding UMLS Metathesau-
rus concepts in MEDLINE. Proc AMIA Annu Fall
Symp, (submitted).




Table 1. Most frequent modifiers identified in existing terms (UMLS)
and candidate terms (MEDLINE) for disorders and procedures.

Disorder terms Procedure terms
MEDLINE UMLS MEDLINE UMLS
severe congenital using surgical
chronic acute clinical serum
acute accidental two diagnostic
primary intentional routine dental
human chronic conventional local
recurrent pulmonary surgical therapeutic
pulmonary malignant initial total
multiple cerebral human patient
two renal total percutaneous
malignant benign standard cardiac

2,979,060
phrases not in UMLS
3,000,000
randomly selected
?simple? MEDLINE phrases
map to
UMLS
477,491
unique English terms
(disorders and procedures)
1,586,469
UMLS Metathesaurus
unique English terms
select disorders +
procedures
79,610
(mod+, head) terms
(adj+, noun*, head)
filter
remove
modifiers
3,114
procedure
modifiers
6,951
disorder
modifiers
1,322,468
(mod+, head) phrases
2,826,848
demodified terms
1,619,338
selected demodified terms
130,352
selected demodified terms +
UMLS mapping (diso./proc.)
(adj+, noun*, head)
filter
remove
modifiers
filter
modifiers
map to
UMLS
125,464
candidate terms
select
mapping






 


Figure 1. Summary of the methods for comparing MEDLINE phrases to UMLS terms.
