Dialogue complexity with portability? 
Research directions for the Information State approach 
Carl Burke, Christy Doran, Abigail Gertner, 
Andy Gregorowicz, Lisa Harper, Joel Korb, Dan Loehr 
The MITRE Corporation 
202 Burlington Road, Bedford, MA 01730 
{cburke,doran,gertner,andrewg,lisah,jkorb,loehr}@mitre.org 
 
 
Abstract 
We review existing types of dialogue manag-
ers (DMs), and propose that the Information 
State (IS) approach may allow both complex-
ity of dialogue and ease of portability.  We 
discuss implementational drawbacks of the 
only existing IS DM, and describe our work 
underway to develop a new DM resolving 
those drawbacks.  
1 Introduction 
Spoken dialogue systems have shown steady improve-
ments in recent years. To continue advancing the state 
of the field, we must direct research towards reducing a 
tradeoff between complexity and portability. Otherwise, 
we will continue to have systems which can handle 
complex interactions, or systems which can be easily 
modified for new domains, but not both. 
The simplest existing dialogue managers (DMs), fi-
nite-state systems, are suitable for simple, well-
structured system-initiated dialogue tasks. They also 
make it easy for novice developers to create new dia-
logue systems. Yet this type of DM does not scale well 
to mixed-initiative dialogues or complicated tasks with 
a wide variety of possible input. The most well-known 
such DM is VoiceXML. Similar systems include Ore-
gon Graduate Institute?s Rapid Application Developer 
(CSLU 2002), Unisys' Dialog Design Assistant (Unisys 
1998), Nuance?s Speech Objects, the Swedish GULAN 
(yellow pages) system (Gustafson et al1998), and sev-
eral commercial systems by SpeechWorks. 
More sophisticated, mixed-initiative, frame-based 
DMs often make use of semantic ?frames? containing 
multiple ?slots? or ?keys?, each of which can hold a 
value. Either conversational partner can volunteer or 
request information about any slots in the frame, at any 
time, in any order. When enough slots are filled to the 
satisfaction of both parties, the task and conversation 
are complete. This type of DM supports a more flexible, 
arbitrary flow-of-control, often controlled by scripts of 
rules firing upon certain conditions. Examples of these 
types of DMs include Philips? SpeechMania (Aust and 
Schroer 1998), the Dialogue Design Language Tool in 
the Danish Generic Dialogue System (Bernsen et al
1998), and several of the DMs developed (by e.g. MIT 
and the University of Colorado) for the DARPA Com-
municator infrastructure. 
Even more complex plan-based DMs reason about 
?plans? and communicative ?goals?, and try to move the 
conversation along towards achieving these goals. By 
representing the relationships between goals, subgoals, 
and primitive actions in a domain, these systems can 
support dialogues with a broader scope than the frame-
based DMs can. Notably, they are intended to detect 
topic shifts as well as support dynamic re-planning 
when misunderstandings occur. These systems typically 
model communicative goals in terms of speech acts 
where speech acts affect goals, beliefs, intent and/or 
obligations of the participants. These DMs can also be 
complex to develop, and correspondingly difficult to 
port to new applications. Examples of this type are 
COLLAGEN (COLLaborative AGENts), by Mitsubishi 
Electric Research Lab (Rich et. al. 2001), and the Uni-
versity of Rochester?s TRAINS and TRIPS systems 
(CISD 2000). 
The approach we find most promising, however, is 
the Information State (IS) approach, which simplifies 
development by providing a rule-based language for 
specifying dialogue systems while allowing the flexible, 
complex interactions characteristic of plan-based dia-
logues. An IS theory of dialogue proposed by Cooper 
and Larson (1998) models dialogue states (i.e. struc-
tured semantic objects) as dependent record types. Dia-
logue moves (roughly equivalent to speaker turns) are 
characterized as transitions between information states 
in a manner that is neutral with regard to semantic the-
ory. This approach to dialogue modeling enables devel-
opers to model the system information state in such a 
way that arbitrary linguistic theories of dialogue may be 
formalized, implemented, and compared. ISs may be 
used to model relations between various kinds of infor-
mation such as utterances, background knowledge, non-
verbal events and visual scenes. This is crucial to mul-
timodal dialogue processing. Another important feature 
of the IS approach is that developers have the flexibility 
to define levels of dialogue as well as model goals, in-
tent, beliefs and obligations. Thus the IS approach may 
also be used to model more complex dialogues using 
concepts derived from plan-based theories of dialogue - 
perhaps, inheriting some of the same challenges. How-
ever, the same framework may be used to also model 
simpler finite-state dialogues.  
TRINDIKit (TRINDI 2002) is an IS-based open 
source Prolog toolkit. TRINDIKit itself provides the 
basic infrastructure of a dialogue manager. It provides 
structured data types and the means to define an Infor-
mation State from those types, a language for defining 
the modules of a Dialogue Move Engine (DME), and a 
language for controlling the application of individual 
modules to dialogue management.  
We have built two dialogue systems using TRIN-
DIKit (Burke et al2002).  We first developed a multi-
modal information kiosk by adapting GoDiS 
(Gothenburg Dialogue System) (Larsson et al2000), 
which implements the Questions Under Discussion 
model in TRINDIKit. Adapting this existing TRIN-
DIKit DM to a new question-answer domain required 
very little effort (less than two staff-weeks from initial 
downloading of TRINDIKit to an operational system 
open to the public). We then modified the DM to sup-
port control of a search-and-rescue robot using a 
speech-and-sketch interface on a PDA, again with rela-
tively little effort. Based on our experience, we feel that 
the IS approach to dialogue management as espoused by 
TRINDI is a strong candidate for supporting both com-
plexity and portability.  In the remainder of this paper, 
we discuss some implementational drawbacks of 
TRINDIKit, and our work underway to develop a new 
toolkit, inspired by TRINDIKit but re-engineered to 
eliminate its drawbacks. 
2 
3 
Implementational Drawbacks 
Data consistency. TRINDIKit does not exercise good 
controls over asynchronous modifications to the IS. At 
one point we had to build artificial delays into our sys-
tem to work around these limitations. The DM we built 
was based on GoDiS, which requires very structured 
turn-taking. In several cases, however, the interactions 
with the user flowed better if these responses were 
automatic. Processing was sufficiently slow that our 
GUI?s automatic acknowledgement often arrived and 
was processed before TRINDIKit was finished cleaning 
up from the previous utterance. As a result, it was pos-
sible to change the IS twice before the DME could re-
spond to one change, and the system lost track of the 
dialogue state. Consistency of data needs to be assured 
throughout the design of the system. 
Inconsistent semantics. We encountered situations 
where constructs of the GoDiS plan language were in-
terpreted differently depending on the depth of the plan. 
With the proliferation of small languages implemented 
by different sets of macros, it was difficult to track 
down bugs in the rules and conversation scripts. This 
was made more difficult by the nature of Prolog. 
Clauses that fail do not normally generate any error 
messages, because failure is a normal aspect of program 
execution. Unfortunately, database bugs and misspelled 
names often caused unexpected failures, causing the 
system to generate either no response or a response that 
looked reasonable but was in fact incorrect. We feel it?s 
necessary to provide explicit notification of certain 
kinds of failure, such as failure to find a named variable, 
failure to find a matching value in a table, and so on. 
Multimodal processing. Neither TRINDIKit nor 
GoDiS provides any direct support for multimodal 
processing. The primary interface driving the develop-
ment of these systems was language; there is no separa-
tion of events by source, no temporal tagging of input 
events, and no provision for assessing temporal relation-
ships between different inputs. 
Proposed Solutions 
From our experience with TRINDIKit, we are con-
vinced of the advantages of a kit-based approach. We 
feel that TRINDIKit was a good first cut at it, and hope 
that our efforts will lead to a second, somewhat better 
iteration.  We are therefore moving ahead with a new 
DM kit, tentatively called MIDIKI (MITRE DIalogue 
KIt), with the following features. 
Distributed information state. We have chosen to 
model all of our module interactions as if they were 
asynchronous. This provides the cleanest separation of 
modules, and the cleanest conceptual integration with 
the asynchronous requirements of robot control. Our 
approach to solving this problem is to define an explicit 
interface definition language, which will be used to de-
fine every module?s interface with the outside world. 
We explicitly include the information state structure in 
this interface definition, perhaps as a module in itself. 
Since TRINDIKit does not include a separate language 
for specifying module interfaces, we are designing our 
own. This language is analogous to CORBA Interface 
Definition Language, but with less concern for the 
physical implementation. 
Controlled extensibility. Our interface specifications 
will need to be translated into specific computer lan-
guages before they can be executed. The translation will 
vary depending on the underlying protocol used to 
communicate between modules. While we want to sup-
port the widest possible audience, we don?t want to get 
bogged down in the construction of translators for every 
possible set of implementation language and protocol. 
Our approach is to exploit an existing standard set of 
translation software, namely XML and XSLT proces-
sors such as Xalan. We are specifying a dialect of XML 
for modules interface definitions, and a small set of 
templates for realizing interfaces with specific combina-
tions of programming language and protocol. Additional 
templates can be written to extend the kit to other lan-
guages and protocols without requiring modification of 
the kit itself. 
Rule engine. The DME rules in TRINDIKit have 
strong similarities to rules in expert systems. We plan to 
implement these rules in both a sequential form, equiva-
lent to the current TRINDIKit, and in an expert system 
form which may be more efficient. We expect that there 
will be differences in operating characteristics between 
those two styles, and we want to identify and quantify 
those differences. 
Control and synchronization. Our primary focus is 
multimodal communication, potentially multiparty as 
well. We are extending TRINDIKit?s triggers to include 
support for consideration of temporal relationships be-
tween events, both within and across modes. 
Integrated environment. An ideal toolkit would 
have an integrated set of tools for designing, testing, and 
debugging dialogues. We would like to support static 
and dynamic analysis of dialogues, recording and play-
back of dialogues, graphical dialogue design tools, a 
?validation suite? of tests to support extension of the 
toolkit to new programming languages and agent proto-
cols, and above all, the ability to plug-in as-yet-
undefined capabilities. 
4 Future Work 
Significant effort has been devoted to defining our mu-
table language capability. This capability provides both 
a transition path from TRINDIKit scripts and a means 
for specifying module interfaces and information state 
structure using a common XML representation. 
Our intent is to provide support for several different 
transport mechanisms to explore the limitations of our 
approach. To date, we have completed an initial inter-
face definition specification and have developed tem-
plates to realize those interfaces with the OAA.  
DARPA's Galaxy Communicator is the second transport 
mechanism we will be considering.  
We have devoted considerable time to up-front con-
sideration of scripting languages, portable code genera-
tion, and module communications, and are now 
beginning the task of implementing our versions of the 
TRINDIKit scripting languages. Our target realization 
for these scripts is a combination of Java code and ex-
pert systems that can be executed within a Java pro-
gram. 
We plan to port and formally evaluate our dialogue 
toolkit within three domains (question-answering, 
automated tutoring, and multimodal robot control). Our 
dialogue toolkit will be openly available, as well as 
sample implementations for each of these domains. 
References 
Aust, H. and Schroer, O. (1998) An overview of the 
Philips dialog system. DARPA Broadcast News 
Transcription and Understanding Workshop, Lans-
downe, VA. 
Bernsen, N. O., Dybkj?r, H. and Dybkj?r, L. (1998) 
Designing interactive speech systems. From first 
ideas to user testing. Springer Verlag. 
Burke, C., Harper, L., and Loehr, D. (2002) A Flexible 
Architecture for a Multimodal Robot Control Inter-
face.  Intelligent Situation-Aware Media and Presen-
tations Workshop, AAAI '02. 
CISD (Conversational Interaction and Spoken Dialogue 
Research Group) (2000) ?TRIPS: The Rochester In-
teractive Planning System?, URL (Mar 2003): 
http://www.cs.rochester.edu/research/trips. 
Cooper, R., and Larsson S. (1998) Dialogue Moves and 
Information States, Third International Workshop on 
Computational Semantics. 
CSLU (Center for Spoken Language Understanding) 
(2002) ?CSLU Toolkit?, URL (Mar 2003): 
http://cslu.cse.ogi.edu/toolkit. 
Gustafson, J., Elmberg, P., Carlson,R., and J?nsson, A. 
(1998) An educational dialogue system with a user 
controllable dialogue manager. ICSLP? 98. 
Larsson, Staffan, Robin Cooper, Stina Ericsson (2000) 
System Description of GoDis.  Third Workshop in 
Human-Computer Conversation, Bellagio, Italy. 
Rich, C., Lesh, N. and Sidner, C. (2001) COLLAGEN: 
Applying Collaborative Discourse Theory.  AI 
Magazine, Special Issue on Intelligent User Inter-
faces. 
TRINDI (2002) ?TRINDIKit?, URL (Mar 2003): 
http://www.ling.gu.se/projekt/trindi/trindikit. 
Unisys (1998) ?Unisys Corporation: Natural language 
speech assistant (NLSA): capabilities overview?. 
Malvern, PA. 
