Chinese Word Segmentation based on Mixing Model 
Wei Jiang          Jian Zhao          Yi Guan          Zhiming Xu  
ITNLP, Harbin Institute of Technology,  Heilongjiang Province, 150001 China 
jiangwei@insun.hit.edu.cn
Abstract
This paper presents our recent work for 
participation in the Second Interna-
tional Chinese Word Segmentation 
Bakeoff. According to difficulties, we 
divide word segmentation into several 
sub-tasks, which are solved by mixed 
language models, so as to take advan-
tage of each approach in addressing 
special problems. The experiment indi-
cated that this system achieved 96.7% 
and 97.2% in F-measure in PKU and 
MSR open test respectively. 
1 Introduction 
Word is a logical semantic and syntactic unit in 
natural language. So word segmentation is the 
foundation of most Chinese NLP tasks. Though 
much progress has been made in the last two 
decades, there is no existing model that can 
solve all the problems perfectly at present. So 
we try to apply different language models to 
solve each special sub-task, due to ?No Free 
Lunch Theorem? and ?Ugly Duckling Theorem?. 
Our system participated in the Second Inter-
national Chinese Word Segmentation Bakeoff 
(henceforce, the bakeoff) held in 2005. Recently, 
we have done more work in dealing with three 
main sub-tasks: (1) Segmentation disambigua-
tion; (2) Named entities recognition; (3) New 
words1 detection. We apply different approachs 
to solve above three problems, and all the mod-
ules are integrated into a pragmatic system 
(ELUS). Due to the limitation of available re-
source, some kinds of features, e.g. POS, have 
been erased in our participation system. This 
segmenter will be briefly describled in this paper. 
                                                          
1 New words refer to this kind of out-of ?vocabulary words 
that are neither recognized named entities or factoid words 
nor morphological words. 
2 ELUS Segmenter 
All the words are categorized into five types: 
Lexicon words (LW), Factoid words (FT), Mor-
phologically derived words (MDW), Named 
entities (NE), and New words (NW). Accord-
ingly, four main modules are included to iden-
tify each kind of words, as shown in Figure 1.  
Class-based trigram model (Gao 2004) is 
adopted in the Basic Segmentation to convert 
the sentence into a word sequence. Let w = w1
w2 ?wn be a word class sequence, then the most 
likely word class sequence w* in trigram is: 
?
 
 
n
i
iii
www
wwwP
n 1
12 )|(maxarg*
21 
w ,
where let P(w0|w-2 w-1) be P(w0) and let 
P(w1|w-1 w0) be P(w1|w0). And wi represents LW 
or a type of FT or MDW. Viterbi algorithm is 
used to search the best candidate. Absolute 
smoothing algorithm is applied to overcome the 
data sparseness. Here, LW, FT and MDW are 
idendified (Zhao Yan 2005). All the Factoid 
words can be represented as regular expressions. 
As a result, the detection of factoid words can be 
archieved by Finite State Machines. 
Figure 1 ELUS Segmenter 
Factoid Detect
Morphology Word
Lexicon words
String
Result
NE Recognization
Sentence
Basic Segmentation
NW Detection
Disambiguation
180
Four kinds of Named entities are detected, i.e. 
Chinese person name, foreign person name, lo-
cation name and orgnization name. This is the 
most complicated module in ELUS.  
Three kinds of models are applied here. 
HMM model (one order) is described as: 
?
 
 
n
i
iiii
TTT
TTPTWP
n 1
1
# )|()|(maxarg
21 
T ,
where iT  represents the tag of current word,  
Viterbi algorithm is used to search the best path. 
Another model is Maximum Entropy (Zhao Jian 
2005, Hai Leong Chieu 2002). Take Chinese 
person name as example. Firstly, we combine 
HMM and Maximum Entropy (ME) model to 
lable the person name tag, e.g. ??/CPB ?/CPI  
?/CPI? (Tongmei Yao); Secondly, the tagged  
name is merged by combining ME Model and 
Support Vector Machine (SVM) and some aided 
rules, e.g. merged into ??/??? in PKU test.
Some complex features are added into ME 
model (described in Zhao Jian 2005), in addition, 
we also collect more than 110,000 person names, 
and acquire the statistic about common name 
characters, these kinds of features are also fused 
into the ME model to detect NE. The other kinds 
of NE recognition adopt similar method, except 
for individual features. 
New Words is another important kind of 
OOV words, especially in closed test. Take PKU 
test as example, we collect NW suffixes, such as 
???(city),???(lamp). Those usually construct 
new words, e.g. ?????(sighting lamp). 
A variance-based method is used to collect 
suffixes. And three points need to be consid-
ered:(1) It is tail of many words;(2) It has large 
variance in constructing word;(3) It is seldom 
used alone. We acquire about 25 common suf-
fixes in PKU training corpus by above method. 
We use Local Maximum Entropy model, e.g. 
??? /1 ? /1?(Huanggang city), i.e. only the 
nearer characters are judged before the suffix 
??? (city). By our approach, the training corpus 
can be generated via given PKU corpus in the 
bakeoff. The features come from the nearer con-
text, besides, common single words and punc-
tuations are not regarded as a part of New Word. 
The last module is Word Disambiugation. 
Word segmentation ambiguities are usually clas-
sified into two classes: overlapping ambiguity 
and combination ambiguity. By evaluating 
ELUS, the most segmentation errors are one 
segmentation errors (about 95%). i.e. the two 
words on both sides of current segmentation 
errors are right. These include LW ambiguities 
and FT ambiguities etc. Here, we adopt Maxi-
mum Entropy model. The same as other mod-
ules, it is defined over HhT in segmentation 
disambiguation, where H is the set of possible 
contexts around target word that will be tagged, 
and T is the set of allowable tags. Then the 
model?s conditional probability is defined as 
? ? Tt thp
thphtp
'
)',(
),()|(
, where 
?
 
 
k
j
thf
j
jthp
1
),(),( DSP
where h is current context and t is one of the 
possible tags. The ambiguous words are mainly 
collected by evaluating our system.  
In NE module and Word Disambiguation 
module, we introduce rough rule features, which 
are extracted by Rough Set (Wang Xiaolong 
2004), e.g. ???????(display ability), ??
???/??(only? can just), ???+person+?
?? (the reporter+person+report). Previous ex-
periment had indicated word disambiguation 
could achieve better performance by applying 
Rough Set. 
3 Performance and analysis 
The performance of ELUS in the bakeoff is pre-
sented in Table 1 and Table 2 respectively, in 
terms of recall(R), precision(P) and F score in 
percentages.
Table 1 Closed test, in percentages (%) 
Closed R P F OOV Roov Riv
PKU 95.4 92.7 94.1 5.8 51.8 98.1
MSR 97.3 94.5 95.9 2.6 32.3 99.1
CITYU 93.4 86.5 89.8 7.4 24.8 98.9
AS 94.3 89.5 91.8 4.3 13.7 97.9
Table 2 Open test, in percentages (%) 
Open R P F OOV Roov Riv
PKU 96.8 96.6 96.7 5.8 82.6 97.7
MSR 98.0 96.5 97.2 2.6 59.0 99.0
CITYU 94.6 89.8 92.2 7.4 41.7 98.9
AS 95.2 92.0 93.6 4.3 35.4 97.9
Our system has good performance in terms 
of F-measure in simplified Chinese open test, 
including PKU and MSR open test. In addition, 
181
its IV word identification performance is re-
markable, ranging from 97.7% to 99.1%, stands 
at the top or nearer the top in all the tests in 
which we have participated. This good perform-
ance owes to class-based trigram, absolute 
smoothing and word disambiguation module and 
rough rules. 
There is almost the same IV performance be-
tween open test and closed test in MSR, CITYU 
and AS respectively, because we adopt the same 
Lexicon between open test and closed test re-
spectively. While in open test of PKU, we adopt 
another Lexicon that comes from six-month 
corpora of Peoples? Daily (China) in 1998, 
which were also annotated by Peking University. 
The OOV word identification performance 
seems uneven, compared with PKU, the other 
tests seem lower, due to the following reasons: 
 (1) Because of our resource limitation, NE 
training resource is six-month corpora of Peo-
ples? Daily (China) in 1998, which came from 
Peking University, and some newspapers and 
web pages annotated by our laboratory;  
(2) We have no traditional Chinese corpus, 
so the NE training resource for CITYU and AS 
is acquired via converting above corpora. Since 
these corpora are converted from simplified 
Chinese, they are not well suitable to traditional 
Chinese corpora;
(3) The different corpora have different crite-
rions in NE detection, especially in location 
name and organization name, e.g. ????/??
/??? (Cuicun Town Xiangtang Hogpen) in 
PKU and ????????? in MSR criterion. 
Even if our system recognizes the ????/?/
?/??? as a orgnization name, we are not eas-
ily to regard ??? ? as one word in PKU, 
since ???? isn?t a lexical word. However in 
MSR, that is easy, because its criterion regard 
the whole Orgnization as a word;
(4) We need do more to comply with the 
segmentation criterion, e.g. ?????(outlier) in 
CITYU come from ???? + ???, while this 
kind of false segment is due to our bad under-
standing to CITYU criterion. 
Though there are above problems, our sys-
tem does well in regonization precision, since 
we adopt two steps in recognizing NE, especial 
in recognizing Chinese person name. And from 
the result of evalution in the bakeoff, we need to 
improve the NE recall in the future.  
In order to make our New words comply 
with the criterion, we conservatively use New 
Word Detection module, in order to avoid hav-
ing bad recognition result, since each corpus has 
its own New Word criterion.
4 Conclusion and Future work 
We have briefly describled our system based on 
mixed models. Different approachs are adopted 
to solve each special sub-task, since there is ?No 
Free Lunch Theorem?. And mixed models are 
used in NE detection. This sytem has a good 
performance in the simplified Chinese in the 
bakeoff.
The future work is mainly concentrating on 
two directions: finding effective features and 
delicately adjusting internal relations among 
different modules, in order to improve segmen-
tation performance. 
References
Fu Fuohong. 2000. Research on Statistical Methods 
of Chinese Syntactic Disambiguation. Ph.D. The-
sis. Harbin Institute of Technology, China. 
Hai Leong Chieu, Hwee Tou Ng. Named Entity. 
Recognition: A Maximum Entropy Approach Us-
ing Global. Information. Proceedings of the 19th 
International Conference. on Computational Lin-
guistics, 2002. 
Hua-Ping Zhang, Qun Liu etc. 2003. Chinese Lexical 
Analysis Using Hierarchical Hidden Markov 
Model, Second SIGHAN workshop affiliated with 
4th ACL, Sapporo Japan, pp.63-70, July 2003. 
Jianfeng Gao, Mu Li et al 2004. Chinese Word 
Segmentation: A Pragmatic Approach. MSR-TR-
2004-123, November 2004. 
Wang Xiaolong, Chen Qingcai, and Daniel S.Yeung. 
2004. Mining PinYin-to-Character Conversion 
Rules From Large-Scale Corpus: A Rough Set Ap-
proach, IEEE TRANSACTION ON SYSTEMS, 
MAN. AND CYBERNETICS-PART 
B:CYBERNETICS. VOL. 34, NO.2, APRIL. 
Zhao Jian, Wang Xiao-long et al 2005. Comparing 
Features Combination with Features Fusion in 
Chinese Named Entity Recognition. Computer 
Application. China. 
Zhao Yan. 2005. Research on Chinese Morpheme 
Analysis Based on Statistic Language Model. 
Ph.D. Thesis. Harbin Institute of Technology, 
China. 
182
