Proceedings of the Workshop on A Broader Perspective on Multiword Expressions, pages 73?80,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Semantic Labeling of Compound Nominalization in Chinese
Jinglei Zhao, Hui Liu & Ruzhan Lu
Department of Computer Science
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
800 Dongchuan Road Shanghai, China
{zjl,lh charles,rzlu}@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
This paper discusses the semantic interpre-
tation of compound nominalizations in Chi-
nese. We propose four coarse-grained se-
mantic roles of the noun modifier and use a
Maximum Entropy Model to label such re-
lations in a compound nominalization. The
feature functions used for the model are
web-based statistics acquired via role related
paraphrase patterns, which are formed by a
set of word instances of prepositions, sup-
port verbs, feature nouns and aspect mark-
ers. By applying a sub-linear transformation
and discretization of the raw statistics, a rate
of approximately 77% is obtained for classi-
fication of the four semantic relations.
1 Introduction
A nominal compound (NC) is the concatenation of
any two or more nominal concepts which functions
as a third nominal concept (Finin, 1980). (Leonard,
1984) observed that the amount of NCs had been in-
creasing explosively in English in recent years. NCs
such as satellite navigation system are abundant in
news and technical texts. In other languages such as
Chinese, NCs have been more productive since ear-
lier days as evidenced by the fact that many simple
words in Chinese are actually a result of compound-
ing of morphemes.
Many aspects in Natural Language Processing
(NLP), such as machine translation, information re-
trieval, question answering, etc. call for the auto-
matic interpretation of NCs, that is, making explicit
the underlying semantic relationships between the
constituent concepts. For example, the semantic re-
lations involved in satellite communication system
can be expressed by the conceptual graph (Sowa,
1984) in Figure 1, in which, for instance, the se-
mantic relation between satellite and communica-
tion is MANNER. Due to the productivity of NCs
and the lack of syntactic clues to guide the interpre-
tation process, the automatic interpretation of NCs
has been proven to be a very difficult problem in
NLP.
In this paper, we deal with the semantic interpre-
tation of NCs in Chinese. Especially, we will fo-
cus on a subset of NCs in which the head word is a
verb nominalization. Nominalization is a common
phenomenon across languages in which a predica-
tive expression is transformed to refer to an event
or a property. For example, the English verb com-
municate has the related nominalized form commu-
nication. Different from English, Chinese has little
morphology. Verb nominalization in Chinese has the
same form as the verb predicate.
Nominalizations retain the argument structure of
the corresponding predicates. The semantic relation
between a noun modifier and a verb nominalization
head can be characterized by the semantic role the
modifier can take respecting to the corresponding
verb predicate. Our method uses a Maximum En-
tropy model to label coarse-grained semantic roles
in Chinese compound nominalizations. Unlike most
approaches in compound interpretation and seman-
tic role labeling, we don?t exploit features from
any parsed texts or lexical knowledge sources. In-
stead, features are acquired using web-based statis-
73
[satellite]m(MANNER)m[communication]m(TELIC)m[system] 
Figure 1: The conceptual graph for satellite communication system
tics (PMI-IR) produced from paraphrase patterns of
the compound Nominalization.
The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-
lows: Section 2 describes related works. Section
3 describes the semantic relations for our labeling
task. Section 4 introduces the paraphrase patterns
used. Section 5 gives a detailed description of our
algorithm. Section 6 presents the experimental re-
sult. Finally, in Section 7, we give the conclusions
and discuss future work.
2 Related Works
2.1 Nominal Compound Interpretation
The methods used in the semantic interpretation of
NCs fall into two main categories: rule-based ones
and statistic-based ones. The rule-based approaches
such as (Finin, 1980; Mcdonald, 1982; Leonard,
1984; Vanderwende, 1995) think that the interpreta-
tion of NCs depends heavily on the constituent con-
cepts and model the semantic interpretation as a slot-
filling process. Various rules are employed by such
approaches to determine, for example, whether the
modifier can fill in one slot of the head.
The statistic-based approaches view the seman-
tic interpretation as a multi-class classification prob-
lem. (Rosario and Hearst, 2001; Moldovan et al,
2004; Kim and Baldwin, 2005) use supervised meth-
ods and explore classification features from a simple
structured type hierarchy. (Kim and Baldwin, 2006)
use a set of seed verbs to characterize the semantic
relation between the constituent nouns and explores
a parsed corpus to classify NCs. (Turney, 2005) uses
latent relational analysis to classify NCs. The simi-
larity between two NCs is characterized by the sim-
ilarity between their related pattern set.
(Lauer, 1995) is the first to use paraphrase based
unsupervised statistical models to classify semantic
relations of NCs. (Lapata, 2000; Grover et al, 2005;
Nicholson, 2005) use paraphrase statistics computed
from parsed texts to interpret compound nominaliza-
tion, but the relations used are purely syntactic. La-
pata(2000) only classifies syntactic relations of sub-
ject and object. Grover(2005) and Nicholson (2005)
classify relations of subject, object and prepositional
object.
2.2 Semantic Role Labeling of Nominalization
Most previous work on semantic role labeling of
nominalizations are conducted in the situation where
a verb nominalization is the head of a general noun
phrase. (Dahl et al, 1987; Hull and Gomez, 1996)
use hand-coded slot-filling rules to determine the se-
mantic roles of the arguments of a nominalization.
In such approaches, first, parsers are used to identify
syntactic clues such as prepositional types. Then,
rules are applied to label semantic roles according
to clues and constraints of different roles.
Supervised machine learning methods become
prevalent in recent years in semantic role labeling
of verb nominalizations as part of the resurgence
of research in shallow semantic analysis. (Pradhan
et al, 2004) use a SVM classifier for the semantic
role labeling of nominalizations in English and Chi-
nese based on the FrameNet database and the Chi-
nese PropBank respectively. (Xue, 2006) uses the
Chinese Nombank to label nominalizations in Chi-
nese. Compared to English, the main difficulty of
using supervised method for Chinese, as noted by
Xue (2006), is that the precision of current parsers
of Chinese is very low due to the lack of morphol-
ogy, difficulty in segmentation and lack of sufficient
training materials in Chinese.
2.3 Web as a large Corpus
Data sparseness is the most notorious hinder for ap-
plying statistical methods in natural language pro-
cessing. However, the World Wide Web can be seen
as a large corpus. (Grefenstette and Nioche, 2000;
Jones and Ghani, 2000) use the web to generate cor-
pora for languages for which electronic resources
are scarce. (Zhu and Rosenfeld, 2001) use Web-
based n-gram counts for language modeling. (Keller
and Lapata, 2003) show that Web page counts and
n-gram frequency counts are highly correlated in a
log scale.
74
3 Semantic Relations
Although verb nominalization is commonly con-
sidered to have arguments as the verb predicate,
Xue(2006) finds that there tend to be fewer argu-
ments and fewer types of adjuncts in verb nomi-
nalizations compared to verb predicates in Chinese.
We argue that this phenomenon is more obvious in
compound nominalization. By analyzing a set of
compound nominalizations of length two from a bal-
anced corpus(Jin et al, 2003), we find the semantic
relations between a noun modifier and a verb nomi-
nalization head can be characterized by four coarse-
grained semantic roles: Proto-Agent (PA), Proto-
Patient (PP), Range (RA) and Manner (MA). This
is illustrated by Table1.
Relations Examples
PA ???? (Blood Circulation)
ja[? (Bird Migration)
PP ??+n (Enterprise Management)
???a (Animal Categorization)
MA -1; (Laser Storage)
?(?& (Satellite Communication)
RA ??? (Global Positioning)
?u (Long-time Development)
Table 1: Semantic Relations between Noun Modifier
and Verb Nominalization Head.
Due to the linking between semantic roles and
syntactic roles (Dowty, 1991), the relations above
overlap with syntactic roles, for example, Proto-
Agent with Subject and Proto-Patient with Object,
but they are not the same, as illustrated by the
example ???a(Animal Categorization). Al-
though the predicate ?a(categorize) in Chinese is
an intransitive verb, the semantic relation between
??(animal) and ?a(categorization) is Proto-
Patient.
4 Paraphrase Patterns
4.1 Motivations
Syntactic patterns provide clues for semantic rela-
tions (Hearst, 1992). For example, Hearst(1992)
uses the pattern ?NP such as List? to indicate that
nouns in List are hyponyms of NP. To classify the
four semantic relations listed in section 3, we pro-
pose some domain independent surface paraphrase
patterns to characterize each semantic relation. The
patterns we adopted mainly exploit a set of word in-
stances of prepositions, support verbs, feature nouns
and aspect markers.
Prepositions are strong indicators of semantic
roles in Chinese. For example, in sentence 1), the
preposition r(ba) indicates that the noun ?(door)
and ?n(Zhangsan) is the Proto-Patient and Proto-
Agent of verb?(lock) respectively.
1) a. ?nr???
b. Zhangsan ba door locked.
c. Zhangsan locked the door.
The prepositions we use to characterize each rela-
tion are listed in table 2.
Relations Prepositional Indicators
PP 