Proceedings of Human Language Technology Conference and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (HLT/EMNLP), pages 499?506, Vancouver, October 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Mining Context Specific Similarity Relationships Using The World Wide 
Web 
Dmitri Roussinov Leon J. Zhao Weiguo Fan 
Department of Information Systems 
W.P. Carey School of Business 
Department of Management 
Information Systems 
Department of Information 
Systems 
Arizona State University University of Arizona Virginia Tech 
Tempe, AZ, 85287 Tucson, AZ 85721 Blacksburg, VA 24061 
dmitri.roussinov@asu.edu lzhao@bpa.arizona.edu wfan@vt.edu 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
We have studied how context specific web 
corpus can be automatically created and 
mined for discovering semantic similarity 
relationships between terms (words or 
phrases) from a given collection of 
documents (target collection). These 
relationships between terms can be used to 
adjust the standard vectors space 
representation so as to improve the 
accuracy of similarity computation between 
text documents in the target collection. Our 
experiments with a standard test collection 
(Reuters) have revealed the reduction of 
similarity errors by up to 50%, twice as 
much as the improvement by using other 
known techniques.  
1 Introduction 
Many modern information management tasks such as 
document retrieval, clustering, filtering and 
summarization rely on algorithms that compute 
similarity between text documents. For example, 
clustering algorithms, by definition, place documents 
similar to each other into the same cluster. Topic 
detection algorithms attempt to detect documents or 
passages similar to those already presented to the 
users. ?Query by example? retrieval is based on 
similarity between a document selected as example 
and the other ones in the collection. Even a classical 
retrieval task can be formulated as rank ordering 
according to the similarity between the document 
(typically very short) representing user?s query and 
all the documents in the collection. 
For similarity computation, text documents are 
represented by terms (words or phrases) that they 
have, and encoded by vectors according to a 
predominantly used vector space model (Salton & 
McGill, 1983). Each coordinate corresponds to a 
term (word or phrase) possibly present within a 
document. Within that model, a high similarity 
between a pair of documents can be only indicated 
by sharing same terms. This approach has apparent 
limitations due to the notorious vocabulary problem 
(Furnas et al, 1997): people very often use different 
words to describe semantically similar objects. For 
example, within a classical vector space model, the 
similarity algorithm would treat words car and 
automobile as entirely different, ignoring semantic 
similarity relationship between them. 
It has been known for a long time that semantic 
similarity relationships between terms can be 
discovered by their co-occurrence in the same 
documents or in the vicinity of each other within 
documents (von Rijsbergen, 1977).  Until the 1990s, 
the studies exploring co-occurrence information for 
building a thesaurus and using it in automated query 
expansion (adding similar words to the user query) 
resulted in mixed results (Minker et al, 1972; Peat & 
Willett, 1991). The earlier difficulties may have 
resulted from the following reasons: 
1) The test collections were small, sometimes only 
few dozens of documents. Thus, there was only a 
small amount of data available for statistical co-
occurrence analysis (mining), not enough to establish 
reliable associations. 
2) The evaluation experiments were based on 
retrieval tasks,  short, manually composed queries. 
The queries were at times ambiguous and, as a result, 
wrong terms were frequently added to the query. E.g. 
initial query ?jaguar? may be expanded with the 
words ?auto?, ?power?, ?engine? since they co-occur 
with ?jaguar? in auto related documents. But, if the 
user was actually referring to an animal then the 
retrieval accuracy would degrade after the expansion.  
3) The expansion models were overly simplistic, e.g. 
by merely adding more keywords to Boolean queries 
(e.g. ?jaguar OR auto OR power OR car?). 
Although more recent works removed some of the 
limitations and produced more encouraging results 
(Grefenstette, 1994; Church et al, 1991; Hearst et 
al., 1992;  Schutze and Pedersen, 1997; Voorhees, 
1994) there are still a number of questions that 
remain open: 
1) What is the range for the magnitude of the 
improvement. Can the effect be of practical 
importance?  
2) What are the best mining algorithms and 
formulas? How crucial is the right choice of them? 
3) What is the best way to select a corpus for 
mining? Specifically, is it enough to mine only 
within the same collection that is involved in 
retrieval, clustering or other processing (target 
collection), or constructing and mining a larger 
499
external corpus (like a subset of World Wide Web) 
would be of much greater help? 
4) Even if the techniques studied earlier are effective 
(or not) for query expansion within the document 
retrieval paradigm, are they also effective for a more 
general task of document similarity computation? 
Similarity computation stays behind almost all 
information retrieval tasks including text document 
retrieval, summarization, clustering, categorization, 
query by example etc. Since documents are typically 
longer than user composed queries, their vector 
space representations are much richer and thus 
expanding them may be more reliable due to implicit 
disambiguation. 
Answering these questions constitutes the novelty of 
our work. We have developed a Context Specific 
Similarity Expansion (CSSE) technique based on 
word co-occurrence analysis within pages 
automatically harvested from the WWW (Web 
corpus) and performed extensive testing with a well 
known Reuters collection (Lewis, 1997). To test the 
similarity computation accuracy, we designed a 
simple combinatorial metric which reflects how 
accurately (as compared to human judgments) the 
algorithm, given a document in the collection, orders 
all the other documents in the collection by the 
perceived (computed) similarity. We believe that 
using this metric is more objective and reliable than 
trying to include all the traditional metrics specific to 
each application (e.g. recall/precision for document 
retrieval, type I/II errors for categorization, 
clustering accuracy etc.) since the latter may depend 
on the other algorithmic and implementation details 
in the system. For example, most clustering 
algorithms rely on the notion of similarity between 
text documents, but each algorithm (k-means, 
minimum variance, single link, etc.) follows its own 
strategy to maximize similarity within a cluster. 
We have found out that our CSSE technique have 
reduced similarity errors by up to 50%, twice as 
much as the improvement due to using other known 
techniques such as Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) 
and Pseudo Relevance Feedback (PRF) within the 
same experimental framework. In addition to this 
dramatic improvement, we have established the 
importance of the following for the success of the 
expansion: 1) using external corpus (a constructed 
subset of WWW) in addition to the target collection 
2) taking the context of the target collection into 
consideration 3) using the appropriate mining 
formulas. We suggest that these three crucial 
components within our technique make it 
significantly distinct from those explored early and 
also explain more encouraging results.  
The paper is structured as follows.  Section 2 
discusses previous research  results that are closely 
related to our investigation.  Section 3 presents  
algorithms implemented in our experiments. Section 
4 describes our  experiments including error 
reduction, sensitivity analysis, and  comparison with 
other techniques.  Finally, Section 5 concludes the 
paper by explaining our key contributions and 
outlining our future research. 
2 Related Work 
Most of the prior works performed only mining 
within the target collection itself and revealed results 
ranging from small improvements to negative effects 
(degrading performance). Throughout our paper, we 
refer to them as self -mining to distinguish from 
mining external corpus, which we believe is more 
promising for similarity computation between 
documents due to the following intuitive 
consideration. Within self-mining paradigm, terms t1 
and t2 have to frequently co-occur in the collection 
in order to be detected as associated (synonymic). In 
that case, expanding document D representation with 
a term t2 when the document already has term t1 is 
not statistically likely to enrich its representation 
since t2 is likely to be in document D anyway. We 
believe mining external larger and contextually 
related corpus has the potential to discover more 
interesting associations with much higher reliability 
than just from the target collection. That is why, this 
paper focuses on constructing and mining the 
external corpus.  
There are very few studies that used external corpus 
and standard evaluation collections. Grefenstette 
(1994) automatically built a thesaurus and applied it 
for query expansion, producing better results than 
using the original queries. Gauch et al (1998) used 
one standard collection for mining (TREC4) and 
another (TREC5) for testing and achieved 7.6% 
improvement. They also achieved 28.5% 
improvement on the narrow-domain Cystic Fibrosis 
collection. Kwok (1998) also reported similar results 
with TREC non Web collections.  Ballesteros and 
Croft (1998) used unlinked corpora to reduce the 
ambiguity associated with phrasal and term 
translation in Cross-Language Retrieval. 
There are even fewer studies involving semantic 
mining on the Web and its methodological 
evaluation. G?ry and Haddad G?ry (1999) used 
about 60,000 documents from one specific domain 
for mining similarity among French terms and tested 
the results using 4 ad hoc queries. Sugiura and 
Etzioni (2000) developed a tool called Q-Pilot that 
mined the web pages retrieved by commercial search 
engines and expanded the user query by adding 
similar terms. They reported preliminary yet 
encouraging results but tested only the overall 
system, which includes the other, not directly related 
to mining features, such as clustering, pseudo-
relevance feedback, and selecting the appropriate 
external search engine. Furthermore, they only used 
the correctness of the engine selection as the 
evaluation metric . There are some other well known 
techniques that do not perform mining for a 
thesaurus explicitly but still capture and utilize 
semantic similarity between the terms in an implicit 
way, namely Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) and 
Pseudo Relevance Feedback (PRF). Latent Semantic 
Indexing (Analysis) (Deerwester et al, 1998) a 
technique based on Singular Value Decomposition, 
was studied in a number of works . It reduces the 
number of dimensions in the document space thus 
reducing the noise (linguistic variations) and 
bringing semantically similar terms together, thus it 
500
takes into consideration the correlation between the 
terms. The reported improvements so far however 
have not exceeded 10-15% in standard collections) 
and sensitive to the choice of the semantic axis 
(reduced dimensions). The general idea behind the 
Pseudo Relevance Feedback (PRF) (Croft & 
Harper, 1979) or its more recent variation called 
Local Context Analysis (Xu & Croft, 2000) is to 
assume that the top rank retrieved documents are 
relevant and use certain terms from them for the 
query expansion. A simple approach has been found 
to increase performance over 23% on the TREC3 
and TREC4 collections and became internal part of 
modern IR systems. Although this idea has been only 
applied so far to users? queries, we extended it in this 
study to similarity computation between documents 
in order to compare with our approach. Although we 
believe this extension is novel, it is not the focus of 
this study. It is also worth mentioning that both LSI 
and PRF fall into ?self-mining? category since they 
do not require external corpus.  
A manually built and maintained ontology (a 
thesaurus), such as WorldNet, may serve as a source 
of similarity between terms and has been shown to 
be useful for retrieval tasks (Voorhees, 1994). 
However, one major drawback of manual approach 
is high cost of creating and maintaining. Besides, the 
similarity between terms is context specific. For 
example, for a campus computer support center the 
words student, faculty, user are almost synonyms, 
but for designers of educational software (e.g. 
Blackboard), the words student and faculty would 
represent entirely different roles. 
Although the terms ?mining?, ?web mining? and 
?knowledge discovery? have been used by other 
researchers in various contexts (Cooley, 1997), we 
believe it is legitimate to use them to describe our 
work for two major reasons: 1) We use algorithms 
and formulas coming from the data mining field, 
specifically signal to noise ratio association metric  
(Church, 1989; Church, 1991) 2) Our approach 
interacts with commercial search engines and 
harvests web pages contextually close to the target 
collection, and there is mining of resources (the 
search engine database) and discovery of content 
(web pages) involved. We admit that the term 
?mining? may be also used for a more sophisticated 
or different kind of processing than our approach 
here. 
3 Algorithms And Implementations  
The target collection (Reuters in our experiment) is 
indexed and its most representative terms are used to 
construct a corpus from an external source (e. g. 
World Wide Web). The term-to-term similarity 
matrix is created by co-occurrence analysis within 
the corpus and subsequently used to expand 
document vectors in order to improve the accuracy 
(correctness) of similarity computation between the 
documents in the target collection. Although in this 
work we do not study the effects on the individual 
applications of the similarity computation, it is 
crucial for such tasks as retrieval, clustering, 
categorization or topic detection. 
3.1 Building a Web Corpus  
We designed and implemented a heuristic algorithm 
that takes advantage of the capabilities provided by 
commercial web search engines. In our study, we 
used AltaVista (www.altavista.com), but most other 
search engines would also qualify for the task. 
Ideally, we would like to obtain web pages that 
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4
Average vector change
Er
ro
r R
ed
uc
tio
n 
(%
)
Thresh = .2 
Thresh = .3 
Thresh = .1 
Thresh = .4 
Thresh = .5 Thresh = .6  
Figure 1. The average error reduction (%) as a function of average document vector change Ca for various 
threshold parameters Thresh. 
501
contain the terms from the target collection in the 
similar context.  While constructing Web corpus, our 
spider automatically sends a set of queries to 
AltaVista and obtains the resulting URLs. The spider 
creates one query for each term ti out of 1000 most 
frequent terms in the target collection (stop words 
excluded) according to the following formula: 
qi = ?+? + ti + ? ? + context_hint 
, where + means string concatenation, quotes are 
used to represent text strings literally and 
context_hint is composed of the top most frequent 
terms in the target collection (stop words excluded) 
separated by empty space. Although this way of 
defining context may seem a bit simplistic , it still 
worked surprisingly well for our purpose.  
According to AltaVista, a word or phrase preceded 
by '+' sign has to be present in the search results. The 
presence of the other words and phrases (context hint 
string in our case) is only desirable but not required. 
The total number of the context hint terms (108 in 
this study) is limited by the maximum length of the 
query string that the search engine can accept.  
We chose to use only top 1000 terms for constructing 
corpus to keep the downloading time manageable. 
We believe using a larger corpus would demonstrate 
even larger improvement. Approximately 10% of 
those terms were phrases. We only used the top 200 
hits from each query and only first 20Kbytes of 
HTML source from each page to convert it into plain 
text. After removing duplicate URLs and empty 
pages, we had 19,198 pages in the Web corpus to 
mine.
Downloading took approximately 6 hours and was 
performed in parallel, spawning up to 20 java 
processes at a time, but it still remained the largest 
scalability bottleneck. 
3.2 Semantic Similarity Discovery 
CSSE performs co-occurrence analysis at the 
document level and computes the following values: 
df(t1, t2) is the joint document frequency, i.e., the 
number of web pages where both terms t1 and t2  
occur. df(t) is the document frequency of the term t, 
i.e., the number of web pages in which the term t 
occurs. Then, CSSE applies a well known signal to 
noise ratio formula coming from data mining 
(Church, 1991) to establish similarity between terms 
t1 and t2: 
sim(t1, t2)=
)2()1(
)2,1(log
tdftdf
ttdfN
?
?
/ Nlog ,         (1)  
 
where N is the total number of documents in the 
mining collection (corpus),  
log N is the normalizing factor, so the sim value 
would not exceed 1 and be comparable across 
collections of different size. 
Based on the suggestions from the other studies 
using formula (1), before running our tests, we 
decided to discard as spurious all the co-occurrences 
that happened only within one or two pages and all 
the similarities that are less than the specified 
threshold (Thresh).  
3.3 Vector Expansion 
Since we were modifying document vectors (more 
general case), but not queries as in the majority of 
prior studies, we refer to the process as vector 
expansion. As we wrote in literature review, there 
are many possible heuristic ways to perform vector 
expansion. After preliminary tests, we settled on the 
simple linear modification with post re-normalization 
as presented below. The context of the target 
collection is represented by the similarity matrix 
sim(t1, t2) mined as described in the preceding 
section. Our vector expansion algorithm adds all the 
related terms to the vector representation of the 
document D with the weights proportional to the 
degree of the relationships and the global inverse 
document frequency (IDF) weighting of the added 
terms: 
w(t, D)? = w(t, D) + 
?
? dt tdf
NttsimDtwa
1 )(
log),'(),'( , where 
- 8 0
- 6 0
- 4 0
- 2 0
0
2 0
0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5
A v e r a g e  v e c t o r  c h a n g e
Er
ro
r R
ed
uc
tio
n 
(%
)
Thresh = .6 
Thresh = .4 
Thresh = .3 
Thresh = .5 
Thresh = .2 
Thresh = .1 
Figure 2. The average error reduction (%) as a function of average document vector change Ca for various 
threshold parameters Tresh without ?context hint? terms. 
502
w(t, D) is the initial, not expanded, weight of the 
term t in the document D (assigned according to TF-
IDF weighting scheme in our case); w?(t, D) is the 
modified weight of the term t in the document D; t? 
iterates through all (possibly repeating) terms in the 
document D ; a is the adjustment factor (a parameter 
controlled in the expansion process). 
4 Experiments 
4.1 Similarity Error Reduction 
Since in this study we were primarily concerned with 
improving similarity computation but not retrieval 
per se, we chose a widely used for text categorization 
Reuters collection (Lewis, 1997) over TREC or 
similar collections with relevance judgments. We 
used a modified version of Lewis? (1992) suggestion 
to derive our evaluation metric, which is similar to 
the metric derived from Kruskal-Goodman statistics 
used in Haveliwala et al (2002) for a study with 
Yahoo web directory (www.yahoo.com). Intuitively, 
the metric reflects the probability of algorithm 
guessing the correct order (called ground truth), 
imposed by a manually created hierarchy (simplified 
to a partition in Reuters case). Ideally, for each 
document D, the similarity computation algorithm 
should indicate documents sharing one or more 
Reuters categories with document D to be more 
similar to the document D than the documents not 
sharing any categories with D. We formalized this 
intuitive requirement into a metric by the following 
way. Let?s define a test set Sa to be the set of all the 
document triples (D, D1, D2) such that D?D1, 
D?D2, D1?D2, and furthermore D shares at least one 
common category with D1 but no common 
categories with D2. We defined total error count 
(Ec) as the number of triples in the test set Sa such 
that sim(D, D1) < sim(D, D2) since it should be the 
other way around. Our accuracy metric reported 
below is the total error count normalized by the size 
of the test set Sa: similarity error = Ec / #Sa, 
computed for each Reuters topics and averaged 
across all of them. The metric ranges from 0 (ideal 
case) to .5 (random ordering). It also needed an 
adjustment to provide the necessary continuity as 
justified in the following. Since the documents are 
represented by very sparse vectors, very often (about 
5% of all triples) documents D, D1, D2 do not have 
any terms in common and as a result similarity 
computation results in a tie: sim(D,D1) = sim (D, 
D2). A tie can not be considered an error because in 
that case one can suggest a trivial improvement to 
the similarity algorithm by simply breaking the ties 
at random in any direction with an equal chance, and 
thus reducing errors in 50% of all ties. This is why 
the metric counts half of all the ties as errors, which 
completely removes this discontinuity.  
We used all the Reuters 78 topics from the 
?commodity code? group since they are the most 
?semantic ?, not trying the others (Economic 
Indicator Codes, Currency Codes, Corporate Codes). 
We discarded the topics that had only 1 document 
and used only the documents that had at least one of 
the topics. This reduced our test collection to 1841 
documents, still statistically powerful and 
computationally demanding since millions of triples 
had to be considered (even after some 
straightforward algorithmic optimizations). After 
indexing and stemming (Porter, 1980) the total 
number of unique stems used for the vector 
representation was 11461. 
Weighting 
Scheme 
boolean 
vectors 
TF only  IDF only  TF-
IDF 
Similarity Error 0.1750 0.1609 0.1278 0.1041 
Table 2. Comparison of different weighting schemes 
with the original (not expanded) documents. 
Table 2 lists the similarity error averaged by topics 
for the different weighting schemes we tried first in 
our experiment.  Since TF-IDF weighting was by far 
the best in this evaluation set up, we limited our 
expansion experiments to TF-IDF scheme only. For 
similarity measure between document vectors, we 
used the most common negative Euclidian distance 
after normalizing the vectors to unit length. It can be 
shown, that cosine metric (dot product), the other 
popular metric, results in the same order and, thus 
same similarity error as well. Without normalization 
or stemming the errors were almost twice as much 
larger. 
Although we varied the adjustment parameter a in 
our experiment, for better interpretation, we plotted 
our primary metric (average error reduction) as a 
function of Ca, the average Euclidian distance 
between the original and the modified document 
vectors when both vectors are normalized to unit 
length. Ca serves as a convenient parameter 
controlling the degree of change in the document 
vectors, better than a, because same values of a may 
result in different changes depending on the term-to-
term similarity matrix sim(t1, t2). In theory, Ca 
varies from 0 (no change) to 2 , the case of 
maximum possible change (no common terms 
between initial and expanded representation). By 
varying adjustment factor a from 0 to 10 and higher 
we observed almost the entire theoretical range of 
Ca: starting from negligible change and going all the 
way to 2 , where the added terms entirely 
dominated the original ones. The average number of 
terms in the document representation was in 60-70 
range before expansion and in 200-300 range after 
the expansion. This of course increased 
computational burden. Nevertheless, even after the 
expansion, the vector representations still remained 
sparse and we were able to design and implement 
some straightforward algorithmic improvements 
taking advantage of this sparsity to keep processing 
time manageable. The expansion for entire Reuters 
collection was taking less than one minute on a 
workstation with Pentium III 697 MHz processor, 
256 MB of RAM, with all the sparse representations 
of the documents and similarity matrix stored in 
primary memory. This renders the expansion suitable 
for online processing.  
To evaluate the performance of each technique, we 
used the error reduction (%) relatively to the baseline 
shown in Table 1 (TF-IDF column) averaged across 
all the topics, which corresponds to the lowest 
503
original non-expanded similarity error. Figure 1 
shows the error reduction as a function of Ca for 
various values of Thresh. We stopped increasing Ca 
once the improvement dropped below -10% to save 
testing time. Several facts can be observed from the 
results: 
1) The error reduction for Thresh in the mid range of 
Ca [.2-.4] is very stable, achieves 50% , which is 
very large compared with the other known 
techniques we used for comparison as discussed 
below. The effect is also comparable with the 
difference between various weighting functions 
(Table 2), which we believe renders the 
improvement practically significant. 
2) For small thresholds (Thresh < .1), the effect is 
not that stable, possibly since many non-reliable 
associations are involved in the expansion.  
3) Larger thresholds (Thresh > .4) are also not very 
reliable since they result in a small number of 
associations created, and thus require large values of 
adjustment parameter a in order to produce 
substantial average changes in the document vectors 
(Ca), which results in too drastic change in some 
document vectors.   
4) The error reduction curve is unimodal: it starts 
from 0 for small Ca, since document vectors almost 
do not change, and grows to achieve maximum for 
Ca somewhere in relatively wide .1 - .5 range. Then, 
it decreases, because document vectors may be 
drifting too far from the original ones, falling below 
0 for some large values of Ca.  
5) For thresholds (Thresh) .2 and .3, the effect stays 
positive even for large values of Ca, which is an 
interesting phenomenon because document vectors 
are getting almost entirely replaced by their 
expanded representations. 
Some sensitivity of the results with respect to the 
parameters Thresh, Ca is a limitation as occurs 
similarly to virtually all modern IR improvement 
techniques. Indeed, Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) 
needs to have number of semantic axis to be 
correctly set, otherwise the performance may 
degrade. Pseudo Relevance Feedback (PRF) depends 
on several parameters such as number of documents 
to use for feedback, adjustment factor, etc. All 
previously studied expansion techniques depend on 
the adjustment factor as  well. The specific choice of 
the parameters for real life applications is typically 
performed manually based on trial and error or by 
following a machine learning approach: splitting data 
into training and testing sets. Based on the above 
results, the similarity threshold (Thresh) in .2-.4 and 
Ca in .1-.5 range seem to be a safe combination, not 
degrading and likely to significantly (20-50%)  
improve performance. The performance curve being 
unimodal with respect to both Ca and Thresh also 
makes it easier to tune by looking for maxima. 
Although we have involved only one test collection 
in this study, this collection (Reuters) varies greatly 
in the content and the size of the documents, so we 
hope our results will generalize to other collections.  
We also verified that the effect typically diminishes 
when the size of the mining collection (corpus) is 
reduced by random sub-sampling. Those results were 
also similar to those obtained 4 months earlier, 
although only 80% of the pages in the mining corpus 
remained. 
 
-30
-20
-10
0
10
0 500 1000
Number of Semantic Axis
Er
ro
r R
ed
uc
tio
n 
(%
)
All topics Tough Topics Only
 
Figure 4. Comparing to LSI. 
-20
0
20
40
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2
Average vector change
Er
ro
r R
ed
uc
tio
n 
(%
)
Thresh = .3 
Thresh = .4 
Thresh = .2 
Thresh = .5 Thresh = .6 Thresh = .1 
Figure 3. The average error reduction (%) as a function of average document vector change Ca for 
various threshold parameters Tresh without using external mining collection. 
504
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Average vector change
Er
ro
r R
ed
uc
tio
n 
(%
)
Nc=5 Nc=10 Nc=20
 
 
Figure 5. The error reduction as the function of the 
average vector change due to Pseudo Relevance 
Feedback for several cut-off numbers Nc. 
4.2 Sensitivity Analysis  
To test the importance of the context, we removed 
the ?context hint? terms from the queries used by our 
agent, and created another (less context specific) 
corpus for mining. We obtained 175,336 unique 
URLs, much more than with using ?context hint? 
terms since the overlap between different query 
results was much smaller. We randomly selected 
25,000 URLs of them and downloaded the referred 
pages. Then, to make the comparison more objective, 
we randomly selected  19,198 pages (same number 
as with using context hint) of the non-empty 
downloaded pages. We mined the similarity 
relationships from the selected documents in the 
same way as described above. The resulting 
improvement (shown in the Figure 2) was indeed 
much smaller (13% and less) than with using 
?context hint? terms. It also degrades much quicker 
for larger Ca and more sensitive to the choice of 
Thresh. This may explain why mixed results were 
reported in the literate when the similarity thesaurus 
was constructed in a very general setting, but not 
specifically for the target collection in mind. It is 
also interesting to note a similar behavior of error 
reduction as the function of Ca and Thresh: it is 
unimodal with maximum in approximately same 
range of arguments. This may also serve as indirect 
evidence of stability of the effect (even if smaller in 
that case) with respect to the parameters involved. 
To verify the importance of using external corpus vs. 
self-mining, we mined the similarity relationships 
from the same collection (Reuters) that we used for 
the tests (target collection) using the same mining 
algorithms. Figure 3 shows that the effect of such 
?self-mining? is relatively modest (up to 20%), 
confirming that using the external corpus (the Web 
in our approach) was crucial. Again, the behavior of 
the error reduction (even smaller in that case) with 
respect to Ca and Thresh is similar to the context 
specific web corpus mining. 
4.3 Comparison with Other Techniques 
Figure 4 shows the similarity error reduction as a 
function of the number of semantic axis when LSI is 
applied. The effect with the entire collection (second 
column) is always negative. So, the Reuters 
collection in our experiment set up was found to be 
not a good application of LSI technique, possibly 
because many of the topics have already small errors 
even before applying LSI. To verify our 
implementation and the applicability of LSI to the 
similarity computation, we applied it only to the 
?tougher? 26 topics, those in the upper half if 
ordered by the original similarity error. As Figure 4 
reveals, LSI is effective in that case for numbers of 
semantic axis comparable with number of topics in 
the target collection. Our findings are well in line 
with reported in prior research. 
We adapted the classic Pseudo Relevance Feedback 
algorithm (Qiu, 1993), which has been so far applied 
only to document retrieval tasks, to similarity 
computation in a straightforward way and also tried 
several variations of if (not described here due to 
lack of space). Figure 5 shows the effect as a 
function of adjustment factor a for various cut-off 
parameters Nc (the number of top ranked documents 
used for feedback). The effect achieves the 
maximum of around 21%, consistent with the results 
reported in prior research. The improvement is close 
in magnitude to the one due to ?self-mining?  
described above. We do not claim that our approach 
is better than PRF since it is not entirely meaningful 
to make this comparison due to the number of 
parameters and implementation details involved in 
both. Also, more important, the techniques rely on 
different source of data: PRF is a ?self-mining? 
approach while CSSE builds and mines external 
corpus. Thus, CSSE can be used in addition to PRF.  
5 Conclusions  
In this paper, we proposed and empirically studied an 
approach to improve similarity computation between 
text documents by creating a context specific Web 
corpus and performing similarity mining within it. 
The results demonstrated that the similarity errors 
can be reduced by additional 50% after all the 
standard procedures such as stemming, term 
weighting, and vector normalization. We also 
established the crucial importance of the following 
three factors, which we believe make our technique 
distinct from those already explored early and 
explain more encouraging results that we obtained:  
1) Using external corpus. 2) Taking the context of 
the target collection into consideration. 3) Using the 
appropriate mining formula.  Another important 
distinction and possible explanation of a more 
dramatic effect is our focus on similarity 
computation between text documents, rather than on 
document retrieval tasks, which have been more 
extensively studied in the past. Similarity 
computation is a more general procedure, which in 
turns defines the quality of virtually all other specific 
tasks such as document retrieval, summarization, 
clustering, categorization, topic detection, query by 
example, etc.  Our future plans are to overcome some 
of the limitations in this study, specifically using 
more than a single (although standard and very 
diverse) collection and study other experimental 
setups, such as document retrieval, text 
categorization, or topic detection and tracking.  
505
6 Acknowledgement 
Weiguo Fan's work is supported by NSF under the 
grant number ITR0325579. 
References 
Church, K.W., Gale, W., Hanks, P., Hindle, D. 
(1991). Using Statistics in Lexical Analysis. In: 
Uri Zernik (ed.), Lexical Acquisition: Exploiting 
On-Line Resources to Build a Lexicon. New 
Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1991, pp. 115-164. 
Church, K.W., Hanks, P. (1989). Word Association 
Norms, Mutual Information and Lexicography. In 
Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference of the 
Association of Computational Linguistics, 1989, 
pp. 76-83. 
Cooley, R., Mobasher, B. and Srivastava, J. (1997). 
Web Mining: Information and Pattern Discovery 
on the World Wide Web (with R. Cooley and J. 
Srivastava), in Proceedings of the 9th IEEE 
International Conference on Tools with Artificial 
Intelligence (ICTAI'97), November 1997. 
Croft, W.B., and Harper, D.J. (1979). Using 
probabilistic models of document retrieval without 
relevance information. Journal of Documentation, 
35, pp. 285-295. 
Deerwester S., Dumais S., Furnas G., Landauer T.K., 
and Harshman R., Indexing by Latent Semantic 
Analysis. Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science 41 (1990), 391-407. 
Furnas, G. W., Landauer, T. K., Gomez, L. M., & 
Dumais, S. T. (1987). The Vocabulary Problem in 
Human-System Communication. Communications 
of the ACM, 30(11), pp. 964-971. 
G?ry, M., Haddad, M. H. (1999). Knowledge 
Discovery for Automatic Query Expansion on the 
World Wide Web. International Workshop on the 
World-Wide Web and Conceptual Modeling 
(WWWCM'99), in conjunction with the 18th 
International Conference on Conceptual Modeling 
(ER'99), Paris, France, November 15-18, 1999, 
pp. 334-347. 
Grefenstette, G. (1994). Explorations in Automatic 
Thesaurus Discovery. Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, Moston, MA.  
Haveliwala, T.H, Gionis, A., Klein, D., Indyk, P. 
(2002). Evaluating Strategies for Similarity Search 
on the Web. WWW2002, May 7-11, 2002, 
Honolulu, Hawaii, USA.  
Hearst, M. (1992). Automatic Acquisition of 
Hyponyms from Large Text Corpora, Proceedings 
of the Fourteenth International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics, Nantes, France, July 
1992. 
Kwok, K.L. (1998). Improving two-stage ad-hoc 
retrieval for short queries. Twenty-First Annual 
International ACM SIGIR Conference on 
Research and Development in Information 
Retrieval, pp.  250-256, New York, August 1998. 
Lewis, D.D. (1992). Representation and Learning in 
Information Retrieval. Doctoral Dissertation. 
University of Massachusetts at Amherst.  
Lewis, D.D. (1997). Reuters-21578 text 
categorization test collection, Distribution 1.0, 
Sept 26, 1997. 
Minker, J., Wilson, G. A. & Zimmerman, B. H. 
(1972). An evaluation of query expansion by the 
addition of clustered terms for a document 
retrieval system. Information Storage and 
Retrieval, pp. 329-348. 
Peat, H. J. & Willett, P. (1991). The limitations of 
term co-occurrence data for query expansion in 
document retrieval systems. Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science, 42(5), 
pp. 378-383. 
Porter, M.F. (1980). An algorithm for suffix 
stripping. Program, 14, pp. 130--137, 1980. 
Qiu, Y. (1993). Concept Based Query Expansion. 
Proceedings of SIGIR-93, 16th ACM International 
Conference on Research and Development in 
Information Retrieval. 
Salton, G. and McGill, M.J. (1983). Introduction to 
Modern Information Retrieval. New York. 
McGraw-Hill. 
Schutze, H. and Pedersen, J.O. (1997). A co-
occurrence-based thesaurus and two applications 
to information retrieval. Information Processing 
and Management. 33(3), pp. 307-318. 
Sugiura, A., and Etzioni, O. (2000). Query Routing 
for Web Search Engines: Architecture and 
Experiments. 9th International World Wide Web 
Conference, Amsterdam, May 15-19, 2000. 
van Rijsbergen, C.J.. (1977). A theoretical basis for 
the use of co-occurrence data in information 
retrieval. Journal of Documentation, 33(2):106--
119, 1977. 
Voorhees, E. M. (1994). Query expansion using 
lexical-semantic relations. In Proceedings of the 
17th Annual International ACM/SIGIR 
Conference, pp. 61-69, Dublin, Ireland.  
Xu, J. and Croft, W.B. (2000). Improving the 
effectiveness of information retrieval with local 
context analysis. ACM Transactions on 
Information Systems (TOIS), 18(1):79--112, 
2000.  
Ballesteros, L., Croft, W.B. (1998). Resolving 
Ambiguity for Cross-Language Retrieval. In 
Proceedings of the 21th Annual International 
ACM/SIGIR Conference, pp. 64-71.
 
506
