c? 2004 Association for Computational Linguistics
Accessor Variety Criteria for Chinese
Word Extraction
Haodi Feng? Kang Chen?
Shandong University Tsinghua University
City University of Hong Kong
Xiaotie Deng? Weimin Zheng?
City University of Hong Kong Tsinghua University
We are interested in the problem of word extraction from Chinese text collections. We define a
word to be a meaningful string composed of several Chinese characters. For example, ,
?percent?, and , ?more and more?, are not recognized as traditional Chinese words from the
viewpoint of some people. However, in our work, they are words because they are very widely used
and have specific meanings. We start with the viewpoint that a word is a distinguished linguistic
entity that can be used in many different language environments. We consider the characters
that are directly before a string (predecessors) and the characters that are directly after a string
(successors) as important factors for determining the independence of the string. We call such
characters accessors of the string, consider the number of distinct predecessors and successors of a
string in a large corpus (TREC 5 and TREC 6 documents), and use them as the measurement of the
context independency of a string from the rest of the sentences in the document. Our experiments
confirm our hypothesis and show that this simple rule gives quite good results for Chinese word
extraction and is comparable to, and for long words outperforms, other iterative methods.
1. Introduction
Words are the basic linguistic units of natural language processing. The importance
of word extraction is stressed in many papers. According to Huang, Chen, and Tsou
(1996), the word is the basic unit in natural language processing (NLP), as it is at the
lexical level where all modules interface. Possible modules involved are the lexicon,
speech recognition, syntactic parsing, speech synthesis, semantic interpretation, and
so on. Thus, the identification of lexical words and/or the delimitation of words in
running texts is a prerequisite of NLP. Teahan et al (2000) state that interpreting a text
as a sequence of words is beneficial for some information retrieval and storage tasks:
for example, full-text searches, word-based compression, and key-phrase extraction.
According to Guo (1997), words and tokens are the primary building blocks in almost
all linguistic theories and language-processing systems, including Japanese (Kobayasi,
Tokumaga, and Tanaka 1994), Korean (Yun, Lee, and Rim 1995), German (Pachunke
et al 1992), and English (Garside, Leech, and Sampson 1987), in various media, such
? School of Computer Science and Technology, Jinan, PRC; Department of Computer Science, Tat Chee
Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong. E-mail: fenghd@cs.cityu.edu.hk or fenghaodi@hotmail.com.
? Department of Computer Science and Technology, Peking, PR China. E-mail: {ck99,zwm-dcs}@mails.
tsinghua.edu.cn.
? Department of Computer Science, Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong. E-mail: csdeng@cityu.
edu.hk.
76
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 1
as continuous speech and cursive handwriting, and in numerous applications, such
as translation, recognition, indexing, and proofreading. The identification of words in
natural language is nontrivial since, as observed by Chao (1968), linguistic words often
represent a different set than do sociological words.
Chinese texts are character based, not word based. Each Chinese character stands
for one phonological syllable and in most cases represents a morpheme. This presents
a problem, as only less than 10% of the word types (and less than 50% of the tokens
in a text) in Chinese are composed of a single character (Chen et al 1993). However,
Chinese texts, and texts in some other Oriental languages such as Japanese, do not
have delimiters such as spaces to mark the boundaries of meaningful words. Even for
English text, some phrases consist of several words. However, the problem in English
is not as dominant a factor as in Chinese. How to extract words from Chinese texts is
still an interesting problem. Note that word extraction is different from the very closely
related problem of sentence segmentation. Word extraction aims to collect all of the
meaningful strings in a text. Sentence segmentation partitions a sentence into several
consecutive meaningful segments. Word extraction should be easier than sentence
segmentation, and the problems involved in it can be solved using simpler methods.
Some Chinese information-retrieval systems operate at the character level instead
of the word level, for example, the Csmart system (Chien 1995). However, to further
improve the efficiency of natural Chinese processing, it is commonly thought to be
important to apply studies from linguistics (Kwok 1997). Lexicon construction is con-
sidered to be one of the most important tasks. Single Chinese characters can quite
often carry different meanings. This ambiguity can be resolved when the characters
are combined with other characters to form a word. Chinese words can be unigrams,
bigrams, trigrams, or n-grams, where n > 3. According to the Frequency Dictionary
of Modern Chinese (Beijing Language Institute 1986), among the 9,000 most frequent
Chinese words, 26.7% are unigrams, 69.8% are bigrams, 2.7% are trigrams, 0.007% are
four-grams, and 0.002% are five-grams. There are lexicons for identifying some (and
probably most of the frequent) words. However, sometimes less-frequent words are
more effective. Weeber, Vos, and Baayen (2000) recently extracted side-effect-related
terms in a medical-information extraction system and found that many of the terms
had a frequency of less than five. This indicates that low-frequency words may also
carry very important information. Our experiments show that we can extract low-
frequency words using a simple method without overly degrading the precision.
There are generally two directions in which words can be formed (Huang, Chen,
and Tsou 1996). One is the deductive strategy, whereby words are identified through
the segmentation of running texts. The other is the inductive strategy, which identifies
words through the compositional process of morpho-lexical rules. This strategy repre-
sents words with common characteristics (e.g., numeric compounds) by rules. In Chi-
nese text segmentation there are three basic approaches (Sproat et al 1996): pure heuris-
tic, pure statistical, and a hybrid of the two. The heuristic approach identifies words
by applying prior knowledge or morpho-lexical rules governing the derivation of new
words. The statistical approach identifies words based on the distribution of their com-
ponents in a large corpus. Sproat and Shih (1990) develop a purely statistical method
that utilizes the mutual information between two characters: I(x, y) = log p(x,y)p(x)p(y) ; the
limitation of the method is that it can deal only with words of length two charac-
ters. Ge, Pratt, and Smyth (1999) introduce a simple probabilistic model based on the
occurrence probability of the words that constitute a set of predefined assumptions.
Chien (1997) develops a PAT-tree-based method that extracts significant words by ob-
serving mutual information of two overlapped patterns with the significance function
77
Feng, Chen, Deng, and Zheng Accessor Variety Criteria for Chinese Word Extraction
SEc =
Pr(c)
Pr(a)+Pr(b)?Pr(c) , where a and b are the two biggest substrings of string c. Zhang,
Gao, and Zhou (2000) propose the application of a statistical method that is based on
context dependence and mutual information. Yamamoto and Church (2001) experi-
ment with both mutual information and residual inverse document frequency (RIDF)1
as criteria for deciding Japanese words, and their main contribution is in affording
a reduced method for computing term and document frequency. In almost all of the
work cited to this point, the dimension that is used to compute mutual information is
term frequency. Chen and Bai (1998) propose a corpus-based learning approach that
learns grammatical rules and automatically evaluates them. Chang and Su (1997) use
an unsupervised Viterbi training process to select potential unknown words and iter-
atively truncate unlikely unknown words in the augmented dictionary. Teahan et al
(2000) propose a compression-based algorithm for Chinese text segmentation. Paola
and Stevenson (2001) demonstrate an effective combination of deeper linguistic knowl-
edge with the robustness and scalability of a statistical technique to derive knowledge
about thematic relations for verb classification. Mo et al (1996) deal with the iden-
tification of the determinative-measure compounds in parsing Mandarin Chinese by
developing grammatical rules to combine determinators and measures.
We introduce another concept, accessor variety (AV) (for a detailed definition, refer
to subsection 3.1), to describe the extent to which a string is likely to be a meaning-
ful word. Actually, Harris (1970) uses similar criteria to determine English morpheme
boundaries, and our work is partially motivated by his success. We first discard those
strings with accessor varieties that are smaller than a certain number (called the thresh-
old; see subsequent discussion). The remaining strings are considered to be potentially
meaningful words. In addition, we apply rules to remove strings that consist of a word
and adhesive characters (clarified in subsection 3.2). Our experiment shows that even
for small thresholds, quite good results can be obtained.
In Section 2, we introduce examples of unknown words, the identification of which
is the task of our work. In Section 3, we discuss our method. In Section 4, we present
our experimental results. We conclude our work with a discussion and a comparison to
previous results in Section 5. In Section 6, we list some future work that can be pursued
following the concept of AV. We note that although our method is quite simple, it is
marginally better than previous comparable results. This method distinguishes itself
from statistically based approaches and grammatical rules. Because of its simplicity, it
can be used easily in computer-based applications. Moreover, innovative variations of
our method and its combination with statistical methods and grammatical methods
are worthy of further exploration.
2. Unknown Words
As defined by Chen and Bai (1998), unknown words are words that are not listed
in an ordinary dictionary, and word extraction seeks to identify such words. To give
readers an intuitive view of these words, we list the types of unknown words that most
frequently appear (Chen and Bai [1998] list 14 different types). What we should point
out here is that except for numeric-type compounds, which are extracted separately,
we extract all the other types of words together.
1. Proper names. These include acronyms, Chinese names, and those words that
have been borrowed from other languages: for example, , ?Bank of China?; ,
1 RIDF = observed IDF ? predicted IDF = ? log dfD + log(1 ? e
? tfD ), where tf , df , and D are term
frequency, document frequency, and number of documents, respectively.
78
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 1
?Feng Haodi? (Chinese girl?s name); , ?Prince Edward?; , ?Microsoft?;
and , ?the United Kingdom of Britain and Northern
Ireland?. To recognize proper names is the first task for Chinese word extraction,
because their meanings cannot be obtained through the combination of smaller words,
as in the compound words that are described next. Therefore, a reasonable way to
approach them is to deduce them from Chinese text collections.
2. Compound words. These are strings with specified meanings that are composed
of shorter meaningful words: for example, , ?Industry and Commerce
Bank of China?, is composed of , ?China?, , ?industry and commerce?, and
, ?bank?; and , ?foreign businessmen invested company?, is com-
posed of , ?foreign businessmen?, , ?invest?, and , ?company?. Compound
words account for a large proportion of Chinese words because it is very easy to com-
pose a new compound word out of smaller known words. There are about 5,000
commonly used Chinese characters, but the number of compound Chinese words is
unpredictable. We want to extract those compounds that are accepted as words by most
people.
3. Derived words. These are words that have affix morphemes: for example,
, ?modernization?, and , ?computerization?, both of which contain af-
fix morpheme .
4. Numeric-type compounds. Some examples of numeric-type compounds would
be 1999 , ?1999?; , ?the first session?; , ?year 2000?; and , ?11
streets?. Although these words have specific meanings and are used frequently, most
dictionaries do not contain them. It is not very difficult to identify them, since there
are morphological rules (Mo et al 1996) for generating these words. Such numeric-
type compounds contain numbers as the main components, and measure characters
or words are used nearby.
3. Proposed Approach
One of the important parameters that is employed in statistical methods for automatic
Chinese word extraction is word or character frequency. Equivalent frequencies, such
as document frequency and term frequency, are used analogously. Algorithms that
are based on these frequencies are used to measure how likely it is that a particular
string of characters is a meaningful word, according to the belief that ?when a string
is repeated many times, it must carry a meaning.? However, in this article, we use
not frequency, but accessor variety. This can be explained as ?when a string appears
under different linguistic environments, it may carry a meaning.? We introduce the
concept accessor variety as a new criterion for identifying meaningful Chinese words.
3.1 Accessor Variety
In Chinese text, each substring of a whole sentence can potentially form a word, but
only some substrings carry clear meanings and thus form a correct word. For example,
the sentence has 21 substrings, but only four substrings, , ,
, and , can be considered words (we do not consider single-character
words here). In some implementations, the segmentation method is used to extract
those words (recent reviews on Chinese word segmentation include Wang, Su, and
Mo [1990] and Wu and Tseng [1993]). There are several commonly used segmentation
methods such as forward maximum matching and backward maximum matching
(Teahan et al 2000; Dai, Loh, and Khoo 1999; Sproat et al 1996). If the dictionary in-
cludes the words , , and , then forward maximum matching will ex-
tract two words, and , after segmenting the sentence. If is deleted
79
Feng, Chen, Deng, and Zheng Accessor Variety Criteria for Chinese Word Extraction
from the dictionary, then the sentence will be segmented into , , , and
, and two words, and , are obtained. Furthermore, if is removed
from the dictionary, then another, different segmentation pattern will be achieved.
Therefore, the dictionary is an important factor in these methods. In fact, this sen-
tence has ambiguities (?The door handle is broken? or ?the door hurts the hand?), and
the segmentation methods try to find a reasonable way to solve this problem. We do
not segment the sentence but extract those substrings that might possibly form words.
The accessor variety criterion is used to decide whether a substring should be retained
or discarded. Sentences (1)?(4) can be used to illustrate the meaning of accessor variety:
(1) , ?The door hurts the hand? or ?The door handle is broken?.
(2) , ?Xiao Ming fixed the door handle?.
(3) , ?This door handle is very beautiful?.
(4) , ?This door handle is broken?.
Consider how to extract the word from these four sentences. In fact, the three-
character string has three distinct prefixes, ?S?, , (?S? denotes the start of
a sentence), and four distinct suffixes, , ?E?, , (?E? denotes the termination of
a sentence). This means that the string can be used in at least three different environ-
ments and might carry meanings that are independent of those of the other characters
in these four sentences. In this case three = min{three, four} is called the accessor variety
of string .
We use the criterion accessor variety to evaluate how independently a string is
used, and thus how likely it is that the string can be a word. The accessor variety of
a string s of more than one character is defined as
AV(s) = min{Lav(s), Rav(s)}.
Here Lav(s) is called the left accessor variety and is defined as the number of distinct
characters (predecessors) except ?S? that precede s plus the number of distinct sen-
tences of which s appears at the beginning. Similarly, the right accessor variety Rav(s)
is defined as the number of distinct characters (successors) except ?E? that succeed s
plus the number of distinct sentences in which s appears at the end. In other words,
characters ?S? and ?E? are repeatedly counted. The reason for doing this is that some
words usually appear at the beginning or the end of sentences. For example, ,
?suddenly?, is often used separately as a short sentence. Therefore, ?S? and ?E? will
be counted multiple times, and we regard as a meaningful word, although there
are probably very rarely other characters preceding or succeeding it.
The extracted words should ensure an AV value of no less than a predefined
threshold, which means that such strings should appear in enough different environ-
ments and therefore be considered meaningful. Our experiments show that even with
a small threshold, the result is quite precise.
3.2 Adhesive Characters
There are some characters, such as auxiliary characters (a mark following an adjec-
tive) and (a mark following an adverb), that often adhere to other words as heads
or tails to compose a string with a high AV value that is not an actual linguistic word;
we call these characters adhesive characters. For example, , ?of people?, has a
very high AV value because many adjectives (and hence many predecessors) precede
, ?people? (e.g., , ?here people?, and , ?diligent people?).
Moreover, many words (and hence many successors) can succeed it to describe the
behavior of the people (e.g., , ?people here make a living
80
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 1
out of commerce?, and , ?diligent people are working?). It seems
that combines with very firmly, but cannot be accepted as a word
by most people. There are also some nonauxiliary characters that very frequently ad-
here to other, shorter words. In our method, we ignore the difference between the
auxiliary and nonauxiliary adhesive characters and extract them under the same cri-
teria. Recalling the discussion about the AV value, we divide the adhesive characters
into two groups. The head-adhesive characters often stick at the heads of other words
and have high Rav values, and the tail-adhesive characters often stick at the tails of
other words and have high Lav values. How adhesive characters are found will be
discussed in the article.
The adhesive characters should be stripped from the string for constructing a well-
formed word. According to the places in which these characters appear, three cases
are considered. If the leftmost consecutive characters of a string are all head-adhesive
characters, then we say that it is in the h+core style. If the rightmost consecutive
characters of a string are all tail-adhesive characters, then we say that it is in the core+t
style. A string that is in both h+core and core+t styles is said to be in the h+core+t style,
where the core is the inner part of the string found by removing the left consecutive
head-adhesive characters and right consecutive tail-adhesive characters. For example,
, ?of I?, is in the h+core style and , ?I?, is the core, , ?my?, is in the core+t
style and , ?I?, is the core; and , ?of procedure is?, is in the h+core+t style
and , ?procedure?, is the core. In other words, none of the strings matching these
three cases should be considered words, that is, they should be discarded.
With the help of adhesive characters, we can introduce the ADHESIVE JUDGE
rules to discard all those strings that have a high AV score but are unlikely to be real
words:
1. A string that is composed of two characters in any of the h+core, core+t,
and h+core+t (no core in the case of two characters) styles should be
discarded if it does not appear in a specified electronic dictionary. For
example, strings such as , ?of I?, and , ?one of?, will be
discarded, whereas strings such as , ?surely?, , ?comprehend?,
and , ?Jane? (a girl?s name), will remain. Under this rule, most
meaningful two-character strings that are unknown to the dictionary will
be recognized as meaningful words because they rarely contain adhesive
characters.
2. A string that is made up of more than two characters in any of the three
styles (h+core, core+t, and h+core+t) should be discarded if the core is a
meaningful multi-character word.
3. The most frequently used auxiliary words, such as , ?of?, , ?have?,
(a mark indicating completion), and , ?at?, must be used to delimit
the original string. If any token is found to be an identified
multicharacter word (a word in the specified dictionary or extracted by
this algorithm before processing the string under consideration), then the
original string is abandoned.
All of the strings will be kept as meaningful words if they survive elimination
according to these rules. According to these rules, strings such as , ?of pro-
cedure is?, , ?one of?, and , ?of I?, should be abandoned, whereas ,
?actually?, and , ?seek truth from facts?, should remain even though they all
contain auxiliary words.
81
Feng, Chen, Deng, and Zheng Accessor Variety Criteria for Chinese Word Extraction
3.3 Numeric-Type Compounds
We define numeric-type compounds to be strings of numbers or strings that con-
tain substrings of numbers followed by measures. For example, , ?thousands
upon thousands?, , ?the first Olympic games?, and , ?50 kilo-
grams?, will be considered as potential numeric-type compounds, whereas ,
?wholehearted?, will not be, because and are not measures. Numbers include
Arabic numbers of SBC case and DBC case and Chinese numbers in both simplified
form and traditional form. Special words such as , ?several?, , ?about?, and ,
?or so?, are treated as numbers too. Measures include both Chinese measures and for-
eign measures (e.g., , ?mu?, , ?chi?, , ?ounce?, and , ?gallon?). Because of
the special nature of words of this type, some lexicons do not include them, which is
why we extract them separately. In our method, a numeric-type compound must be
first a maximal numeric-type string, which means that the string cannot be preceded
or succeeded by other numbers or measures in the sentence under consideration. For
example, when processing the sentence , ?October
2nd, 1977, is his birthday?, strings , ?one?, , ?nineteen?, , ?1977?,
, ?October?, and , ?second day?, are not extracted. The only numeric-type
compound that is extracted from this sentence is , ?October 2nd,
1977?. The numeric-type compound candidates are then further examined according to
the ADHESIVE JUDGE rules, and the survivors of that examination are eventually ac-
cepted as numeric-type compounds. Notice that for strings of only numbers or strings
of numbers followed by measures, we set the threshold to one.
As we process numeric-type compounds separately, we ignore strings that contain
numeric-type compounds when we extract the ordinary words.
4. Experimental Results
4.1 Setup of the Experimental Environment
The corpus-based word extraction method described in the previous section was tested
on a 153 MB corpus consisting of People?s Daily news and Xinhua news from TREC5 and
TREC6 (Linguistic Data Consortium, n.d.). We also conducted experiments on a small
corpus that has approximately 1.7 MB of data and is a part of the former corpus.
Neither corpus was annotated. The system dictionary that we used in each experi-
ment was downloaded from http://www.mandarintools.com/segmenter.html and contains
119,538 terms from two to seven characters long. In our method, a preprocessing
step was performed on the corpus in which we eliminated all of the non-Chinese
symbols. Each uninterrupted Chinese character sequence was kept as one line in the
transformed data. For each line in the data file, all possible substrings were extracted,
along with their predecessors and successors. Those predecessors and successors were
finally merged, and the AV, Lav, and Rav values were calculated. Different thresholds
were used for discarding those strings with low AV values and checking how the
threshold affects the results. Moreover, the ADHESIVE JUDGE rules were used for the
further discarding of those strings that seemed unlikely to be words.
A list of adhesive characters is needed when we apply the ADHESIVE JUDGE
rules. We constructed the adhesive character list based on the accessor variety infor-
mation of single characters. Characters with high Lav values were considered to be
tail-adhesive characters. Characters with high Rav values were considered to be head-
adhesive characters. Characters with very high AV values were considered to be the
delimiters that are used in rule (3) of the ADHESIVE JUDGE rules. In the end, we
placed 68 tail-adhesive characters, 66 head-adhesive characters, and 16 delimiters on
our list.
82
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 1
In our experiments, we performed only one step of each of the ADHESIVE JUDGE
rules (in either direction) for discarding meaningless multicharacter strings. That is,
in any of the three styles (h+core, core+t, or h+core+t), only the leftmost or rightmost
character was considered among all of the head- or tail-adhesive characters. If the first
character of a string was a head-adhesive character and the remaining substring (after
stripping the first character) was found in the system dictionary or the preextracted
shorter word lists (and thus a core was found), such a string was considered to be in
the h+core form and thrown away. The same judgment process was used in the core+t
and h+core+t styles. In other words, only the first or last character, or both, of a string
were used in rule (2) of the ADHESIVE JUDGE rules. Such simplification does not
hurt the results too much.
The AV value threshold is another important factor in this method. We tested dif-
ferent thresholds to evaluate how they influenced the performance. One might imagine
that a higher threshold will result in higher precision while causing the loss of some
recall. This phenomenon was certainly observed in our experiments. Word length has
a relationship with the threshold: that is, longer words required a smaller threshold
to reach the same precision, or higher precision could be obtained on longer words
with the same threshold, because longer words have more specific usage and appear
in fewer environments.
Our first experiment was carried out on the small corpus of Xinhua news. Strings
with lengths varying from two to ten characters were examined. In the following, we
tested our method on the large corpus and all strings with lengths from two to seven
characters. In the end, we extracted the numeric-type compounds from each corpus.
In addition, there is no commonly accepted standard for evaluating the perfor-
mance of word extraction methods, and it is very hard to decide whether a word is
meaningful or not (Sproat et al 1996). We define precision as the number of extracted
words that would be meaningful in a Chinese native speaker?s opinion, divided by the
total number of extracted compounds. As it is very hard to find all of the words in the
original corpus that would be found meaningful by a Chinese person, it is very hard to
count recall in the traditional way, that is, the number of meaningful words extracted
divided by the number of all meaningful words in the original data. On the other hand,
it is also impossible to approach traditional precision and traditional recall by compar-
ing the hand-segmented sample sentences and the automatically segmented sentences,
as people usually do, because our method does not touch upon segmentation. The
reason that we do not consider segmentation is that we aim only to investigate the
performance of AV itself, whereas the involvement of a segmentation module would
inevitablly influence our judgment on the performance of AV. Therefore, we substitute
partial recall for traditional recall. We define partial recall as the number of extracted
meaningful words (from the whole corpus) that appear in a sample corpus divided
by the total number of meaningful words in the sample corpus. Evidently, the partial
recall value will be no smaller, and usually greater, than the recall value calculated in
the traditional way. This point will be clearly reflected by the following experimental
results. What should be pointed out here is that some people use the F-measure as an
evaluation metric (Ricardo and Berthier 1999; Chang and Su 1997). However, this is
difficult to interpret according to Beeferman, Berger, and Lafferty (1999). In our opin-
ion, as the F-measure or precision-recall curves are based on two parameters, recall
and precision, it is enough for us only to list the partial recall and precision.
4.2 Experiments on the Small Corpus
As noted previously, the small corpus contained approximately 1.7 MB data of Xinhua
news. We processed all of the strings in the corpus with lengths from one to ten
83
Feng, Chen, Deng, and Zheng Accessor Variety Criteria for Chinese Word Extraction
Table 1
Some of the words extracted from the small corpus.
Economy of GuangDong and Hong Kong
new region of PuDong
Sihanouk (name)
Italian Team
nature protection region
Administration Committee of PLO
UNESCO
Association of Relations Across the Taiwan Straits (ARATS)
GuangDa International Trust Investment Company
YiZheng Chemical Fibre United Company
Parent Ocean Petroleum Company of China
XiaoLangDi Irrigation Hinge Project
French Open Tennis
Hong Kong Special Administration Region
United Nations Security Council
Asia Development Bank
Innovation of the Economy System
most-favoured-nation clause
Christopher (name)
Preparing Committee
Mandela (name)
UBA Championship Cup
characters. Table 1 shows some of the extracted correct words that were not contained
in the system dictionary.
We can see that almost all of these words are compound words, proper names,
or derived words. It would be almost impossible to list all of them in a general-
purpose dictionary. Furthermore, some of them occur only a few times. For example,
only occurs three times in this corpus. The method we used has the
ability to extract low-frequency words.
Table 2 shows the overall precision performance when the word length is not
specified. We set the threshold from two to nine and observed that with a larger
threshold we could obtain more precise results. As the number of words extracted
was very large (approximately 30,000 words), we randomly chose a portion (often
approximately 1,000 words) of the total set of extracted words as the test set to calculate
the precision; that is, we listed all of the extracted words, and then for each word,
we generated a random number between zero and one. If the number was smaller
than the number of test words divided by the number of all extracted words (here
1, 000/30, 000), then the corresponding word was chosen. Human judgment was then
used to check whether an extracted word was a correct or spurious word.
In the evaluation phase we found that the method performed differently on strings
of different lengths. Hence, we also checked the precision performance with specified
word lengths. We set the threshold to three and obtained the data in Table 3. Again
we used the sampling method just described to test the overall precision.
From Table 3 we can see that the method worked almost equally well on all word
lengths except length three. After checking the results, we found that three-character
strings are often constructed from a two-character legitimiate word together with a
single character. It is difficult to judge with such a simple method whether such three-
character strings are legitimate words.
Beyond precision, another concern is partial recall. In other words, how many
words will be missed using such a method? The corpus contained 55,788 sentences.
84
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 1
Table 2
Experiments on the threshold?precision relationship of the small corpus.
Threshold Precision Number of words
2 64.4% 37,093
3 83.8% 14,468
4 89.6% 8,648
5 94.1% 6,147
6 96.8% 4,757
7 97.4% 3,800
8 97.3% 3,162
9 97.7% 2,734
Table 3
Experiments on the word length?precision relationship of the small corpus.
Word length Precision Number of words
2 90.2% 6,962
3 56.6% 2,532
4 91.4% 3,417
5 85.1% 712
6 90.4% 493
7 89.4% 180
8 90.1% 111
9 80.3% 61
Table 4
Experiments on the threshold?partial recall relationship of the small corpus.
Threshold Partial recall Number of words
2 76.7% 37,093
3 66.5% 14,468
4 59.0% 8,648
5 54.3% 6,147
6 50.3% 4,757
7 47.1% 3,800
8 44.0% 3,162
9 41.5% 2,734
We checked only a small portion (a random sample of approximately 2,000 sentences)
of the total corpus. We used this sample to find meaningful words by hand. The result
of automatic extraction from the whole corpus was then compared with that of hand
extraction of the sample sentences. The partial recall was computed as the number of
words in both sets divided by the number of words in the human extraction set. We
list the experimental partial-recall values in Table 4.
We analyzed the instance with the threshold of two. Some of the words were
missed because they occurred only once, which was less than the threshold. Some of
the words were missed because they occurred only in very restricted environments.
This means that although they appeared more than once in the corpus, their acces-
sor variety value was only one. In the latter case, we could extract the strings that
contained such strings as substrings. The details are discussed in the section on error
analysis.
85
Feng, Chen, Deng, and Zheng Accessor Variety Criteria for Chinese Word Extraction
Table 5
Some words extracted from the large corpus.
desolate road
Huang Yanping (Chinese name)
goose feather fan
Bi Tong Ling (name of a Chinese medicine)
send love by swan goose
beloved hometown
MaGu offers birthday present
right of independent management
the Peking Museum
the Technology Institute of East China
fake and bad merchandise
the Peking penmanship temple fair
Sunday photo newspaper
socialistic modernization
4.3 Experiments on the Large Corpus
The corpus that was used for these experiments was the TREC Chinese corpus (Lin-
guistic Data Consortium, n.d.), which contains 160,000 articles, including articles that
were published in the People?s Daily from 1991 to 1993 and a portion of news released
by the Xinhua News Agency in 1994 and 1995. In the experiment, we extracted words
with lengths of two to seven characters. The data contained approximately 7,000,000
sentences. We first eliminated the non-Chinese characters. All of the experiments that
were carried out on the small corpus were also conducted on the large corpus. In Ta-
ble 5 we first show some legitimate words that were extracted from the large corpus.
Notice that these words cannot be found in the word list that was extracted from the
small corpus or in the system dictionary.
In Table 6, we show the overall precision performance. The performance trends
that were observed in Table 2 can be also observed here. However, as this corpus is
much larger than the previous one, many characters have the chance to occur together
to form spurious words. That is why the precision is much lower than that for the
small corpus. Nevertheless, as the corpus is much larger now, a correct word can
occur in many more environments than in the small corpus, which suggests that we
can improve the precision by using a large threshold for the accessor variety value
without overly degrading the partial recall. For example, when the threshold is set to
nine, the precision is as high as 73.4% and the partial recall remains as high as 80.4%.
Table 6
Experiments on the threshold?precision relationship of the large corpus.
Threshold Precision Number of words
2 51.2% 2,854,700
3 58.3% 1,269,378
4 69.0% 788,964
5 70.3% 562,407
6 70.4% 432,830
7 73.8% 349,511
8 74.2% 291,688
9 73.4% 249,904
86
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 1
Table 7
Experiments on the word length?precision relationship of the large corpus with threshold
three.
Word length Precision Partial recall Number of words
2 37.8% 92.3% 266,027
3 22.9% 83.5% 335,557
4 68.9% 80.9% 360,413
5 67.0% 83.3% 141,153
6 76.0% 81.6% 123,392
7 70.7% 64.3% 42,836
Table 8
Experiments on the word length?precision relationship of the large corpus with threshold nine.
Word length Precision Partial recall Number of words
2 71.7% 90.0% 77,200
3 52.7% 73.0% 55,015
4 74.6% 70.2% 78,868
5 75.0% 63.9% 18,775
6 86.9% 63.2% 15,663
7 89.4% 42.9% 4,383
The precision and partial-recall performance in respect to the word length was
also tested on the large corpus. The same sample method was used, and the results
for thresholds three and nine are shown in Tables 7 and 8, respectively.
Note that there is a great jump in the precision for word lengths two and three
after we change the threshold from three to nine, but the partial recall does not change
much. For longer words, the method even performs well with threshold three.
The next experiment was intended to test the partial-recall performance for all
of the words with lengths from two to seven. The result is shown in Table 9, which
indicates that the partial-recall value is satisfactory even with a large threshold. This
means that we can extract most of the words in the corpus.
4.4 Experiments on Numeric-Type Compounds
In this section, we consider numeric-type compounds. Some of the compounds of this
type that were extracted from the large corpus are listed in Table 10.
Table 9
Experiments on the threshold?partial recall relationship of the large corpus.
Threshold Partial recall Number of words
2 89.2% 2,854,700
3 87.2% 1,269,378
4 85.6% 788,964
5 84.2% 562,407
6 83.0% 432,830
7 82.0% 349,511
8 81.2% 291,688
9 80.4% 249,904
87
Feng, Chen, Deng, and Zheng Accessor Variety Criteria for Chinese Word Extraction
Table 10
Numeric-type compounds extracted.
3 2 March 2nd
first time
May the Fourth, 1992
two sides of the Strait
relationship between two countries
thirty Kilograms or so
100 one hundred Hong Kong dollars
200 two hundred ounces
forty thousand mu
4.5 Error Analysis
Two kinds of errors occurred: the extraction of meaningless strings as meaningful
words and the neglect of meaningful words. Some errors of the two types are listed
below.
4.5.1 Meaningless Strings Extracted. A number of meaningless strings were extracted:
for example, , ?solve the Republic of Bosnia and Hercegovina?; ,
?meeting today?; , ?employ international?; , ?title match order?;
, ?today China?; , ?related part?; , ?game today?; , ?interna-
tional pass?; , ?city people?; , ?will next?; , ?field people?; , ?be-
come country?; , ?province order?; , ?point to?; , ?city first?; and ,
?people attention?.
Most of these errors occurred because the strings are made up of one shorter
meaningful word and one character that has a high accessor variety value but is absent
from the adhesive-character list. For example, is composed of (accessor
variety value 133 in the large corpus) and , but is not on the adhesive-character
list. Therefore, was extracted as a word. However, if we list too many characters
as adhesive characters, the partial recall will be degraded. To give another example,
, ?bank of China deliver?, was extracted as a meaningful word even though
its meaning is very unclear. In the string , we considered and
to be adhesive characters and regarded as being in the h+core+t style.
However, the core is not in the system dictionary or the shorter word list
that we extracted previously. Hence, it passed the ADHESIVE JUDGE rules and was
retained as a word. It is hard to discard strings such as and ,
even though their meanings are not at all clear.
4.5.2 Meaningful Words Missed. A number of meaningful words were missed: for
example, , ?clear?; , ?gaseous state?; , ?sight-seeing interest is not
fulfilled?; , ?barren?; , ?carry forward?; , ?Straits Exchange Foundation?;
, ?recently?; and , ?African National Congress?.
The main reason for these errors is that the strings occur only once in the corpus or
their accessor varieties are smaller than the threshold. One way to solve this problem
is to use a larger corpus to improve the partial recall. Another reason for these errors is
that the string is composed of a shorter word plus an adhesive character, in which case
it was discarded according to the ADHESIVE JUDGE rules. For example, is
composed of and , where is a word in the system dictionary and is an
adhesive character. To solve this problem, we can use fewer adhesive characters at the
cost of some precision. To give another example, , ?Chang Jiang triangle
88
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 1
region?, is a meaningful word that appeared in the corpus but was not extracted,
because it contains a substring that can be interpreted as a numeric compound
?three jiao? (which means 0.3 Chinese RMB), and therefore we discarded it. However,
we can extract this string as a numeric-type compound.
5. Conclusion
We have described a hybrid method for extracting Chinese words from the Chinese
text corpus using accessor variety and adhesive characters. We tested the method on
the performance of different thresholds and word lengths and different corpus sizes.
We conclude that the method based on accessor variety and adhesive characters
performs efficiently in fulfilling word extraction tasks. The precision with the small
corpus we used was much larger than that with the large corpus, but the situation
was opposite for partial recall. For example, when the threshold was set to three, the
precision and partial recall with the small corpus were 83.8% and 66.5%, respectively,
whereas with the large corpus they were 58.3% and 87.2%, respectively. When the
threshold was set to nine, the corresponding numbers were 97.7% and 41.5% versus
73.4% and 80.4%. As even human judges differ when facing the task of segmenting a
text into words and test corpora differ from system to system (Sproat et al 1996), it is
very difficult to compare two methods.
To convincingly illustrate the efficiency of our method, we chose one of the most
direct ways: We implemented Chang and Su?s (1997) method and our own method on a
corpus, the size of which was similar to the one that was used in their paper. We chose
Chang and Su?s paper as reference for two reasons: Their approach was unsupervised,
just like ours, and it was a complicated iterative method that integrated several com-
monly used word-filtering techniques (including Viterbi training, mutual information,
entropy, and joint Gaussian mixture density function) to improve their result. Their
segmentation system contains two modules: One is the segmentation module, which
is used to segment words and calculate the frequencies of the words; the other is the
filtering module, which is used to rank the likelihood ratios of the words, and further
to filter out those words with low likelihood ratios from the augmented dictionary
and add those words with high likelihood ratios into the augmented dictionary. The
system iteratively repeats these two modules until a predefined condition is fulfilled.
We will show that even compared to such a deliberate approach, our simple method
is marginally better. For simplicity, we will use IT to refer to Chang and Su?s method
and AV to refer to our method, where the symbol IT implies iterative and AV implies
accessor variety.
We combined PD9208.SGML and PD9209.SGML (files of People?s Daily as published
in August and September 1992, which is a proportion of the TREC Chinese corpus
[Linguistic Data Consortium, n.d.]) to form a file of 376,053 sentences after the clearing
step (notice that in Chang and Su?s [1997] paper, 311,591 sentences were used).
We conducted two comparison experiments, one for extracting words with lengths
of two to four characters and the other for extracting words with lengths of two to
seven characters. The reason for selecting these two sets of word lengths is that Chang
and Su considered only words with lengths of two to four characters, whereas in our
method we consider words with lengths of two to seven characters. In both experi-
ments, the number of iterations for IT was 21 (because Chang and Su also conducted
21 iterations), and the AV value threshold (when the AV value of a string is greater
than or equal to this threshold, it is considered to be a word) for our method is three.
Because we do not segment the file in AV, it is impossible to count the precision
and recall by comparing the hand-segmented sample sentences with the automatically
89
Feng, Chen, Deng, and Zheng Accessor Variety Criteria for Chinese Word Extraction
segmented sample sentences. (In this case, sample sentences are first obtained, then
they are segmented both by hand and automatically by the method under examina-
tion. The precision is equal to the number of words that are extracted both by hand
and automatically, divided by the total number of words that are extracted automati-
cally. The recall is equal to the number of words that are extracted both by hand and
automatically, divided by the total number of words that are extracted by hand.) This
evaluation method was applied in Chang and Su?s (1997) original work. Instead, we
evaluated both IT and AV with the method that we described in the previous sections.
We randomly chose 1,000 words of each word length (in the first experiment, word
length varied from two to four, and in the second experiment, word length varied
from two to seven) from the output dictionary that was generated by each method.
The precision of each word length was then defined as the proportion of correct words
among the 1,000 sample words of the same word length. Regarding partial recall (we
used partial recall as a substitute for traditional recall, as discussed previously), we
first randomly chose sentences from the unsegmented file, and then segmented them
by hand. Then we extracted words with different lengths from this set of sentences.
The partial recall of each word length was then defined as the number of words of
that length that were extracted both from the hand-segmented sample sentences and
from the automatically generated output dictionary, divided by the total number of
words of that length that were extracted from the hand-segmented sample sentences.
The system dictionaries that we used in each experiment were derived from
the large dictionary described before (i.e., a dictionary downloaded from http://www.
mandarintools.com/segmenter.html that contains 119,538 terms from two to seven char-
acters long). In each experiment, the size of the system dictionary and the size of the
applied corpus were chosen to approach those of the system dictionary and the corpus
that were mentioned in Chang and Su?s (1997) original work.
In each experiment, all of the values of precision and partial recall of both IT
and AV were counted by the same person. Therefore, the evaluation results should be
reasonably credible.
In the experiment of extracting words of lengths two to four, the system dictionary
contained 24,705 bigrams, 4,355 trigrams, and 4,252 four-grams, that is, a total of 33,312
entities. We randomly chose 979 sentences and segmented them by hand. Suppose that
the word set obtained was S. We then removed from S those segments that occurred
in the system dictionary and those segments that appeared less than five times in the
original corpus (the 376,053 sentences). The latter removal was undertaken because
Chang and Su (1997) did not consider segments with frequency of less than five.
Hence, from S, we obtained 580 bigrams, 156 trigrams, and 135 four-grams. These
words were considered to be new words extracted by hand from the sample sentences
and were used to test the partial recall for each method, IT and AV. In Table 11, we
list the precision and partial-recall value for each word length from two to four for
both IT and AV.
We can see from the table that IT outperforms AV for word length two, but the
situation is just the opposite for word length four. With word length three, the two
methods perform comparatively, and AV?s performance is slightly worse. Considering
that our method, AV, is much simpler than IT, we conclude that it is quite promising.
Because we observed from this experiment that the performance of our method
improves with increased word length, we conducted another experiment to further
examine this phenomenon. In this experiment, we extracted words with lengths from
two to seven characters. The system dictionary that we used contained 38,097 entries,
with 27,986 bigrams, 4,906 trigrams, 4,834 four-grams, 238 five-grams, 89 six-grams and
44 seven-grams. We randomly chose 1,989 sentences and segmented them by hand.
90
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 1
Table 11
Precision and partial recall of word lengths two to four of the first experiment on IT and AV.
Bigram Trigram Four-gram
Precision
IT 57.69% 26.18% 56.93%
AV 47.04% 25.75% 68.76%
Partial recall
IT 85.69% 84.62% 81.48%
AV 75.34% 81.41% 87.41%
Table 12
Precision and partial recall of word lengths two to seven of the second experiment on IT and
AV.
Bigram Trigram Four-gram Five-gram Six-gram Seven-gram
Precision
IT 49.85% 25.38% 59.12% 32.71% 56.60% 32.62%
AV 42.70% 28.28% 68.86% 54.66% 73.77% 70.23%
Partial recall
IT 84.84% 71.59% 78.05% 70.37% 80.65% 84.62%
AV 80.83% 81.06% 88.35% 83.33% 90.32% 76.92%
After filtering out the segments that appeared in the system dictionary and those with
frequencies less than five, the numbers of new words that were extracted by hand
from the sample sentences of word lengths two to seven were 699, 264, 369, 54, 31,
and 13, respectively. These words were used to test the partial recall. In Table 12, we
list the results of the second experiment. The precision and partial-recall values were
computed in the same way as were the values in Table 11.
This table strongly indicates that AV outperforms IT for all word lengths except
for word length two. Two characters have greater chances of occurring together in
different environments than larger numbers of characters. This degrades the precision
of our method in the case of bigrams, as the threshold that we used for AV value
was three, i.e., when the AV value of a bigram was greater than or equal to three, we
regarded it as a word. The reason for the lower partial recall of AV with word length
two is that we filtered out all of the bigrams that were both absent from the system
dictionary and had adhesive characters. For larger word lengths, only those grams
with specific meanings had chances of occurring together in different environments;
that is, they had higher AV values, which resulted in a higher precision value in our
method. The reason for higher partial recall values of AV with longer grams is that even
when a longer gram with higher AV value both was absent from the system dictionary
and had adhesive characters, we did not dogmatically filter it out. Alternatively, we
furthered examined whether it was in one of the three styles h+core, core+t, or h+core+t
(as discussed in Section 3). If it was in one of these styles, then we filtered it out.
There are several ways to explain the performance of IT being better than that of
AV with bigrams but worse with longer grams. First, IT does not consider adhesive
characters, which helps improve the partial recall while degrading the precision, as
many grams contain adhesive characters and they are hard to inspect (note that in our
method, we filtered out some of the grams with adhesive characters). Second, IT uses
several techniques to filter out the bad candidates for real words, which is intended to
help improve the precision. But there are several deficiencies in this design. In the IT
91
Feng, Chen, Deng, and Zheng Accessor Variety Criteria for Chinese Word Extraction
segmentation module, a longer segment is preferred. (For each sentence, IT tries to find
the segmentation with the highest likelihood, where the likelihood is defined as the
multiplication of the relative frequencies of all the segments, and the relative frequency
of one segment is defined as the frequency of that segment divided by the sum of the
frequency of all grams [Chang and Su 1997]. Therefore, if a segmentation has more
segments, then its likelihood value is smaller.) This will inevitably degrade the partial
recall of shorter grams. On the other hand, because system dictionaries usually contain
very limited numbers of longer terms, IT?s filter module (i.e., a likelihood-ranking
model) has inadequate information to correctly describe the feature functions of word
class or nonword class for longer grams. This will inevitably degrade both the precision
and the partial recall for longer grams, as real words might be considered nonwords,
and nonwords might be considered real words. Finally, although the combination of
several features seems more comprehensive, it also generates more noise than using
only one feature.
We think that all of the factors that we described above can roughly explain the
phenomenon that is presented in Table 12. Comparing Table 12 to Table 11, we find that
the results are slightly different even for the same word lengths. One reason for this is
that in different experiments, we used different system dictionaries. Note that all of the
results were obtained only on new words. Therefore, the size of the system dictionary
will affect the result of the experiment. Usually, the larger the system dictionary is, the
poorer are the precision and recall that are obtained. In the dictionary that we used in
the latter experiment, there were more bigrams than in the dictionary that we used in
the first experiment. That is why the precision value and the partial-recall value for
bigrams are smaller than those in the first experiment. As there are similar numbers
of trigrams and four-grams in both dictionaries, the results for these grams are very
close in both experiments. Another factor that may lead to these differences is the
use of different sample sentences and different methods to segment them by hand for
testing partial recall. In the former experiment, we considered only terms with lengths
from two to four characters, and hence only segmented the sample sentences to terms
of lengths from two to four. In the latter experiment, we considered all terms with
lengths from two to seven characters.
6. Discussion of Future Work
In this work, we have proposed accessor variety as an alternative to the commonly
used frequency criterion. Our approach may give rise to new research directions in
Chinese text processing. Our promising results for word extraction make it a potential
useful method for other problems as well.
In addition, word extraction is the basic step for many text-processing tasks. It
is related to but different from word segmentation. Extracted words can be used as
the fundamental elements for related application problems, such as creating a text
summary for a bundle of articles and text clustering.
Futhermore, words as sequences of letters occur not only in language processing,
but also in other application areas. Our method may be of some heuristic value to other
related problems, such as those involving substring processing (Deng, Li, and Wang
2002; Thijs et al 2002; Narasimhan et al 2002), and biomedical concepts identification
Majoros, Subramanian, and Yandell 2003).
Finally, in our simple method, we process the data only once, and no iterative re-
finement is applied. The result is comparable even to that of very comprehensive sys-
tems and shows some improvement with longer grams. The simplicity of our method
makes it especially suitable for processing large corpora.
92
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 1
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Jing-Shin Chang for
help in our implementation of their method
IT. Many thanks also go to Chun-yu Kit for
his suggestions. And we also thank the
anonymous reviewers for their constructive
advice in revising the original manuscript.
The work described in this article was fully
supported by a grant of NSFC/RGC joint
research scheme (N CityU 102/01,
NSFC60131160743).
References
Beeferman, Doug, Adam Berger, and
John D. Lafferty. 1999. Statistical models
for text segmentation. Machine Learning,
34(1?3):177?210.
Beijing Language Institute. 1986. Xian dai
han yu pin lu ci dian [Word Frequency
Dictionary of Modern Chinese]. Beijing
Language Institute Press.
Chang, Jing-Shin and Keh-Yih Su. 1997. An
unsupervised iterative method for
Chinese new lexicon extraction.
International Journal of Computational
Linguistics and Chinese Language Processing,
2(2):97?148.
Chao, Yuen-Ren. 1968. A Grammar of Spoken
Chinese. University of California Press,
Berkeley and Los Angeles.
Chen, Ching-Yu, Shu-Fen Tseng, Chu-Ren
Huang, and Keh-Jiann Chen. 1993. Some
distributional properties of Mandarin
Chinese?A study based on the Academia
Sinica corpus. Proceedings of Pacific Asia
Conference on Formal and Computational
Linguistics I, pages 81?95, Taipei.
Chen, Keh-Jiann and Ming-Hong Bai. 1998.
Unknown word detection for Chinese by
a corpus-based learning method.
International Journal of Computational
Linguistics and Chinese Language Processing,
3(1):27?44.
Chien, Lee-Feng. 1995. Csmart?A
high-performance Chinese document
retrieval system. In Proceedings of the 1995
International Conference of Computer
Processing of Oriental Languages (ICCPOL),
pages 176?183, Hawaii.
Chien, Lee-Feng. 1997. PAT-tree-based
keyword extraction for Chinese
information retrieval. In Proceedings of the
20th Annual International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, pages 50?58,
Philadelphia.
Dai, Yubin, Teck Ee Loh, and Christopher
Khoo. 1999. A new statistical formula for
Chinese text segmentation incorporating
contextual information. In SIGIR ?99:
Proceedings of the 22nd Annual International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval, pages
82?89, Berkely, CA.
Deng, Xiaotie, Guojun Li, and Lusheng
Wang. 2002. Center and distinguisher for
strings with unbounded alphabet. Journal
of Combinatorial Optimization, 6(4):383?400.
Garside, Roger, Geoffrey Leech, and
Geoffrey Sampson. 1987. The
Computational Analysis of English: A
Corpus-Based Approach. London, Longman.
Ge, Xian-Ping, Wanda Pratt, and Padhraic
Smyth. 1999. Discovering Chinese words
from unsegmented text. In Proceedings of
the 22nd Annual International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, pages 271?272,
Berkeley, CA.
Guo, Jin. 1997. Critical tokenization and its
properties. Computational Linguistics,
23(4):569?596.
Harris, Zellig S. 1970. Morpheme
boundaries within words. In Papers in
Structural and Transformational Linguistics.
D. Reidel, Dordrecht, pages 68?77.
Huang, Chu-Ren, Keh-Jiann Chen, and
Ben-Jamin K. Tsou. 1996. Readings in
Chinese Natural Language Processing. In
Journal of Chinese Linguistics Monograph
Series no. 9, edited by Chu-ren Huang et
al., pages 1?22.
Kobayasi, Yosiyuki, Takenobu Tokumaga,
and Hozumi Tanaka. 1994. Analysis of
Japanese compound nouns using
collocational information. In Proceedings of
the 15th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics (COLING?94),
vol. 2, pages 865?869, Kyoto, Japan.
Kwok, Kui-Lam. 1997. Comparing
representations in Chinese information
retrieval. In Proceedings of the 20th Annual
International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, pages 34?41, Philadelphia.
Linguistic Data Consortium. n.d. TREC
Mandarin-Text Retrieval Conference
Mandarin Newswire, LDC 2000T52.
Majoros, William H., G. Mani Subramanian,
and Mark Yandell. 2003. Identification of
key concepts in biomedical literature
using a modified Markov heuristic.
Bioinformatics, 19(3):402?407.
Mo, Ruo-Ping J., Yao-Jung Yang, Keh-Jiann
Chen, and Chu-Ren Huang. 1996.
Determinative-measure compounds in
Mandarin Chinese: Formation rules and
parser implementation. In Readings in
93
Feng, Chen, Deng, and Zheng Accessor Variety Criteria for Chinese Word Extraction
Chinese Natural Language Processing, Journal
of Chinese Linguistics Monograph Series
no. 9, edited by Chu-ren Huang et al,
pages 123?146.
Narasimhan, Giri, Changsong Bu, Yuan
Gao, Xuning Wang, Ning Xu, and Kalai
Mathee. 2002. Mining protein sequences
for motifs. Journal of Computational Biology,
9(5):707?720.
Pachunke, Thomas, Oliver Mertineit, Klaus
Wothke, and Rudolf Schmidt. 1992. Broad
coverage automatic morphological
segmentation of German words. In
Proceedings of the 14th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING?92), vol. 4, pages 1218?1222,
Nantes, France.
Paola, Merlo and Suzanne Stevenson. 2001.
Automatic verb classification based on
statistical distribution of argument
structure. Computational Linguistics,
27(3):373?408.
Ricardo, Baeza-Yates and Ribeiro-Neto
Berthier. 1999. Modern Information Retrieval.
ACM Press, Addison Wesley Longman.
Sproat, Richard and Chilin Shih. 1990. A
statistical method for finding word
boundaries in Chinese text. Computer
Processing of Chinese and Oriental Languages,
4:336?351.
Sproat, Richard, Chilin Shih, William Gale,
and Nancy Chang. 1996. A stochastic
finite-state word-segmentation algorithm
for Chinese. Computational Linguistics,
22(3):377?404.
Teahan, William J., Yingying Wen, Rodger J.
McNab, and Ian H. Witten. 2000. A
compression-based algorithm for Chinese
word segmentation. Computational
Linguistics, 26(3):375?393.
Thijs, Gert, Kathleen Marchal, Magali
Lescot, Stephane Rombauts, Bart De
Moor, Pierre Rouze, and Yves Moreau.
2002. A Gibbs sampling method to detect
overrepresented motifs in the upstream
regions of coexpressed genes. Journal of
Computational Biology, 9(2):447?464.
Wang, Yong-Heng, Hai-Ju Su, and Yan Mo.
1990. Automatic processing of Chinese
words. Journal of Chinese Information
Processing, 4(4):1?11.
Weeber, Marc, Rein Vos, and R. Harald
Baayen. 2000. Extracting the lowest
frequency words: Pitfalls and possibilities.
Computational Linguistics, 26(3):301?317.
Wu, Zimin and Gwyneth Tseng. 1993.
Chinese text segmentation for text
retrieval: Achievements and problems.
Journal of the American Society for
Information Science, 44(9):532?542.
Yamamoto, Mikio and Kenneth W. Church.
2001. Using suffix arrays to compute term
frequency and document frequency for all
substrings in a corpus. Computational
Linguistics, 27(1):1?30.
Yun, Bo-Hyun, Ho Lee, and Hae-Chang
Rim. 1995. Analysis of Korean compound
nouns using statistical information. In
Proceedings of the 1995 International
Conference on Computer Processing of
Oriental Languages (ICCPOL-95), Hawaii.
Zhang, Jian, Jianfeng Gao, and Ming Zhou.
2000. Extraction of Chinese compound
words?An experimental study on a very
large corpus. Proceedings of the Second
Chinese Language Processing Workshop,
pages 132?139, Hong Kong.
