Towards a Road Map on Human Language Technology: 
Natural Language Processing 
 
Editors: Andreas Eisele, Dorothea Ziegler-Eisele 
Version 2 (March 2002) 
Abstract 
This document summarizes contributions and discussions from two workshops that took place 
in November 2000 and July 2001.  It presents some visions of NLP-related applications that 
may become reality within ten years from now. It investigates the technological requirements 
that must be met in order to make these visions realistic and sketches milestones that may 
help to measure our progress towards these goals. 
1. Introduction  
Scope of this Document 
One of the items on ELSNET's agenda for the period 2000-2002 is to develop views on and 
visions of the longer-term future of the field of language and speech technologies and 
neighboring areas, also called ELSNET's Road Map for Human Language Technologies. As a 
first step in this process, ELSNET's Research Task group is organizing a series of 
brainstorming workshop with a number of prominent researchers and developers from our 
community.  The first one of these workshops took place in November 2000 under the general 
motto ?How will language and speech technology be used in the information world of 2010? 
Research challenges and infrastructure needs for the next ten years".  The second one was co-
organized in July 2001 by ELSNET and MITRE as part of ACL-2001 and had the somewhat 
more specific orientation on ?Human Language Technology and Knowledge Management 
(HLT-KM)?. This workshop brought together more than 40 researchers from industry and 
academia and covered a considerable range of topics related to KM and HLT in general. 
This paper aims at summarizing and organizing material from both workshops, but 
concentrates on applications and technologies that involve NLP, i.e. the processing of written 
natural language, as speech-related technologies and new models of interactivity have already 
been covered in documents presented around the first workshop. In the discussion of question 
answering and summarization, vision papers and roadmaps compiled by researchers in the US 
and published by NIST have been taken as an additional source of inspiration.   
The Growing Need for Human Language Technology 
Natural language is the prime vehicle in which information is encoded, by which it is 
accessed and through which it is disseminated.  With the explosion in the quantity of on-line 
 
text and multimedia information in recent years there is a pressing demand for technologies 
that facilitate the access to and exploitation of the knowledge contained in these documents.  
Advances in human language technology will offer nearly universal access to on-line 
information and services for more and more people, with or without skills to use computers. 
These technologies will play a key role in the age of information and are cited as key 
capabilities for competitive advantage in global enterprises.  
Extraction of knowledge from multiple sources and languages (books, periodicals, newscasts, 
satellite images, etc.) and the fusion into a single, coherent textual representation requires not 
only an understanding of the informational content of each of these documents, the removal 
of redundancies and resolution of contradictions.  Also, models of the user are required, the 
prior knowledge that can be assumed, the level of abstraction and the style that is appropriate 
to produce output that is suitable for a given purpose. 
More advanced knowledge management (KM) applications will be able to draw inferences 
and to present the conclusions to the user in condensed form, but let the user ask for 
explanations of the internal reasoning. In order to find solutions for problems beyond a static 
pool of knowledge, we need systems that are able to identify experts, who have solved similar 
problems. Again, advanced NLP capabilities will be required to appraise the aptitude of 
candidates from documents authored by them or describing prior performance. 
But also outside of KM, sophisticated applications of NLP will emerge over the next years 
and decades and find their way into our daily lives. The range of possibilities is almost 
unlimited. An important group of applications is related to electronic commerce, i.e. new 
methods to establish and maintain contact between companies and their customers. Via 
mobile phones, e-mail, animated web-based interfaces, or innovative multi-channel interfaces, 
people will want to make use of all kinds of services related to buying and selling goods, 
home-banking, booking of journeys, and the like. Also in the area of electronic learning a 
considerable growth is expected within the coming years.   
Multilinguality 
Whereas English is still the predominant language on the WWW, the fraction of non-English 
Web pages and sites is steadily increasing. Contrasting earlier apprehensions, the future will 
probably present ample opportunities for giving value to different languages and cultures. 
However, the possibility to collect information from disparate, multilingual sources also 
provides considerable challenges for the human user of these sources and for any kind of NLP 
technology that will be employed.  
One of the major challenges is lexical complexity. There will be about 200 different 
languages on the web and thus about 40.000 potential language pairs for translation.  Clearly, 
it will not be possible to build bilingual dictionaries that are comprehensive both in the 
number of language pairs and in the coverage of application domains.  Instead, multilingual 
vocabularies need to provide mappings into language independent knowledge organization 
structures, i.e. common systems of concepts linked by semantic relations.  However, the 
definition of such an ?interlingua? will be difficult in cases in which languages make 
distinctions of different granularity. 
Research Trends and Challenges 
The field of human language technology covers a broad range of activities with the goal of 
enabling people to communicate with machines using natural communication skills.  
 
Although NLP can help to facilitate knowledge management, it requires a large amount of 
specialized knowledge by itself.  This knowledge may be encoded in complex systems of 
linguistic rules and descriptions, such as grammars and lexicons, which are written in 
dedicated grammar formalisms and typically require many person-years of development 
effort.  The rules and entries in such descriptions interact in complex ways, and adaptation of 
such a sophisticated system to a new text style or application domain is a task that requires a 
considerable amount of specialized manpower. 
One way to cope with the difficulties in the acquisition of linguistic knowledge was to restrict 
attention to shallower tasks, such as looking for syntactic ?chunks? instead of a full syntactic 
analysis. Whereas this has proven rather successful for some applications, it obviously 
severely limits the depth to which the meaning of a document or utterance is taken into 
account. 
Another approach was to shift attention towards models of linguistic performance (what 
occurs in practice, instead of what is principally possible) and to use statistical or machine 
learning methods to acquire the necessary parameters from corpora of annotated examples. 
These data-driven approaches offer the possibility to express and exploit gradual distinctions, 
which is quite important in practice. They are not only easier to scale and adapt to new 
domains, their algorithms are also inherently robust, i.e. they can deal, to a certain extent, 
gracefully with errors in the input. 
Statistical parsers, trained on suitable tree banks, now achieve more than 90% precision and 
recall in the recognition of syntactic constituents in unseen sentences from English financial 
newspaper text. 
However, a lot of work remains to be done, and it is not obvious how the success of corpus-
driven approaches can be enlarged along many dimensions simultaneously.  One challenge is 
that analysis methods need to work for many languages, application domains and text types, 
whereas the manual annotation of large corpora of all relevant types will not be economically 
feasible.  Another challenge is that, other than syntax, many additional levels of analysis will 
be required, such as the identification of word sense, the reference of expressions, structure of 
argumentation and of documents, and the pragmatic role of utterances.  Often, the theoretical 
foundation that is required before the annotation of corpora can begin is still lacking. 
One could say that for corpus-driven approaches the issue of scalability of the required 
resources shows up again, albeit in a somewhat different disguise.  Hence, research in NLP 
will have to address this issue seriously, and find answers to the question how better tools and 
learning methods can reduce the effort of manual annotation, how annotated corpora of a 
slightly different type could best be re-used, how data-driven acquisition processes can 
exploit and extend existing lexicons and grammars, and finally how analysis levels for which 
the theoretical basis is still under development could be advanced in a data-driven way. 
Structure of this Document 
The remainder of this document is structured as follows.  In Chapter 2 we describe a number 
of prototypical applications and scenarios in which NLP will play a crucial role.  Whereas 
each of these scenarios is discussed mainly from a user?s perspective, we also give 
indications, which technological requirements must be met to make various levels of 
sophistication of these applications possible.  In Chapter 3, the technologies that have been 
mentioned earlier are discussed in more detail, and we try to indicate which levels of 
functionality may be expected within the timeframe of this study.  These building blocks are 
 
then put into a tentative chronological order, which is displayed in Chapter 4.  Finally, 
Chapter 5 gives some general recommendations about beneficial measures concerning the 
infrastructure for the relevant research. 
2. Applications of NLP 
Recent developments in natural language processing have made it clear that formerly 
independent technologies can be harnessed together to an increasing degree in order to form 
sophisticated and powerful information delivery vehicles. Information retrieval engines, text 
summarizers, question answering and other dialog systems, and language translators provide 
complementary functionalities which can be combined to serve a variety of users, ranging 
from the casual user asking questions of the web to a sophisticated, professional knowledge 
worker. 
Though one cannot strictly separate the following applications from each other, because one 
can act as a part of another, we try to dissect the large field of existing and future applications 
in the hope of making the field as a whole more transparent.  
Information Retrieval (IR) 
What is called information retrieval today is actually but a foretaste of what it should be.  
Current systems neither understand the information need of the user, nor the content of the 
documents in their repositories. Instead of meaningful replies, they just return a ranked, and 
often very long list of documents that are somehow related to the given query, which is 
typically very short.  A better name for this restricted functionality would be text retrieval. 
Information retrieval systems must understand a query, retrieve relevant information, and 
present the results. Retrieved information may consist of a long document, multiple 
documents of the same topic, etc and good systems should present the most important 
material in a clear and coherent manner. 
Current information retrieval techniques either rely on an encoding process using a certain 
perspective or classification scheme to describe a given item, or perform a superficial full-text 
analysis, searching for user-specific words. Neither case guarantees content matching. 
The ability to leverage advances in input processing (especially natural language query 
processing) together with advances in content-based access to multimedia artifacts (e.g., text, 
audio, imagery, video) promises to enhance the richness and breadth of accessible material 
while at the same time improving retrieval precision and recall and thus reducing the search 
time. Dealing with noisy, large scale, and multimedia data from sources as diverse as radio, 
television, documents, web pages, and human conversations (e.g., chat sessions and speech 
transcriptions) will offer challenges. 
One important part of IR would be multi-document summarization that can turn a large set of 
input documents into several different short summaries, which can then be sorted by topics or 
otherwise put into a coherent order.  
 
Summarization 
Summarization will enable knowledge workers access to larger amounts of material with less 
required reading time. The goal of automatic text summarization is to take a partially 
structured source text, extract information content from it and present the most important 
content in a condensed form in a manner sensitive to the needs of the user and task. 
Scalability to large collections and the generation of user-tailored or purpose-tailored 
summaries are active areas of research. 
The summarization can either be an extract consisting entirely of material copied from the 
input, or an abstract containing material not present in the input, such as subject categories, 
paraphrases of content, etc. 
For extraction shallower approaches are possible, as frequently the sentences may be 
extracted out of context. The transformation here involves selecting salient units and 
synthesizing them with the necessary smoothing (adjusting references, rearranging the 
text?). Training by using large corpora is possible. 
Abstracts need a deeper level of analysis, the synthesis involves natural language generation 
and some coding for a domain is required. 
Depending on their function, three types of abstracts can be distinguished: An indicative 
abstract provides a reference function for selecting documents for more in-depth reading. An 
informative abstract covers all the salient information in the source at some level of detail and 
evaluative abstracts express the abstractor?s views on the quality of the work of the author. 
Characteristics for the summarization are the reduction of the information content 
(compression rate), the fidelity to the source, the relevance to the user?s interest, and the well-
formedness regarding both to syntactic and discourse level. Extracts need to avoid gaps, 
dangling anaphora, ravaged tables and lists, abstracts need to produce grammatical, plausible 
output. 
Some current applications of summarization are: 
1. Multimedia news summaries: watch the news and tell what happened while I was 
away 
2. Physicians? aids: summarize and compare the recommended treatments for this patient 
3. Meeting summarization: find out what happened at that teleconference I missed 
4. Search engine hits: summarize the information in hit lists retrieved by search engines 
5. Intelligence gathering: create a 500-word biography of Osama bin Laden 
6. Hand-held devices: create a screen-sized summary of a book 
7. Aids for the Handicapped: compact the text and read it out for a blind person 
Though there are already promising approaches towards mastering all types of summaries, 
there are still obstacles to overcome such as the need for robust methods for the recognition of 
semantic relations, speech acts, and rhetorical structure. 
 
Question Answering  (QA) 
The straightest way to get access to the gigantic volume of knowledge around us is probably 
asking questions by communicating with other persons, computers or machines. 
An important new class of systems will move us from our current form of search on the web 
(type in keywords to retrieve documents) to a more direct form of asking questions in natural 
language, which are then directly responded to with an extracted or generated answer. 
Currently it is rather straightforward to get an answer to ?what questions? (what is the capital 
of China, what are the opening hours of the hermitage etc.), whereas ?why questions? (why 
did the new market fail) are normally not answered by an information retrieval query, unless 
the answer happens to be present in the information database, or can be inferred afterwards by 
the user from the answers she gets. 
In the next decade time has come to find answers to why questions from information systems 
by letting the systems make the appropriate inferences. This requires very sophisticated 
automatic reasoning methods, based on systematic extraction of information from texts, 
storing the information in a systematized way, which lends itself to reasoning and inference 
rules that will be able to draw the proper conclusions from the knowledge stored in the 
information database. 
We can subdivide the long-term goal of building powerful, multipurpose information 
management systems for QA in simpler subtasks that can be attacked in parallel at varying 
levels of sophistication, over shorter time frames.  
Clearly there is not a single, archetypical user of a Q&A system. In fact there is a full 
spectrum of questions, starting with simple factual questions, which could be answered in a 
single short phrase found in a single document (e.g. ?Where is the Taj Mahal??). Next, 
questions like ?What do we know about Company xyz??, where the answer cannot be found 
in a single document but will require retrieving multiple documents, locating portions of 
answers in them and combining them into a single response. This kind of question might be 
addressed by decomposing it into a series of single focus questions. 
Finally there are very complex questions, with broad scope, using judgment terms and 
needing deep knowledge of the user?s context to be answered. Imagine someone is watching a 
television newscast, becomes interested in a person, who appears to be acting as an advisor to 
the country?s Prime Minister. And now the person wants to know things like: ?Who is this 
individual. What is his background? What do we know about the political relationship of this 
person and the Prime Minister and/or the ruling party??. The future systems that can deal with 
this type of questions must manage the search in multiple sources in multiple 
media/languages, the fusion of information, resolution of conflicting data, multiple 
alternatives, adding interpretation, drawing conclusions.  
In order to realize this goal, research must deal with question analysis, response discovery and 
generation from heterogeneous sources, which may include structured and unstructured 
language data of all media types, multiple languages, multiple styles, formats and also image 
data i.e. document images, photography and video. 
To the extent to which NLP research will learn to master the challenges of source selection, 
source segmentation, extraction, and semantic integration across heterogeneous sources of 
unstructured and semi-structured data, NLP technology will help us to reduce the time, 
 
memory, and attention required to sift through many returned web pages from a traditional 
search by providing direct answers to questions. 
Semantic Web 
The standardization committee for the WWW (called W3C) expects around a billion web 
users by 2002 and an even higher number of available documents. However, this success and 
exponential grow makes it increasingly difficult to find, to access, to present, and to maintain 
the information of use to a wide variety of users. 
The semantic web will bring structure to the meaningful content of Web pages, creating an 
environment where software agents roaming from page to page can readily carry out 
sophisticated tasks for users. 
The semantic web is not a separate web but an extension of the current one, in which 
information is given well-defined meaning better enabling computers and people to work in 
cooperation. With the help of ontologies large amounts of text can be semantically annotated 
and classified. 
Currently pages on the web use representations rooted in format languages such as HTML or 
SGML. The information content, however, is mainly presented by natural language. Thus, 
there is a wide gap between the information available for tools that try to address the 
problems above and the information kept in human readable form. 
The semantic web will provide intelligent access to heterogeneous and distributed information 
enabling software agents to mediate between the user needs and the available information 
sources. 
The first steps in weaving the semantic web into the structure of the existing web are already 
under way. In the near future, these developments will usher in significant new functionality 
as machines become much better able to process and ?understand? the data that they merely 
display at present. 
What is required: creation of a machine understandable semantics for some or all of the 
information presented in the WWW i.e.  
? Developing languages for expressing machine understandable meta-information for 
documents, in the line of RDF, DAML, and similar proposals. 
? Developing terminologies (i.e., name spaces or ontologies) using these languages and 
making them available on the web. 
? Integrating and translating different terminologies 
? Developing tools that use such languages and terminologies to provide support in 
finding, accessing, presenting and maintaining information sources. 
Developing such languages, ontologies and tools is a wide-ranging problem that touches on 
the research areas of a broad variety of research communities.  
Creation of the relevant tools will require a better knowledge of what the users want to know 
from websites, i.e. these developments need to be based on a user-centered process view. 
 
Another crucial issue will be: ?Who is going to populate the semantic web??  The semantic 
markup that is required by automated software agents needs to be very easy to create and 
supporting tools need to be provided, otherwise this wonderful idea will not have significant 
impact for a long time. Advanced NLP technology that can ?guess? the correct semantic 
annotation and propose suitable markup semi-automatically will enable conformance to the 
needs of software agents with minimal manual effort. 
Dialogue Systems  
No matter if people want to buy something, find or use a service or just need information, 
dialog systems promise user-friendly and effective ways to achieve these goals, even for first 
time users.  
Despite the apparent resemblance to QA systems, there are several specific problems to be 
solved concerning dialogue modality and structure. Input to a dialog system might be via 
keypad, voice, pointing device, combinations thereof, or other channels, so all errors and 
incompleteness of spontaneous natural language will show up. In contrast to QA systems, 
there will be mixed initiatives of speaker and system and the scope is much wider if we take 
into account that the focus during natural dialogue may often change.  Also, the utterance 
made during a dialog can only be correctly interpreted based on the dialog context and the 
mutual knowledge that has been accumulated before it was made. 
In future we require systems that can support natural, mixed initiative human computer 
interaction that deals robustly with context shift, interruptions, feedback and shift of locus or 
control.  
Open research challenges include the ability to tailor flow and control of interactions and 
facilitate interactions including error detection and correction tailored to individual physical, 
perceptual and cognitive differences.  
Motivational and engaging life-like agents offer promising opportunities for innovation. 
Agent/user modeling: Computers can construct models of user beliefs, goals and plans as well 
as models of users? individual and collective skills by processing materials such as documents 
or user interactions/conversations. While raising important privacy issues, modeling users or 
groups of users unobtrusively from public materials or conversations can enable a range of 
important knowledge management capabilities  
tracking of user characteristic skills and goals enhances interaction as well as discovery of 
experts by other users or agents 
A central problem for the development of dialogue systems is the fact that contemporary 
linguistics is still struggling to achieve a genuine integration of semantics and pragmatics. A 
satisfactory analysis of dialogue requires in general both semantic representation i.e. 
representation of the content of what the different participants are saying and pragmatic 
information, i.e. what kinds of speech acts they are performing (are they asking a question, 
making a proposal?)  
Analysis of a dialog needs to explain the purpose behind the utterances it consists of. 
Determining the semantic representation of an utterance and its pragmatic features must in 
general proceed in tandem. A dialogue system identifying the relevant semantic and 
pragmatic information will thus have to be based on a theory in which semantics and 
 
pragmatics are both developed with the formal precision that is a prerequisite for 
implementation and suitably attuned to each other and intertwined. 
Applications in Electronic Commerce 
New technological possibilities can quickly impact the interaction between companies and 
their customers. One example are dialog systems that allow customers to obtain personal 
advises or services. For reasons indicated above, these systems are difficult to build, but once 
this investment has been done, they can be operated at low cost for the company. 
Another example, which may be even sooner to come, is the creation of systems that support 
processing of emails sent by customers.  According to business analyses, e-mail has already 
now become one of the most common forms of customer communication. For numerous 
businesses that are not well-prepared, this has transformed e-mail into a severe pain point, 
giving rise to the pressing need to adopt e-mail response management systems. 
Obviously, NLP technologies that are able to extract the salient facts from email messages 
can constitute a central part of these systems.  Due to the potential complexity of the queries 
and additional problems like ungrammatical input and spelling errors, the correct 
interpretation of arbitrary messages is far from easy.  However, there are several factors that 
alleviate the situation: Messages that are too difficult for automatic processing can be routed 
to human agents. In cases in which doubts about the correctness of generated responses 
persist, these responses can always be checked by manual inspection. Historical data about 
email exchange with customers can be used to bootstrap the models that are required for the 
system. Depending on the business, a significant fraction of the emails may be amenable to 
NLP, including requests for information material, business reports, certificates, statements of 
account, scheduling requests, conference registrations etc. 
e-Learning 
Using modern technology to facilitate learning is one of the most promising application 
domains of NLP.  Good QA systems that are able to give answers to the point, or 
summarization systems that can adapt to the user?s prior knowledge and present important 
additions in a way that is easy to understand could immediately take the place of a good 
teacher, which an unlimited supply of time and patience.  One technology is ripe to build 
these tools, using them for e-learning will one of the biggest opportunities to our knowledge 
society. 
However, as the European society evolves more and more into multilingualism, it is natural to 
ask how NLP can help to make language learning easier and more effective. We can imagine 
systems to help train children to write and to speak a foreign language. There will be 
combinations of multi-modal aids for the handicapped. A child will write a sentence and the 
system will correct it and tutor him about the problems. A child will read a text aloud and the 
system will monitor which words are not right and why and will analyze where the 
pronunciation problems are. Later the system would suggest some pronunciation exercises in 
the particular problem. 
Systems that are able to guess the intention of a speaker from the speaker?s utterances in a 
flexible and intelligent way will offer a plethora of possibilities for e-learning. As similar 
capabilities are required for dialog systems in general, there will be significant synergy effects 
between these fields of research. 
 
Translation 
The idea of machine translation (MT) has been one of the driving forces in the early days of 
NLP.  However, even after more than 50 years of effort, current systems still produce output 
of limited quality, which is suitable for assimilation of foreign-language documents, but not 
for the production of publishable material. But even if the old dreams did not come true, MT 
will play an increasing role in the multilingual world. 
Last year, for the first time, English constituted less than half the material on the web. Some 
predict that Chinese will be the primary language of the web by 2007. Given that information 
on the web will increasingly appear in foreign languages and not all users will be fluent in 
those languages, there will be a need to gist or skim content for relevance assessment and/or 
provide high quality translation for deeper understanding. Some forms of translation for 
information access is already today available in the web at no cost. The increasing demand for 
these services will give a push to improve their quality and the providers will find ways to 
increase vocabularies and translation quality semi-automatically from terminological 
resources, bilingual corpora and similar sources.  Also the need for interactive systems that 
can give rough translations of chat sessions in real time will create interesting challenges. 
Clearly, any systematic collection of lexical and terminological information in the form of 
domain-specific ontologies will help to build better MT systems for these domains.  
Conversely, the construction of ontologies can be facilitated by automatic alignment of 
existing translations, as this will naturally lead to a clustering of the vocabulary along the 
relevant semantic distinctions. 
These developments will also have an impact on improved systems for high-quality 
translation for the dissemination of documents. Chances are that hybrid combinations of 
symbolic and stochastic translation engines, able to learn relevant terminology from 
translation memories will eventually achieve a level of performance that will make them 
useful for the professional translator. Combined with multi-modal workbenches where voice 
input, keyboard and mouse interaction will make the composition of the target text as 
convenient as possible, these new technologies may help at least in some easier domains, 
where so far the effort of the human translator is dominated by low-level activities such as 
entering the text, adjusting the formatting, copying names and numbers, which are clearly 
amenable to partial automation.  
3. Technologies for NLP 
This chapter contains a more detailed discussion of some of the technologies that are required 
for the applications mentioned in the last chapter. Most of the material is organized along 
traditional fields of research in NLP, describing technologies that already exist, but must be 
further developed to achieve the ambitious goals.  Some technologies cannot be assigned to 
one specific level, because they serve a more generic purpose, such as the extraction of 
relevant knowledge from text corpora.  
Low-Level Processing 
Most systems that analyse natural language text typically start by segmenting the text into 
meaningful tokens.  Sometimes, the exact spelling of these tokens needs to be brought into a 
 
canonical form, so that it can match with a lexical entry. Both processes can be based on 
matching the input against regular expressions, for which efficient algorithms exist. Whereas 
this task looks straightforward from the distance, there are actually some subtle details that 
need to be considered.  Quite often, a decision whether a word should be split at a special 
character or whether a dot ends a sentence or is part of the preceding word depends on the 
vocabulary of the domain and on layout conventions used in this document, so that general 
rules cannot be defined.  Documents that need to be analyzed may contain markup from text 
processors, which needs to be stripped or interpreted in a suitable way. The knowledge 
required in these preliminary stages of processing can already be quite specific, so that a 
manual creation of suitable rule systems is not economically feasible. 
Current research on the automatic tokenization and normalization of texts therefore 
concentrates on the question how the knowledge required by these methods can automatically 
be derived from examples, using techniques statistical or machine learning approaches. 
Another difficulty is the treatment of noise in the input.  Output of speech recognition systems 
often contains recognition errors at rather high rates. Utterances entered interactively or 
printed documents that have undergone OCR have similar problems.  Unfortunately, the 
distortion of even a single character can mess up the linguistic analysis of the complete input.  
But of course, we expect NLP systems to deal gracefully and intelligently with small 
distortions and errors in the input. 
To make systems more robust against noisy input, probabilistic techniques for the restoration 
of distorted signals,  which have shown to be quite effective in speech recognition, need to be 
adapted and generalized to new applications.  However, training simple-minded statistical 
models on massive amounts of data will often not be feasible.  By now, statistical language 
models that incorporate grammatical knowledge are able to give slight improvements over n-
gram approaches, and it seems plausible to expect that future improvements of these will be 
easier to use in specific situation where training data is scarce. Large vocabularies, many 
types of distortions, and the need to use fine-grained contextual knowledge for improved 
predictive models constitute significant research challenges.  Most likely, there will be some 
synergy between language models used in speech and similar models that will be developed 
for low-level processing and correction of written ill-formed input. 
Once the segmentation into basic units has been performed, the next step is to identify 
suitable lexical entries for each token and, in cases where more than one entry applies, to 
determine which one is most appropriate in the given context. This process is called part-of-
speech disambiguation or POS tagging and is usually done with statistical models or machine-
learning approaches trained on manually tagged data.  Current technology achieves rather 
high accuracy on newspaper text, but again, performance suffers significantly when a model 
trained on a certain set of data is applied to text from a different domain. As the output of the 
POS tagger is typically used as input to subsequent modules, tagging errors may hamper the 
correct analysis of much more than the affected word. Research on high-quality POS tagging 
will face problems that are similar to those of language modelling: It requires detailed 
information about a large number of rare words that may be quite specific to the given domain 
and application, which is difficult to construct, no matter which road to lexical acquisition is 
taken.  Any effort that will support the construction, distribution, sharing and re-use of large, 
domain-specific lexical resources will doubtlessly also help to improve the accuracy of POS 
tagging on text from these domains. 
 
The next step in the analysis of text is to identify groups of words that belong together and 
refer to one semantic entity. Often, these phrases contain names, and for many practical 
applications, it is important to classify these expressions according to the type of entity they 
denote (Person, City, Company, etc.).  Depending on the application, the classification may 
be more or less fine-grained. Again, it is obvious that improved lexical knowledge will help to 
improve the performance of named entity recognition. But we cannot in all cases rely on a 
lexical resource to cover the relevant entities.  A text may discuss the opening of a new 
company, which will therefore not be contained in the lexicon. To handle such cases 
intelligently, we need mechanisms that can exploit contextual clues for the correct 
classification of unknown entities and we need effective mechanisms that propagate 
information about new entities into the lexical repositories, so that the system as a whole 
learns from the texts it sees, similar to the way a human reader would do.  
Syntactic Analysis 
The goal of syntactic analysis is to break down given textual units, typically sentences, into 
smaller constituents, to assign categorical labels to them, and to identify the grammatical 
relations that hold between the various parts. 
In most applications of language technology the encoded linguistic knowledge, i.e. the 
grammar, is separated from the processing components. The grammar consists of a lexicon, 
and rules that syntactically and semantically combine words and phrases into larger phrases 
and sentences. 
Several language technology products on the market today employ annotated phrase-structure 
grammars, grammars with several hundreds or thousands of rules describing different phrase 
types. Each of these rules is annotated by features and sometimes also by expressions in a 
programming language. 
The resulting systems might be sufficiently efficient for some applications but they lack the 
speed of processing needed for interactive systems, such as applications involving spoken 
input, or systems that have to process large volumes of texts, as in machine translation. 
In current research, a certain polarization has taken place. Very simple grammar models are 
employed, e.g. different kinds of finite-state grammars that support highly efficient 
processing. Some approaches do away with grammars altogether and use statistical methods 
to find basic linguistic patterns. Other than speed, these shallow and statistically trained 
approaches have advantages in terms of robustness, and they also implicitly perform 
disambiguation, i.e. when more than one analysis is possible, they make a decision for one 
reading (which of course may be the wrong one). 
On the other end of the scale, we find a variety of powerful linguistically sophisticated 
representation formalisms that facilitate grammar engineering. These systems are typically set 
up in a way that all logically possible readings are computed, which increases the clarity (no 
magic heuristics hidden in procedures), but also slows down the processing.  Despite their 
nice theoretical properties it has so far been difficult to adapt these systems to the needs of 
real-world applications, where speed, robustness, and partial correctness in typical cases are 
more urgent than theoretical faithfulness and depth of analysis. 
How will this situation evolve? The two approaches will continue to compete for potential 
applications, and the current advantage for shallow approaches will diminish as more 
ambitious applications get within reach, and as languages are used that require richer analysis.  
 
This will give incentives for shallow approaches to struggle for higher accuracy and more 
detailed analyses, whereas the deep processing will be forced to find workable solutions for 
the problems with speed and robustness.  In the ideal case, more fine-grained forms of 
integration will be found, i.e. hybrid systems that will keep the advantages of both worlds as 
far as possible. 
The simplest integration will just use shallow analysis as a fallback mechanism when deep 
analysis fails. In this case, results from both approaches need to be translated into one 
common representation, and the development of such a ?common denominator? will be a 
significant challenge.  To achieve an even more fine-grained cooperation between both 
approaches, deep analysis may be equipped with the ability to locally fall back to more 
superficial processing, driven by the need to deal with a specific problem in the input. Vice 
versa, the results of shallow analysis might be combined into a more detailed structure 
incrementally, based on rules from a deep grammar.  Also analyses of corpus data obtained 
with shallow tools can be mined for linguistic knowledge that is then fed into resources used 
by a deep parser, and vice versa. 
Research challenges will be how to find syntactic parsers that are at the same time fast, 
robust, deliver a detailed analysis that is correct with high probability and that are easily to 
adapt to special domains. 
Semantic Analysis 
The goal of semantic analysis is to assign meanings to utterances, which is an essential 
precondition for most applications of NLP.  However, what level of abstraction is required in 
this phase depends on the difficulty of the task.  Extraction of answers to simple factual 
questions from a given text will require less depth in analysis than the summarization of a 
lengthy treatise in few paragraphs. 
We can dissect the task of semantic analysis into several subtasks, depending on the linguistic 
level where it takes place.  Most important are the semantic tagging of ambiguous words and 
phrases, and the resolution of referring expressions. 
The disambiguation of word senses needs to identify the meaning that should be assigned to a 
given word. The hardest part of this task is to define the set of meanings that should be 
considered in this task, i.e. to select the appropriate granularity for the conceptualization.  The 
emergence of standardized, large-scale ontological resources will help to solve this part of the 
task, as the concepts that appear in such ontologies are a natural choice for the meanings of 
single words or simple phrases. Additionally, multilingual corpora that are aligned on the 
level of words and phrases can serve as an approximation to sense-tagged corpora, so draft 
ontologies and models for sense disambiguation can be extracted from these. 
Considerable efforts in defining useful evaluation metrics for sense disambiguation are 
pursued in the ongoing SENSEVAL activities.  So far, the methods used by the participants of 
SENSEVAL are mostly based on simple statistical classification using features extracted from 
the context of word occurrences. To the extent to which robust, high quality systems for 
syntactic analysis will appear, this will also help to obtain improved accuracy in the semantic 
disambiguation. 
The resolution of referring expression such as pronouns or definite noun phrases is the ability 
to identify their target, which may be expressions that appear prior in the text, abstractions of 
material that appeared earlier, or entities that exist independently from the text in existing 
 
background knowledge. Seen in a more general way, the task is to cull out objects and events 
from multimedia sources (text, audio, video). An example challenge includes extracting 
entities within media and correlating those across media. For example this might include 
extracting names or locations from written/spoken sources and correlating those with 
associated images. Whereas commercial products exist to extract named entities from text 
with precision and recall in the ninetieth percentile, domain independent event extractors 
work at best in the fiftieth percentile and performance degrades further with noisy, corrupted, 
or idiosyncratic data. 
Therefore work on the resolution of referring expression and the identification of entities in 
text and multimedia documents remains important fields of activity for the future. 
Discourse and Dialogue 
Extracting the knowledge contained in documents and understanding and generating natural 
dialog behavior requires more than the resolution of local semantic ambiguities.  Intelligent 
analysis needs to consider the global argumentative structure of documents and discourse, and 
dialogs need to be analyzed for pragmatic content. 
Computational work in discourse has focused on two different types of discourse: extended 
texts and dialogues, both spoken and written, yet there is a clear overlap between these two: 
dialogues contain text-like sequences spoken by a single individual and texts may contain 
dialogues. But application opportunities and needs are different. Work on text is of direct 
relevance to document analysis and retrieval applications, whereas work on dialogue is of 
import for human-computer interfaces regardless of the modality of interaction. Both are 
divisible into segments (discourse segments and phrases) with the meaning of the segments 
being more than the meaning of the individual parts. 
The main focus of the research is the interpretation beyond sentence boundaries, the 
intentional and informational approach. 
According to the informational approaches, the coherence of discourse follows from semantic 
relationships between the information conveyed by successive utterances. As a result, the 
major computational tools used here are inference and abduction on representations of the 
propositional content of utterances. 
According to the intentional approaches the coherence of discourse derives from the 
intentions of speakers and writers and understanding depends on recognition of those 
intentions. 
One difficulty is to build models of human-machine-dialog when initially only examples of 
human-human interaction exist, which may not be relevant.  Bootstrapping suitable models 
will therefore require Wizard-of-Oz studies with simulated systems. 
Natural Language Generation 
In many of the applications mentioned above, systems need to produce high-quality natural 
language text from computer-internal representations of information. Natural language 
generation can be decomposed into the tasks of text planning, sentence planning and surface 
realization. Text planners select from a knowledge pool which information to include in the 
output and out of this create a text structure to ensure coherence. On a more local scale, 
sentence planners organize the content of each sentence, massaging and ordering its parts.  
 
Surface realizers convert sentence-sized chunks of representation into grammatically correct 
sentences. 
Generator processes can be classified into points on a range of sophistication and expressive 
power, starting with inflexible canned methods and ending with maximally flexible feature 
combination methods. It is safe to say that at the present time one can fairly easily build a 
single-purpose generator for any specific application, or with some difficulty adapt an 
existing sentence generator to the application, with acceptable results. However, one cannot 
yet build a general-purpose sentence generator or a non-toy text planner. Several significant 
problems remain without sufficiently general solutions: 
? Lexical selection is one of the most difficult problems in generation. At its simplest 
this question involves selecting the most appropriate single word for a given unit of 
input. However as soon as the semantic model approaches a realistic size and as soon 
as the lexicon is large enough to permit alternative locutions, the problem becomes 
very complex. The decision depends on what has already been said, what is 
referentially available from context, what is most salient, what stylistic effect the 
speaker wishes to produce and so on. What is required: development of theories about 
and implementations of lexical selection algorithms, for reference to objects, events 
states, etc., and tested with large lexical. 
? Discourse structure (see also there) So far, no text planner exists that can reliably plan 
texts of several paragraphs in general. What is required: Theories of the structural 
nature of discourse, of the development of theme and focus in discourse, and of 
coherence and cohesion; libraries of discourse relations, communicative goals and text 
plans: implemented representational paradigms for characterizing stereotypical texts 
such as reports and business letters; implemented text planners that are tested in 
realistic non-toy domains. 
? Sentence planning: Even assuming the text planning problem is solved, a number of 
tasks remain before well-structured multi-sentence text can be generated: These tasks, 
required for planning the structure and content of each sentence, include: pronoun 
specification, theme signaling, focus signaling, content aggregation to remove 
unnecessary redundancies, the ordering of prepositional phrases, adjectives, etc. What 
is required: Theories of pronoun use, theme and focus selection and signaling, and 
content aggregation; implemented sentence planners with rules that perform these 
operations; testing in realistic domains. 
? Domain modeling: a significant shortcoming in generation research is the lack of 
large, well-motivated application domain models, or even the absence of clear 
principles by which to build such models. A traditional problem with generators is that 
the inputs are frequently hand-crafted, or are built by some other system that uses 
representation elements from a fairly small hand-crafted domain model, making the 
generator?s inputs already highly oriented toward the final language desired?.What is 
required: Implemented large-size (over 10.000 concepts) domain models that are 
useful both for some non-linguistic application and for generation; criteria for 
evaluating the internal consistency of such models; theories on and practical 
experience in the linking of generators to such models: lexicon of commensurate size. 
 
Probably the problem least addressed in generator systems today is the one that will take the 
longest to solve. This is the problem of guiding the generation process through its choices 
when multiple options exist to handle any given input. 
The generator user has to specify not only the semantic content of the desired text, but also its 
pragmatic ? interpersonal and situational ? effects. Very little research has been performed on 
this question beyond a handful of small-scale pilot studies. What is required: Classifications 
of the types of reader characteristics and goals, the types of author goals, and the interpersonal 
and situational aspects that affect the form and content of language; theories of how these 
aspects affect the generation process; implemented rules and/or planning systems that guide 
generator systems? choices; criteria for evaluating appropriateness of general text in specified 
communicative situations. 
Effective presentations require the appropriate selection of content, allocation to media, and 
fine grained coordination and realization in time and space. Discovery and presentation of 
knowledge may require mixed media (e.g., text, graphics, video, speech and non-speech 
audio) and mixed mode (e.g., linguistic, visual, auditory) displays tailored to the user and 
context. This might include tailoring content and form to the specific physical, perceptual, or 
cognitive characteristics of the user. It might lead to new visualization and browsing 
paradigms for massive multimedia and multilingual repositories that reduce cognitive load or 
task time, increase analytic depth and breadth, or simply increase user satisfaction. A grand 
challenge is the automated generation of coordinated speech, natural language, gesture, 
animation, non-speech audio, generation, possibly delivered via interactive, animated lifelike 
agents. Preliminary experiments suggest that, independent of task performance, agents may 
simply be more engaging/motivating to younger and/or less experienced users. 
Ontologies 
Large-scale ontologies are becoming an essential component of many applications including 
standard search (such as Yahoo and Lycos), e-commerce (such as Amazon and eBay), 
configuration (such as Dell and PC-Order), and government intelligence (such as DARPA?s 
High Performance Knowledge Base program).  As discussed in the preceding paragraphs, 
ontologies will constitute a major source of knowledge needed for several levels of NLP. 
Ontologies are increasingly seen as an important vehicle for describing the semantic content 
of web-based information sources and they are becoming so large that it is not uncommon for 
distributed teams of people to be in charge of the ontology development, design, population, 
and maintenance. 
Ontologies define a vocabulary for researchers who need to share common understanding of 
the structure of information in a domain. It includes machine-interpretable definitions of basic 
concepts in the domain and relations among them. The principal reasons to use an ontology in 
machine translation (MT) and other language technologies are to enable source language 
analyzers and target language generators to share knowledge, to store semantic constraints 
and to resolve semantic ambiguities by making inferences using the concept network of the 
ontology. An ontology contains only language independent information and many other 
semantic relations as well as taxonomic relations. 
Though the utility of domain ontologies is now widely acknowledged in the IT (Information 
Technology) community, several barriers must be overcome before ontologies become 
practical and useful tools. One important achievement would be to reduce the time and cost of 
identifying and manually entering several thousand concept descriptions by developing 
 
automatic ontology construction.  Another important task is to find arrangements that make 
development and sharing of ontologies commercially attractive.  
Some challenges for ontology research:  
Work on ontologies needs to provide generally applicable top-ontologies that cover most 
important core concepts that will be needed for many domains.  Extensions to new domains 
could then start by enriching these top-ontologies in a specific direction, reducing the initial 
effort for creating new ontologies, for merging independently developed extensions, and for 
rapid customisation of existing ontologies. 
This requires that ontology-creators are willing to share parts of their work and find suitable 
processes to organize cooperation.  It also requires the development of standards for the 
languages in which ontologies are specified and can be interchanged (e.g. along the lines of 
the OIL proposal).  Here, the challenge is to find suitable compromises between expressive 
power and depth on one hand and ease of use on the other hand.  Ideally, one specification 
language should be able to cover the whole spectrum up to advanced knowledge 
representation as used in the CYC project.  
Incremental improvement of ontologies needs to be facilitated by specialized tools for easy 
visualization and modification. These tools (and the representations they work on) need to be 
domain-independent and suited even for casual users, and their design needs to be based on a 
user-centred process view.   
It must be easy to plug in ontologies into various NLP-based tools such as tools for 
information extraction, organization and annotation of document collections (semantic Web), 
environments for terminology management and controlled language. This will permit to audit 
the contained knowledge in manifold ways, and will allow for rapid quality improvement. 
What is required: tools that support broad ranges of users in (1) merging of ontological terms 
from varied sources, (2) diagnosis of coverage and correctness of ontologies, and (3) 
maintaining ontologies over time.  
Lexicons 
Lexical knowledge ? knowledge about individual words in the language ? is essential for all 
types of natural language processing. Developers of machine translation systems, which from 
the beginning have involved large vocabularies, have long recognized the lexicon as a critical 
(and perhaps the critical) system resource. As researchers and developers in other areas of 
natural language processing move from toy systems to systems which process real texts over 
broad subject domains, larger and richer lexicons will be needed and the task of lexicon 
design and development will become a more central aspect of any project. 
A basic lexicon will typically include information about morphology and on the syntactic 
level, the complement structures of each word or word sense. A more complex lexicon may 
also include semantic information, such as a classification hierarchy and selectional patterns 
or case frames stated in terms of this hierarchy. For machine translation, the lexicon will also 
have to record correspondences between lexical items in the source and target language; for 
speech understanding and generation, it will have to include information about the 
pronunciation of individual words. For this purpose the overall lexicon architecture and the 
representation formalism used to encode the data are important issues. 
 
No matter if we want to build an ontology or a lexicon, in general for this kind of high-quality 
semantic knowledge base, manual processing is indispensable. Traditionally computer 
lexicons have been built by hand specifically for the purpose of language analysis and 
generation. However, the needs for larger lexicons are now leading to efforts for the 
development of common lexical representations and co-operative lexicon development. 
The area is ripe ? at least for some levels of linguistic description ? for reaching in the short 
term a consensus on common lexical specifications. We must expand the experiences with the 
sorts of semantic knowledge that could be effectively used by multiple systems. We must also 
recognize the importance of the rapidly growing stock of machine-readable text as a resource 
for lexical research. The major areas of potential results in the immediate future seem to lie in 
the combination of lexicon and corpus work. There?s a growing interest from many groups in 
topics such as sense tagging or sense disambiguation on very large text corpora, where lexical 
tools and data provide a first input to the systems and are in turn enhanced with the 
information acquired and extracted from corpus analysis. 
Machine Learning 
As mentioned above, the acquisition of knowledge continues to impose on of the biggest 
difficulties to the application of NLP technologies. This holds both for linguistic knowledge 
(grammars lexicons) and for world knowledge (ontologies, facts).  In order to make 
extensions of NLP to new domains possible, the acquisition process needs to be supported by 
algorithms that can exploit existing textual material and extract knowledge of various types 
from it. 
Approaches to these methods can be found in various fields of research, such as statistical 
language models, bilingual alignment, grammar induction, statistical parsing, statistical 
classification technology, Bayesian networks and other ML methods used in artificial 
intelligence research, data mining techniques etc. 
Due to the specific nature of lexical information, it is important to pick or develop methods 
that scale to large vocabularies and large sets of features and that can exploit multiple sources 
of evidence in a good way.  Also, the methods need to be able to use a rich set of existing 
background knowledge, so that no effort is wasted in re-discovering what was already known. 
It is important to have methods that can use richly annotated training data, but do not require 
that large datasets have to be annotated in this way.  Instead, methods should be able to draw 
a maximum of advantage from raw data without annotation using unsupervised learning 
approaches.  Also, it will be important to guide the effort of human annotation so that time is 
spent in the most efficient way, using active learning methods.  Tools and processes for 
managing annotation projects (including assessment of quality levels) need to be developed 
and shared on a broad basis. 
Whenever possible, one should try to use models that contain explicit linguistic 
representations (ideally organized along different strata) so that partial reuse of models and 
rapid adaptation to slightly different is facilitated. 
 
4. Milestones 
Some relevant items not included in Bernsen 2000. 
 
Basic technologies 
Short term  
- accurate syntactic analysis for well-formed input from specific domains 
- simple methods for minimizing annotation effort during domain adaptation 
- ML algorithms that combine active and unsupervised learning for optimal exploitation 
of data 
- generally applicable annotation schemes for semantic markup of text 
- standards for encoding and exchange of ontological resources emerge 
- top-level ontologies generally available 
- tools for semi-automatic construction and population of ontologies from text 
- tools for simple semantic enrichment of Web pages 
- approaches to markup of discourse structure and pragmatics 
Medium term 
- improved methods for minimizing annotation effort during domain adaptation 
- tools for adaptation of syntactic analysis to specific application with minimal human 
effort 
- accurate syntactic analysis for slightly ill-formed input for restricted domains 
- improved syntactic analysis of input with uncertainties (word lattices) 
- machine learning methods that exploit and extend existing knowledge sources 
- sufficiently accurate semantic analysis of free text from restricted domains 
- generic schemes for the annotation of pragmatic content 
- schemes for annotation of discourse and document structure 
- generally usable ontologies exist for many domains 
- NL generation verbalizes information extracted/deduced from multiple sources for QA 
- Agent/user models for dialogs of moderate complexity 
 
Long term 
- accurate syntactic analysis for ill-formed input from multiple domains 
- sufficiently accurate semantic analysis of free text from multiple domains 
- recognition of pragmatic content in text and dialog 
- NL generation produces stylistically adequate and well-structured text 
Systems 
Short term  
- QA systems are able to answer simple factual questions  
- Summarization system produce well-formed extracts from short documents 
- automated e-mail response systems deliver high-quality replies in easy cases 
- MT for information assimilation 
Medium term 
- QA systems that deduce answers from information in multiple sources  
- Summarization systems are able to merge multiple documents 
- Summarization systems are able to deliver different types of summaries 
- Integration of translation memories with MT enables fast domain-adaptation  
- Mixed-initiative dialogue systems for services and e-commerce 
Long term 
- Translator?s workbenches based on TM, MT, and multi-modal input facilities 
- QA systems that are able to explain their reasoning 
5. Recommendations for NLP research in Europe 
1. Build and make publicly available at low cost large-scale multilingual lexical 
resources, with broad coverage, generic enough to be reusable in different application 
frameworks  
2. To turn special attention to the development of better ontologies which are reusable 
across domains in order to encode static world knowledge 
3. Creation of large common accessible multilingual corpora of syntactical and 
semantically annotated data annotated also beyond sentence boundaries  
 
4. Encourage development of statistical and machine-learning methods that facilitate 
bootstrapping of linguistic resources 
5. Common standards will improve the effectiveness of people?s cooperation, the 
identification of the requirements for the system specification, the inter-operability 
among systems and the possibility of re-using and sharing system components. 
6. Integration of language processing into the rest of cognitive science, artificial 
intelligence and computer science e.g. some ambitious projects centered on NL but 
combining various techniques and different areas of AI. New type of projects: Very 
different for scale, ambition and timeframe 
7. Establishment of centers of excellence as focus points for projects for a period of five 
to ten years. 
8. Encourage systematic evaluations (but how ?) 
6. References 
? Berners-Lee, T. (2001) The Semantic Web, Scientific American (5/2001) 
? Bernsen , N.O. (2000) Speech-Related Technologies. Where will the field go in 10 
years? roadmap workshop, Katwijk 
? Burger, J. e.a. (2000) Issues, Tasks and Program Structures to Roadmap Research in 
Question & Answering, Memo National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
Gaithersburg 
? Carbonell, J. e.a. (2000) Vision Statement to Guide Research in Q&A and Text 
Summarization, Memo National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg 
? Cole,R.A. (Ed.). (1997) Survey of the State of the Art in Human Language 
Technology Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
? Declerck, Th., Wittenburg, P., Cunningham, H. (2001) The Automatic Generation of 
Formal Annotations in a Multimedia Indexing and Searching Environment, ACL 
Workshop, Toulouse 
? Delannoy, J.-F. (2001) What are the points? What are the stances? Decanting for 
question-driven retrieval and executive summarization, ACL Meeting, Toulouse 
? Fensel, D. Hendler, J., Lieberman, H. ,Wahlster, W. (2000) Dagstuhl-Seminar: 
Semantics for the WWW, Dagstuhl, Germany 
? Grishman, R. and Calzolari, N. Lexicons in Survey of the State of the Art in Human 
Language Technology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
? Grosz, B. (1997) Discourse and Dialogue in Survey of the State of the Art in Human 
Language Technology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
 
 ? Heisterkamp, P., (2000) Speech Technology in the year 2010, roadmap workshop, 
Katwijk 
? Hirschman, L. and Thompson, H.S. (1997) Evaluation in Survey of the State of the 
Art in Human Language Technology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
? Hovy, E., (1997) Language Generation in Survey of the State of the Art in Human 
Language Technology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
? Kang, S.-J. and Lee, J.-H. (2001) Semi-Automatic Practical Ontology Construction by 
using Thesaurus, Computational Dictionaries, and Large Corpora, ACL workshop 
Toulouse 
? Kay, M. (1997) Machine Translation: The Disappointing Past and Present. In: Survey 
of the State of the Art in Human Language Technology, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge 
? Kay, M. (1997) Multilinguality. In: Survey of the State of the Art in Human Language 
Technology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
? Knight, K. (2001) Language Modeling for Good Generation, Workshop on Language 
Modeling and Information Retrieval, Pittsburgh 
? Krauwer, St., (2000) Going from ?what? to ?why? across language barriers in the 
unified distributed information space. Roadmap workshop, Katwijk 
? Maybury, M.T. and Mani, I., (2001) Automatic Summarization, ACL Meeting 
Toulouse 
? Maybury, M.T., (2001) Human Language Technologies for Knowledge Management: 
Challenges and Opportunities, ACL Meeting, Toulouse 
? Pardo, J.M., (2000) How will language and speech technology be used in the 
information world of 2010? Research challenges & Infrastructure needs for the next 
ten years. Report on the Roadmap Workshop, Katwijk aan Zee 
? Staab, St., (2001) Knowledge Portals, ACL Meeting, Toulouse 
? Stock, O. (2000) Processing Natural Language from 2000 to 2010, roadmap 
workshop, Katwijk 
? Velardi, P. and Missikoff, M. and Basili, R. (2001) Identification of relevant terms to 
support the construction of Domain Ontologies, ACL workshop Toulouse 
? Uszkoreit; H.  (2001) Crosslingual Language Technologies for Knowledge Creation 
and Knowledge Sharing, Toulouse 
? Zaenen, A. and Uszkoreit, H. (1997) Language Analysis and Understanding. In: 
Survey of the State of the Art in Human Language Technology, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge 
 
