Cross Document Co-Reference Resolution Applications for People in the Legal 
Domain
Christopher Dozier  
Research and Development  
Thomson Legal and Regulatory  
610 Opperman Drive 
Eagan, MN 55123,USA 
chris.dozier@thomson.com 
Thomas Zielund  
Research and Development  
Thomson Legal and Regulatory  
610 Opperman Drive 
Eagan, MN 55123,USA 
tom.zielund@thomson.com 
Abstract
By combining information extraction and re-
cord linkage techniques, we have created a re-
pository of references to attorneys, judges, and 
expert witnesses across a broad range of text 
sources.  These text sources include news, 
caselaw, law reviews, Medline abstracts, and 
legal briefs among others. We briefly describe 
our cross document co-reference resolution al-
gorithm and discuss applications these re-
solved references enable. Among these 
applications is one that shows summaries of 
relationships chains between individuals based 
on their document co-occurrence and cross 
document co-references.  
1 Introduction  
Attorneys, judges, and expert witnesses all play 
important roles in legal systems.  Judges decide 
cases.   Attorneys handle the legal needs of clients.  
Expert witnesses testify about complex facts and 
play an ever-increasing part in the settlement of 
cases.  An important part of an attorney?s prepara-
tion for litigation involves researching the back-
ground of the judge deciding the case, of attorneys 
representing the opposing side, and of testifying 
experts.  To help attorneys with this research need, 
we have created a system that automatically links 
across documents references to attorneys, judges, 
and expert witnesses. These documents include 
news articles, caselaw documents, law reviews, 
Medline abstracts, and legal briefs among others.   
Our method of creating cross document co-
references involves extracting from text MUC type 
templates for individuals and matching the tem-
plates to biographical profile records using a 
Bayesian based record linkage technique.  We have 
described this method in detail elsewhere (Dozier 
and Haschart, 2000; Dozier et al, 2003) and 
briefly describe it in section 2. 
The biographical records for attorneys, judges, 
and expert witnesses that we use for cross docu-
ment co-reference resolution have been created 
through a combination of automatic and manual 
techniques.  The basis of the biographical records 
for attorneys and judges comes from a manually 
created professional directory which is itself a 
product called the Westlaw Legal Directory. The 
biographical records for the expert witnesses were 
created through text mining.  We have described 
the text mining application for creation of the ex-
pert witness database in (Dozier er al., 2003) and 
describe it briefly in sections 3 and 4. 
A new application we have created from these 
cross document references involves creating sum-
maries of relationships between attorneys, judges, 
and expert witnesses.  This new application is dis-
cussed in section 5.
Since their deployment, these applications have 
created automatically over 7 million links between 
references to attorneys, judges, and expert wit-
nesses in various document collections and their 
respective biographical profiles. 
2 Cross Document Co-reference Resolu-
tion through Extraction and Linking
By combining information extraction techniques 
with record linkage techniques, we have been able 
to resolve cross document references for attorneys, 
judges, and expert witnesses.   Our basic technique 
involves extracting a template record for an indi-
vidual from a text document and matching the tem-
plate record to an authority file record.  Figure 1 
depicts how extraction and record linkage are 
combined to create cross document links. 
P e rson  T e m p la te
S tructu red
R e co rd
A u tho rity  P ro file
S truc tu re d  R e cord
R cord  lin ka ge
process
E x trac tio n  o f
te m p la te
record
T e xt D ocum e nt L in ka geR e co rd
C onvers ion  o f
S tru ctu red
R ecord  to T ext
P e rson  P ro file
D ocum en t
Figure 1: Cross Document Coreference Resolution
Process
The extraction portion of our system is similar to 
template extraction systems described in the Mes-
sage Understanding Conferences proceedings
(MUC-6, 1995) and elsewhere (Appelt et al,1993)
(Grishman,1997).  Our extraction process relies on
a finite state machine that identifies paragraphs in a 
document containing attorney, judge, or expert 
names and a semantic parser that extracts from the
paragraphs template information about each indi-
vidual named.
The record linkage portion of our system uses a
Bayesian network to match and link attorney,
judge, and expert templates to biographical re-
cords.  This network computes the probability that
a given biographical record matches the same per-
son specified in an extracted template.  To com-
pute this match likelihood, we treat first name,
middle name, last name, firm, city, state, court, and 
other information as independent pieces of match
evidence.  We compute the prior probability of a
match by calculating the probability that a ran-
domly selected biographical record will match a 
template. We then compute conditional match
probabilities for each piece of evidence using a 
manually tagged training set. For each piece of
evidence, we compute the conditional probability
that a biographical record matches a template when
that piece of evidence matches exactly, matches in 
a strong fuzzy way, matches in a weak fuzzy way,
is unknown, or mismatches.   We define what we 
mean by strong fuzzy and weak fuzzy in (Dozier 
and Haschart, 2000) and (Dozier et al, 2003).  But 
basically we mean that a piece of match evidence
matches in a fuzzy way when it is compatible with 
another piece of evidence but does not match ex-
actly.
We compute the match probability score for the 
records using the following form of Bayes? rule: 
P(M|E) is the probability that the template and 
authority records refer to the same person, given
match evidence E.
P(M) is the prior probability that the reference 
records refer to the same person. P(?M) is the 
prior probability that records do not refer to the 
same person.
P(Ei|M) is the conditional probability that the 
match variable Ei takes on a particular value given 
that the template and authority records match.  For 
example, if we let E1 stand for middle name match
evidence, the probability that the middle names in
the records match exactly given that the records
themselves match is P(E1=exact|M).
P(Ei|?M) is the conditional probability that Ei
takes on a particular value, given that the template
and authority records do not match.  For example,
if we let E1 stand for middle name match evidence, 
the probability that the middle names in the refer-
ence records match, given that the records them-
selves do not match, is P(E1=exact|? M).
A sample caselaw document with highlighted 
links to judges and attorneys is shown in figure 2.
Figure 3 shows caselaw documents linked to the
biographical record for attorney Gerry Spence.
3 Mining Authority Records From Text
For expert witnesses, we created an expert wit-
ness authority file of some 100,000 profiles, mined
from approximately 300,000 jury verdict and set-
tlement documents, using publicly available pro-
fessional license information, an expertise
taxonomy, and automatic text mining techniques. 
This directory can be browsed by area of expertise
as well as by location and name.  The profiles are
automatically linked to Medline abstracts, as well
as back to the relevant jury verdict and settlement 
documents. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the largest expert witness directory of its kind and 
the first to be built using automatic text mining
techniques.
Figure 4 shows the text mining process we used 
to create our authority file of expert witnesses from
jury verdict and settlement documents.
)|()()|()(
)|()(
)|(
??
?
??
 
i
i
i
i
i
i
MEPMPMEPMP
MEPMP
EMP
Figure 2: Caselaw Document. Underscored Names are Hyperlinked to Profiles.
Figure 3: Gerry Spence Authority Record with Coreference Links.  Listed in Left-hand Panel are Cases that 
Reference Gerry Spence. 
Merge Expert
Instances
Merge Professional
License Data
Expert Witness
Authority File
JVS document
collection
Assign Taxonomy
Label
Expert
Taxonomy
Professional
License
Records
Expert Witness
Instance
Records
Extract Experts
from JVS
Match JVS
Experts to Authority
File
Medline article
Figure 4: Text Mining of Expert Witness Profiles 
First, we extract references to expert witnesses
from court proceeding documents.  In our initial 
implementation of the system, we extracted
290,000 reference records to expert witnesses from
300,000 documents.  The method of extraction for
these reference records is essentially the same as
the method described in section 2 for template re-
cords. Reference records in fact are template re-
cords for experts. 
Second, we merge the expert witness reference
records together to create an expert witness profile 
file in which each particular expert is listed only 
once. Section 4 describes the merging process in 
more detail. 
Third, we add professional license information
into the expert witness profile records.  These re-
cords include license information from the Drug 
Enforcement Agency, which licenses health care
professionals to prescribe drugs, and from various
other professional licensing agencies.  To deter-
mine whether a license record and expert record 
refer to the same person, we again apply Bayesian
based record linkage.  The evidence we use to
match license records to profiles includes first
name, middle name, last name, name suffix, city-
state information, area of expertise, and name rar-
ity.
Fourth, we automatically assign each expert wit-
ness record one or more classification categories in
an expertise taxonomy.
Finally, we link court documents and Medline 
abstracts to expert witness profile records using 
Bayesian based record linkage for a third and 
fourth time.
Figure 5 below shows a jury verdict and settle-
ment document.  Note that the reference to expert
witness oncologist Arthur Ablin is highlighted. 
Figure 6 shows the authority file record for Arthur
Ablin to which the hypertext link in the jury ver-
dict and settlement document is linked.  Figure 7 
shows the cases Dr. Ablin has testified in as well 
as Medline articles Dr. Ablin has authored.
4 Merging Reference Records to Create 
Authority File 
To create our directory of expert profiles (i.e., 
expert authority file) from expert reference re-
cords, we need to create a set of records that list a
particular expert one and only one time. This 
means we need to merge together all the reference
records that pertain to each individual.
As a first step in merging the expert reference
records, we group the reference records into sets in
which each record in a group shares a common last
name.  By doing this, we avoid the computational
cost of comparing every expert witness reference
record to every other reference record.
To merge expert references together within the 
groups, we use the following greedy algorithm:
1. Select an unmerged expert reference record from
the group. Create an expert authority record from 
this record. Mark the expert reference record as 
merged.
2. Compare the new expert authority record to each 
unmerged reference record in the group.  In each
comparison, compute the probability that the ex-
pert in the authority record refers to the same indi-
vidual referenced in the reference record.  Use 
Bayesian matching to compute this match probabi-
lity.  If the match probability exceeds a match
threshold, mark the reference record as ?merged?.
Note that the match threshold probability is deter-
mined empirically from training data.
3. If any unmerged records remain in the group, 
then return to step 1 else halt.
Note that, at this stage, it is still possible for 
there to be duplicate records in the authority file, if 
two or more reference records pertain to the same 
individual but have variant last name spellings. 
While this is not common, it can happen when a 
source document contains a misspelled last name. 
To address this situation, we make a final pass over
the merged authority file and flag record pairs for 
manual review when the last names of two records 
are separated from each other by an edit distance
of two or less and when the records match in all 
other respects.
5 Relationship Summaries
Using the links between documents and entities 
such as judges, attorneys, and expert witnesses, we
are creating a new set of products that automati-
cally summarize relevant relationships among
these entities.  For example, by following co-
Figure 5: Jury Verdict and Settlement Document with Hyper Links to Attorneys, Judges, and Expert Wit-
nesses including Arthur Ablin. 
Figure 6: Profile of Oncology Expert Arthur Ablin That Was Created Through Text Mining.
Figure 7: Documents Pertaining to Arthur Ablin. 
reference and co-occurrence links, automatic re-
ports can be generated that show which attorneys
have hired which expert witnesses, which attorneys
have worked together, which attorneys have ap-
peared before which judges, which experts have 
co-authored papers, and so on. 
Figures 8, 9, and 10 show a summary of the rela-
tionships between U.S. Chief Justice William H.
Rehnquist and some other attorneys and judges
who have been identified in documents with him.
The summary shows some of the close working 
relationships one would expect to find for the chief 
justice.  Note, however, that these relationships
were discovered through cross-document co-
reference, not through an editorial process.
6 Discussion 
Our cross document co-reference resolution 
method works by attaching a person referenced in 
a document to a profile record that stands for a 
unique real world person outside the frame of the 
document.   Person references from multiple
documents that attach to the same profile are re-
solved by this common attachment.
In the case of attorneys and judges, we used an
existing directory of attorneys and judges as the 
source of our profile records.  In the case of ex-
perts, we created profiles by mining references 
from highly structured and trustworthy documents
such as jury verdict and settlement documents and 
professional license records.
When more than one person in a single docu-
ment can be attached to individual profiles and the 
relationship between the references in the docu-
ment can be also extracted, then a relationship re-
cord can also be created outside the frame of the
document and these relationships can then be
chained together to generate relational inferences.
This is the technology we are currently exploring
within the legal domain and beyond.
There is a popular belief that between any two
people, there are around six degrees of separation
or less.  Although (Dodds et al, 2003) and 
(Travers and Milgram, 1969) provide some em-
pirical evidence in support of this theory, the popu-
larity of the theory spawns more from a popular 
trivia game in which you attempt to find a path to 
Kevin Bacon from any Hollywood star through co-
starring roles (see oracleofbacon.org for an on-line 
demo).
Using the database of links built from cross 
document co-reference resolution on legal docu-
ments, a similar technique could be used to find
paths of co-occurrence between arbitrary pairs of 
U. S. legal professionals.  Although we do not pic-
ture any popular party games developing from this, 
such techniques could prove useful for activities 
such as detecting conflicts of interest among peo-
ple working on a legal matter. 
Judge Summary 
x Name: William H. Rehnquist
x From: United States Supreme Court
x Location: Washington, DC
Links from Other WestLaw Content
x Case Law: 847
x Oral Arguments: 10
Figure 8: Link Summary Statistics for William H. Rehnquist 
1 Judges Appearing with William H. Rehnquist 
Name Court Location
Co-
Appearances
Antonin Scalia United States Supreme Court Washington, DC 782
David H. Souter United States Supreme Court Washington, DC 769
John Paul Stevens United States Supreme Court Washington, DC 690
Anthony M. Kennedy United States Supreme Court Washington, DC 682
Clarence Thomas United States Supreme Court Washington, DC 621
Sandra Day O?Connor United States Supreme Court Washington, DC 596
Ruth Bader Ginsburg United States Supreme Court Washington, DC 534
Stephen G. Breyer United States Supreme Court Washington, DC 471
Byron R. White United States Supreme Court Washington, DC 145
Thurgood Marshall United States Supreme Court Washington, DC 48
10 most frequently co-appearing of 27 records displayed.
Figure 9: Judges Appearing with Justice William H. Rehnquist
Attorneys Appearing with William H. Rehnquist
Name Firm
1.1 Location Co-
Appearances
Edwin S. Kneedler Justice Dept. Solicitor General Washington, DC 40
Theodore B. Olson U.S. Department Of Justice Washington, DC 36
Michael R. Dreeben Justice Dept. Solicitor General Washington, DC 34
Lawrence G. Wallace Justice Dept. Solicitor General Washington, DC 26
Kent L. Jones Justice Dept. Solicitor General Washington, DC 25
James A. Feldman Justice Dept. Solicitor General Washington, DC 19
Warren Price, III Price, Okamoto, Himeno & Lum Honolulu, HI 18
Charles M. Oberly, III Oberly & Jennings, P.A. Wilmington, DE 18
Kenneth W. Starr Kirkland & Ellis Llp Washington, DC 16
Malcolm L. Stewart Justice Dept. Solicitor General Washington, DC 16
10 most frequently co-appearing of 1792 records displayed.
Figure 10: Attorneys Appearing with Justice William H. Rehnquist
We have described the precision and recall of the 
programs that create cross document co-references 
for attorneys and judges in (Dozier and Haschart, 
2000) and that create co-references for experts in 
(Dozier et al, 2003).  In general, for collections in 
which documents reference people within stereo-
typical syntax, attach location and job type infor-
mation to the person, and usually include the 
person?s full first name (e.g., attorney names and 
expert witness names in caselaw), we typically 
achieve better than 0.98 precision and better than 
0.95 recall.  For collections in which documents do 
not give full name or do not have highly stereo-
typical syntax, the precision and recall perform-
ance is worse.  For example, when tagging expert 
witness references in Medline, where an author?s 
first initial is given in place of the full form of the 
first name and the author?s job type must be in-
ferred from the topic of the scientific article, we 
currently achieve precision of  better than 0.95 and 
recall of around 0.60. 
7 Conclusion  
By combining information extraction and record 
linkage techniques, we have created a repository of 
references to attorneys, judges, and expert wit-
nesses across a broad range of text sources.  These 
text sources include news, caselaw, law reviews, 
Medline abstracts, and legal briefs among others. 
We briefly describe our cross document co-
reference resolution algorithm and discuss applica-
tions these resolved references enable. Among 
these applications is one that shows summaries of 
relationships chains between individuals based on 
their document co-occurrence and cross document 
co-references
References
Appelt, D. E., Hobbs, J. E., Bear, J., Israel, D., Ty-
son, M. (1993).  FASTUS: A Finite-State Proc-
essor for Information Extraction from Real-
World Text.  In Proceedings of the International 
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 
1172-1178. 
Dodds, P., Muhammed, R. & Watts, D.  An Ex-
perimental Study of Search in Global Social 
Networks.  Science, Vol 301, Issue 5634, 8 Au-
gust 2003, pages 827-829. 
Dozier, C. and Haschart, R., (2000) Automatic Ex-
traction and Linking of Person Names in Legal 
Text. In Proceedings of RIAO-2000 (Recherche 
d?Informations Assistee par Ordinator), pages
1305-1321, Paris, France.  
Dozier, C., Jackson. P., Guo, X., Chaudhary, M., 
and Arumainayagam, Y. (2003) Creation of an 
Expert Witness Database Through Text Mining. 
In Proceedings of the 9th International Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence and Law., pages 
177-184, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK. 
Grishman, R. (1997). Information Extraction: 
Techniques and Challenges. In Information Ex-
traction : A Multidisciplinary Approach to an 
Emerging Information Technology : Interna-
tional Summer School, Frascati, pages 13-27, 
Spring Verlag, Frascati, Italy.  
Travers, Jeffrey and Milgram, Stanley (1969). An 
Experimental Study of the Small World Prob-
lem. Sociometry, Volume 32, Issue 4 (Dec., 
1969), pages 425-443.  
