Using the Web as a Phonological Corpus: a case study from Tagalog 
 
 
 
Kie Zuraw 
Department of Linguistics 
UCLA 
Los Angeles, U.S.A. 
kie@ucla.edu 
 
 
  
 
Abstract 
Some languages? orthographic properties 
allow written data to be used for phono-
logical research. This paper reports on an 
on-going project that uses a web-derived 
text corpus to study the phonology of 
Tagalog, a language for which large cor-
pora are not otherwise available. Novel 
findings concerning the phenomenon of 
intervocalic tapping are discussed in de-
tail, and an overview of other phonologi-
cal phenomena in the language that can 
be investigated through written data is 
given.  
1 Introduction 
Because the field of phonology studies sound 
patterns of languages, corpus-based phonology 
typically relies on audio corpora. These are ex-
pensive to create, and usually must undergo labo-
rious hand-tagging to be useful. For much pho-
nological investigation, there is no way around 
these harsh facts. Sometimes, however, a lan-
guage?s phonology and orthography conspire to 
allow phonological data to be gleaned from text. 
Abigail Cohn and Lisa Lavoie (p.c.), for exam-
ple, have used text data on English comparatives 
to determine whether words are treated as mono-
syllabic, taking suffixal X-er, or longer, taking 
periphrastic more X. The cases of interest are 
words such as feel and fire, which have a tense or 
diphthongal nucleus followed by l or r, and are 
felt by many English speakers to be longer than 
monosyllabic. Corpus data on the frequencies of 
the two comparative types can be used as further 
evidence on the status of such words. 
The Tagalog language (Austronesian, Philip-
pines) exhibits several morphophonological phe-
nomena that are reflected in its spelling. All of 
these phenomena involve some variation, which 
makes them ideal for text-corpus study: only 
with large amounts of data can we investigate the 
distribution of the variants and search for the fac-
tors that condition the variation. See Schachter & 
Otanes (1972) for basic descriptions of most of 
these phenomena: 
 
? intervocalic tapping (d can become the 
tap sound [], spelled r, when it is be-
tween two vowels): dumi ?dirt? ma-rumi 
?dirty? 
? vowel-height alternations (o in final syl-
lables can alternate with u in non-final 
syllables; there is a similar but more 
complicated i/e alternation): halo ?mix? 
halu-in ?to be mixed? 
? nasal assimilation (a nasal consonant can 
take on the place of articulation of a fol-
lowing consonant): pam-butas ?borer? 
pan-damot ?picker-upper? pang-gamas 
?trowel? (ng represents the velar nasal 
[]) 
? nasal substitution (stem-initial obstruents 
can turn into nasals when certain pre-
fixes are added): pili ?choosing? ma-mili 
?to choose? 
? syncope (the vowel of a stem?s final syl-
lable can be deleted when a suffix is 
added, and the consonants that conse-
quently become adjacent can undergo 
changes): gawa ?act? gaw_-in ?to be 
done?, tingin ?look? tig_n-an ?to be 
looked at? 
? partial reduplication (when foreign stems 
that begin with consonant sequences 
and/or foreign consonants such as f un-
59
dergo copying of the first syllable, the 
consonant sequence can be simplified 
and the foreign consonant can be nativ-
ized): nag-fri-friendster ~ nag-pi-
friendster ?using Friendster? 
? infix location (in foreign stems begin-
ning with consonant sequences, an infix 
can go inside or after the consonant se-
quence): g-um-raduate ~ gr-um-aduate 
?graduated? 
? infix in vs. prefix ni: l-in-uto ~ ni-luto 
?to be cooked? 
? location of reduplication in prefixed 
words: pa-pag-lagy-an ~ pag-la-lagy-an 
?will place? (stem is lagy, from lagay 
?location?) 
Variation in some of these phenomena has 
been investigated previously (Ross 1996 for par-
tial reduplication; Rackowski 1999 for location 
of reduplication), sometimes using dictionary 
counts to obtain statistics (Zuraw 2002 for vowel 
height; Zuraw 2000 for nasal substitution). Cor-
pus frequencies of the variants, however, or even 
basic word frequencies, have not previously been 
available. 
As should be apparent from the examples 
given above, which are all in normal Tagalog 
spelling except for the hyphens added to show 
morpheme boundaries (hyphens are used in Tag-
alog, but not in the locations shown above), all of 
these phonological phenomena can be investi-
gated in a text corpus. In most cases, modulo 
typing errors, we can be confident that the writ-
ten form represents the writer?s intended pronun-
ciation, especially since spell-checking software 
that would change a writer?s original spelling is 
not widely used for Tagalog, and there is little 
prescriptive pressure favoring one variant spell-
ing over the other.1 One area in which we should 
be cautious is partial reduplication, however: in a 
spelling such as nag-fri-friendster, it is plausible 
first that the writer might pronounce the stem in 
a nativized fashion despite preserving the Eng-
lish spelling (e.g., with [p] instead of [f]2), and 
second that regardless of intended stem pronun-
ciation, the reduplicant?s spelling is merely an 
echo of the stem?s spelling, and does not reflect 
the writer?s pronunciation. 
                                                 
1
 Location of reduplicant is an exception: prescriptively, the 
reduplicant is adjacent to the root (Tania Azores-Gunter, 
p.c.). 
2
 A Philippine social-networking website similar to friend-
ster.com is jocularly named prendster.com. 
Section 2 below describes how a written cor-
pus of Tagalog was constructed from the web. 
Section 3 gives results from the corpus on tap-
ping, and Section 4 concludes. 
 
2 Construction of the corpus 
Like most of the world?s 6,000 or so languages, 
Tagalog is a language for which carefully con-
structed, tagged corpora (written or audio) do not 
exist. However, unlike most of the world?s lan-
guages, Tagalog has a substantial web presence. 
As with all web-as-corpus endeavors, there is the 
drawback that the data will be messier, and there 
will be more input from non-native speakers than 
in, say, a newspaper-derived corpus. But in the 
case of some phenomena, such as infix location, 
a web corpus is actually preferable to a newspa-
per-derived corpus (if one existed): the range of 
loanwords found in formal Tagalog writing is 
narrower, favoring Spanish loans over English, 
than that found in the highly informal writing of 
blogs and web forums. From this informal writ-
ing we can obtain data on how the language?s 
grammar is being extended to the novel phono-
logical situations presented by a wide range of 
English loans. 
A previous demonstration project (Ghani, 
Jones and Mladeni 2004) showed how a corpus 
of Tagalog can be created from the web by con-
structing queries designed to target Tagalog-
language pages and exclude pages in other lan-
guages; the queries are created by using a small 
seed corpus to estimate word frequencies, and 
the frequencies are updated as the corpus grows. 
Kevin Scannell?s An Cr?bad?n project 
(http://borel.slu.edu/crubadan/index.html), which 
seems to work in a similar fashion, includes a 
Tagalog language model. BootCaT (Baroni & 
Bernardini 2004), which is designed to create 
corpora and discover multi-word terms in spe-
cialized domains, such as psychiatry, works simi-
larly, with the added twist that queries use words 
that are more frequent in the target domain than 
in a reference corpus. The method used here is 
similar, though cruder. No attempt is made to 
exclude pages written partly or even mostly in a 
language other than Tagalog; many blogs, for 
instance, are overwhelmingly in English but with 
occasional sprinklings of Tagalog, and I wanted 
to obtain these sprinklings, because they are rich 
in nonce affixed forms of loanwords.3 
                                                 
3
 I have not conducted any performance comparisons of 
different language-identification algorithms in pulling Taga-
60
In order to construct the corpus used here, first 
a smaller corpus of mainly Tagalog web pages, 
generously supplied by Rosie Jones (derived 
from Ghani, Jones and Mladeni 2004) was 
processed in order to yield estimated word fre-
quencies for Tagalog.  
Using these frequencies, a long list of queries 
composed of frequent words is automatically 
generated. Each term is at least 12 characters 
long, including spaces but not including apostro-
phes or other non-alphabetic characters. A word 
is chosen from among the most frequent 500 in 
the starter corpus, with a probability proportional 
to its log frequency. If this produces a 12-
character string, the query is complete. Other-
wise, another word is chosen using the same pro-
cedure and added to the string, until the threshold 
of 12 characters is reached. This threshold was 
selected in order to ensure queries long enough 
to be specifically Tagalog (e.g., not sa ng), but 
short enough to yield a large number of web hits. 
Some sample queries: kami pangulo, +at salita 
oo,
4
 lalo parang, noong akin aklat. Although 
these queries are not treated as phrases, the order 
produced by the query-generator was preserved, 
because the topmost hits produced by, e.g., lalo 
parang and parang lalo are not the same. It is 
important to ?toss the salad?5 in this way, be-
cause the Google search engine that these queries 
are sent to allows only the top 1,000 results of a 
query to be viewed. 
A program that sends these queries to Google 
(www.google.com), using the Google web APIs 
service, was written by Ivan Tam. This returns a 
maximum of 10,000 URLs (web addresses) per 
day, because a user?s license key allows only 
1,000 queries per day, and each query return only 
10 results?to see more than the top 10 results 
for a given query, a new query must be sent, 
which counts against the day?s 1,000. Typically, 
the number of URLs retrieved was about 5,000. 
This is because the number of times the program 
asks to see more results for a given query is de-
termined by the estimated number of results ini-
                                                                          
log-language documents from the web, because this would 
require hand identification of their results (or of a large 
body of test documents). Qualitatively, however, the Ghani 
et al approach does seem to suffer the same main problem 
as mine: a sizeable number of documents from Philippine 
languages other than Tagalog are retrieved. 
4
 A ?+? was added by hand to a few members of the top-500 
list that Google would otherwise ignore because they are 
common function words in English or another major lan-
guage. Quotations are placed around words with crucial 
punctuation, such as apostrophes in contractions. 
5
 Thanks to Ivan Tam for this useful metaphor. 
tially reported by Google, but this is often an 
overestimate. For example, Google may estimate 
that there are 800 results, and the program will 
thus ask to see 80 pages of results (using up 80 
of the day?s queries), but perhaps only 621 re-
sults will be obtained. (The program gives the 
user the option of setting a maximum number of 
results to obtain per query; setting this number 
lower makes more efficient use of the day?s 
query quota.)  
Tam?s program gives the option of taking us-
ing Google?s option to return, out of any subset 
of results from one query that are highly similar, 
just one URL. That option was used here, but no 
further attempt was made to exclude highly simi-
lar results that come from different queries?
obviously, this is an area where the procedure 
could be improved. The program also offers the 
option, which was used here, to create a separate 
query to search any crowded hosts (Google tends 
to show only two results from a single server, 
returning a ?More results from ...? link; in the 
results returned by the Google Web APIs service, 
this translates into a non-blank value for 
<hostName>). 
The day?s URLs are compared against those 
retrieved so far, and the new ones are extracted. 
Another part of Tam?s program then retrieves the 
full text of each new URL, although an existing 
program such as wget could also be used. Be-
cause the data of interest in this project are uni-
gram and bigram frequencies, and irrelevant bi-
grams such as ?a href? (a frequent bigram in 
html code) play no role, html stripping was not 
performed. 
The resulting corpus currently has 98,607 
pages and an estimated 20 million words of Tag-
alog (200 million ?words? total, but examination 
of a sample finds that when html tags and non-
Tagalog text are removed, about 10% remains). 
Word frequencies and certain bigram frequencies 
(e.g., the word+enclitic frequencies discussed 
below) are obtained from this corpus. 
3 Tapping in the corpus  
The phenomenon investigated most recently in 
the corpus is tapping. As mentioned above, 
Tagalog has a rule taking /d/ to the tap [] 
(spelled r) between vowels; tap rarely occurs 
non-intervocalically, except in loanwords (Span-
ish [] and [r], and English [] are usually 
adapted as []). There are no opportunities for d/r 
alternation in affixes, but there are stems that 
begin or end in d, and if a vowel-final prefix or 
61
vowel-initial suffix is attached, the potential for 
tapping arises. Tapping has been reported to be 
variable at the prefix-stem boundary (ma-rumi 
?dirty? vs. ma-dahon ?leafy?) but obligatory at the 
stem-suffix boundary (lakar-an ?to be walked 
on?, from lakad ?walk?) (Schachter and Otanes 
1972). This is reminiscent of phenomena such as 
s-voicing in Northern Italian, which authors such 
as Nespor and Vogel (1986) and Peperkamp 
(1997) have analyzed as involving an asymmetry 
in how prefixes and suffixes relate to the pro-
sodic word. For the sake of brevity, I will not 
review the Northern Italian facts here, but will 
apply an analysis similar to Peperkamp?s to the 
Tagalog tapping case. (Peperkamp points out that 
prefix/suffix asymmetries always seem to be in 
this direction: prefixes are prosodically less inte-
grated with stems than are suffixes.)  
If we assume, as a first approximation, that a 
suffix is incorporated into the same prosodic 
word (p-word) as its stem, while a prefix adjoins 
to the stem to form a higher p-word, and we fur-
ther assume that tapping applies only to a vowel-
d-vowel stretch that is not interrupted by a p-
word boundary, then we would predict that tap-
ping occurs at the stem-suffix boundary but not 
at the prefix-stem boundary: 
 
 p-word   
 
 p-word     p-word 
     | 
ma dahon  lakar    an 
 
Figure 1. Prosodic structure of prefixed 
word without tapping vs. suffixed word. 
 
Loosely following Peperkamp, I will assume 
that this prosodification is derived by a constraint 
requiring the left edge of any accessed lexical 
unit (see below) to project the left edge of a p-
word. In Optimality Theory terms (Prince & 
Smolensky 1993/2004), the symmetrical con-
straint requiring the right edge of an accessed 
lexical unit to project any prosodic edge is 
ranked lower (specifically, below an anti-
recursion constraint requiring every p-word node 
to immediately dominate a foot). 
3.1 Tapping at the prefix-stem boundary 
How can we explain ma-rumi, where tapping 
does occur at the prefix-stem boundary? In the 
Northern Italian case, Baroni (2001) found that 
application of the s-voicing rule at the prefix-
stem boundary in a reading task was negatively 
correlated with semantic transparency as deter-
mined by a rating task. Baroni?s interpretation is 
that forms with voicing (which tend to be seman-
tically opaque) are treated as morphologically 
simple. I will follow Baroni loosely in assuming 
that words like marumi are accessed as a single 
lexical unit (without taking a position on whether 
that lexical entry contains information about 
morpheme boundaries). If marumi is accessed as 
a lexical unit?rather than indirectly via ma- and 
dumi?then the constraint mentioned above re-
quires only the left edge of the whole word to 
project a p-word boundary, and the structure is as 
in Figure 2. Because no p-word boundary inter-
rupts the vowel-d-vowel sequence, tapping ap-
plies. 
 
     p-word      
      
ma rumi 
 
Figure 2. Prosodic structure of prefixed 
word with tapping. 
 
The corpus does not directly yield judgments 
of semantic transparency, of course?though in-
direct measures using the similarity of contexts 
in which the derived word and its base occur 
could be examined in future work?but it does 
yield a statistic that Hay (2003) has argued is 
closely related to the degree to which a morpho-
logically complex word is treated as a single unit 
vs. compositionally: the ratio of base frequency 
to derived-word frequency. Hay argues, based on 
a series of experiments on English, that when a 
derived word is more frequent than its morpho-
logical base (e.g., English illegible vs. legible), it 
is more likely to be accessed through a direct 
route during processing (direct access to illegible 
rather than access via in- and legible), and thus 
more likely to be treated as a single unit phonol-
ogically, and more likely to develop independent 
semantics. The prediction that can be tested in 
the Tagalog corpus is this: prefixed words that 
are more frequent than their unprefixed bases are 
more likely to undergo tapping than prefixed 
words that are less frequent than their unprefixed 
bases. 
To minimize hand-checking of items, the cor-
pus was searched only for the 592 orthographi-
cally distinct prefixed d-stem words that appear 
in a dictionary of Tagalog (English 1986). These 
words were extracted from the dictionary and put 
into electronic form by Nikki Foster. The fre-
quency of each word?s tapped and untapped form 
62
were retrieved from the corpus (e.g., for the dic-
tionary?s i-dipa, both idipa and iripa?s frequen-
cies were obtained). Dictionary-listed variants 
were searched, and certain punctuation was al-
lowed. ?Linkers? were also allowed (these are 
clitics that can become, orthographically, part of 
the preceding word). The frequency of each 
word?s root, as listed in the dictionary, was also 
retrieved. (In the case of words with multiple 
affixes, it is unclear what the immediate morpho-
logical predecessor is, so for the sake of simplic-
ity the root, rather than some intermediate form, 
was used.) 
The histograms below show how many pre-
fixed words display each range of tapping rates 
in the corpus, from 0 (always d) to 1 (always r). 
They demonstrate the predicted influence of de-
rived/base frequency ratio on tapping rate: when 
the prefixed word is more frequent than its root 
(Figure 3), a high rate of tapping predominates 
(strongly), whereas when the root is more fre-
quent than the prefixed word (Figure 4), a low 
rate of tapping predominates (weakly): 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Co
u
nt
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
rate of tapping
Inclusion criteria: NoDupMinFreqSimpleNativeOnlyPrefixedOnly from AllDictItems.svd
 
 
Figure 3. Distribution of tapping rate in pre-
fixed words that are more frequent than their 
bases. 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Co
u
nt
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
rate of tapping
Inclusion criteria: NoDupMinFreqSimpleNativeOnlyPrefixedOnly from AllDictItems.svd
 
 
Figure 4. Distribution of tapping rate in pre-
fixed words that are less frequent than their 
bases. 
 
Interestingly, in both cases the rates of tapping 
cluster near 0 and 1?intermediate rates are rela-
tively rare. The data above are limited to words 
with a corpus frequency of at least 10, so that 
each word had a fair chance of displaying an in-
termediate rate of tapping if that were its true 
behavior. This suggests that the great majority of 
prefixed words in Tagalog are lexicalized as ei-
ther undergoing or not undergoing tapping (or, 
depending on what form lexical entries in fact 
take, as having one prosodic structure or the 
other). This is rather different from the Northern 
Italian situation discovered by Baroni, where 
many words robustly vary, even within a single 
speaker. 
Words with a corpus frequency of less than 
10, which are almost all less frequent than their 
bases, show a preference of non-tapping, as ex-
pected: 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Co
u
n
t
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
rate of tapping
Inclusion criteria: NoDupNativeOnlyPrefixedOnlyLOWFreq from AllDictItems.svd
 
Figure 5. Distribution of tapping rate in pre-
fixed words with corpus frequency < 10 
(nearly all are less frequent than their bases). 
 
Hay argues that it is relative frequency of a de-
rived word and its base, not raw frequency of the 
derived word, that models of lexical access pre-
dict to have an effect on word decomposability. 
In the present case, raw frequency does also have 
a strong effect on whether a prefixed word be-
longs to the tapping or non-tapping categories, 
but raw and relative frequency are themselves 
highly correlated. In order to verify that relative 
frequency has an effect independent of raw fre-
quency, the prefixed words were divided into 28 
categories according to the log of their raw fre-
quency (0 to <0.1, 0.3 to <0.4, 0.4 to <0.5, etc.). 
Within each category, the percentage of words 
less frequent than their bases that undergo tap-
ping >95% of the time and the percentage of 
words more frequent than their bases that un-
dergo tapping >95% of the time were calculated. 
The prediction is that the second percentage 
should be higher?that is, words matched for raw 
frequency should be more likely to undergo tap-
ping if they are more frequent than their bases?
and this was borne out in a Wilcoxon signed-
63
rank test (p<.05). The contribution of raw fre-
quency remains to be further explored. 
3.2 Tapping at the stem-suffix boundary 
Tapping was examined in a similar fashion at the 
stem-suffix boundary. From English?s (1986) 
dictionary, 160 native-etymology roots that end 
in d were extracted, and the corpus was searched 
for any suffixed forms of these roots (with or 
without additional prefixes and infixes). As ex-
pected from Schachter and Otanes?s (1972) de-
scription, tapping is indeed nearly obligatory at 
the stem-suffix boundary, as shown in Figure 6 
(which again shows only words with corpus fre-
quency of at least 10): 
 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Co
u
n
t
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
rate of tapping
Inclusion criteria: at least 10 tokens from allsuffixedforms.svd
 
Figure 6. Distribution of tapping rate in suf-
fixed words. 
 
Because of the relative ease of searching for 
suffixed forms (there are only two productive 
native suffixes in Tagalog, -in and -an, so a sim-
ple regular expression can find all the suffixed 
forms of any root), the counts here are much 
higher than in the prefix-stem case?compare the 
scales of the vertical axes in the histograms?and 
we can look more closely at the 124 words?a 
minority so small it is largely invisible in Figure 
6?that do not uniformly undergo tapping at the 
stem-suffix boundary. Rate of tapping among 
these 124 words turns out to be weakly but sig-
nificantly correlated with the log ratio of suffix-
word frequency to root frequency (Spearman?s 
rho=.534, p<.001), as predicted by Hay?s view of 
phonological integration. 
There are multiple possible interpretations for 
this result under the prosodic account given 
above. Perhaps stem and suffix do always form a 
single p-word, but paradigm-uniformity effects 
(e.g., Steriade 2000) can, if sufficiently strong, 
block tapping even within a p-word. Or, perhaps 
the requirement that a suffix be integrated into 
the prosodic word can itself be overridden, occa-
sionally, by frequency effects demanding a com-
positional treatment of an affixed word that is 
less frequent than its base.6 It is also possible that 
all the ?nontapping? here represents typographi-
cal errors, but that there is a frequency effect on 
errors such that the more frequent a base relative 
to the word it is nested inside, the more likely 
that the base?s spelling is preserved. 
3.3 Tapping at the stem-stem boundary 
The prosodic system assumed above (with some 
constraints not mentioned there), allows a com-
bination of two stems to have either of the pro-
sodic structures shown in Figure 7, with the 
choice depending on whether the combination is 
accessed as a single lexical unit. But in either 
case, a p-word boundary separates the two stems, 
and thus tapping is not expected on either side of 
the stem-stem boundary. 
 
         p-word        p-word 
 
 p-word p-word    p-word 
      |      |                | 
   stem   stem      stem   stem 
 
Figure 7. Two possible prosodic structures 
for compound or two-syllable reduplication. 
 
There are two places where a stem+stem com-
bination could arise in Tagalog. One is in com-
pounds, such as basag-ulo ?fight? (lit. breaking-
head), where each member bears a separate 
stress. If we assume, following most previous 
work on the p-word, that dominating a stressed 
syllable is a necessary feature of a p-word 
(though not sufficient, since a single p-word may 
contain multiple stresses), this is consistent with 
a p-word+p-word prosodic structure. Lacking a 
list of compounds, however, I found it impracti-
cal to search for compounds in the corpus 
(though this is a project for the future).  
The second place where stem-stem boundaries 
arguably arise is in two-syllable reduplication, 
which occurs in a variety of morphological con-
structions, including reduplication by itself: e.g. 
pa-balik-balik ?recurrent?, from balik ?return?. In 
these reduplications, each copy bears a stress. 
We would therefore expect that tapping should 
not occur at the boundary between the two redu-
                                                 
6
 In Hay?s view, relative frequency is not epiphenomenal, 
but rather determines the mode of lexical access (direct or 
indirect route) and thus a word?s behavior. It is also possi-
ble, of course, that relative frequency is only the symptom 
of some underlying property of words, or that there is feed-
back between frequency and the properties that influence it. 
64
plicants. This is indeed what is found, as shown 
in the histogram below, though the data come 
mostly from stem-initial d cases (e.g., dagli-dagli 
?right away?); there were only 5 stem-final d 
cases that met the frequency threshold (e.g., 
agad-agad ?immediately?):7 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Co
u
n
t
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
rate of  tapping
Inclusion criteria: minimum5tokens from reduplicatedFormsVariantsCombined.svd
 
 
Figure 8. Distribution of tapping rate at re-
duplicant-reduplicant boundary (two-
syllable reduplication). 
 
The lack of tapping is unlikely to be a redupli-
cative identity effect (Wilbur 1973, McCarthy 
and Prince 1995), because tapping is blocked 
even when the other copy of the same consonant 
does undergo tapping because of an adjacent pre-
fix or suffix (ka-agad-agar-an, ka-raga-daga-_n 
[glosses unknown?English?s dictionary con-
tains both roots but not these derivatives of 
them]). 
The lack of tapping is also probably not due to 
the reduplicated forms? low frequency: most are 
indeed less frequent than their bases, but it was 
seen above that prefixed words that are less fre-
quent than their bases undergo tapping almost as 
often as not. 
3.4 Tapping in clitics 
There are two enclitics in Tagalog that begin 
with /d/: din ?also? and daw ?(reported speech)?. 
Each has a tap-initial allomorph (rin, raw). There 
is reported to be variation between the two allo-
morphs even after consonant-final words 
(Schachter and Otanes 1972). So far, I have ex-
amined in the corpus only din/rin after vowel-
final words.  
All bigrams whose second word is din or rin 
were extracted from the corpus. Variation was 
                                                 
7
 The interpretation of stem-final d cases is complicated by 
the fact that p-words spelled with an initial vowel are usu-
ally actually glottal-stop initial. Thus, agad-agad can be 
pronounced with a glottal stop (agad-[]agad), so that the 
medial d is not truly intervocalic. 
indeed found, but unlike in the prefix+stem case, 
where the variation was highly polarized?with 
most words having one strongly dominant behav-
ior?in the word+clitic case the variation is con-
tinuous (again, only bigrams with a corpus fre-
quency of at least 10 are shown): 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Co
un
t
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
rate of tapping
Inclusion criteria: Word1VFinalFreqAtLeast10RinDinOnly from rindinRevisedAgain.svd
 
Figure 9. Distribution of tapping rate at 
word-clitic boundary. 
 
One interpretation is that most word+clitic 
combinations are not lexicalized, and their tap-
ping behavior is determined on the fly. The cor-
relation between the log ratio of bigram to base 
word frequency and the rate of tapping, though 
very weak, is significant (Spearman?s rho=.197, 
p<.0001). If we look at enclitic+din/rin combina-
tions (where the first enclitic ends in a vowel, as 
in ... pa rin ?... still also?), which display simi-
larly gradient variation, the correlation is 
stronger, though p is larger because there are 
fewer data points (Spearman?s rho=.527, p<.05).  
4 Conclusion  
This paper has presented one case study, on Tag-
alog tapping, of phonological research using a 
written, web-derived corpus. Several aspects of 
the investigation depended crucially on the web-
as-corpus method. Because of economic con-
straints, the only realistic way to assemble a 
large corpus of a language like Tagalog is cur-
rently by taking text from the web. And only a 
large corpus makes it possible to ask questions 
such as ?how does the frequency ratio of a de-
rived word to its base affect the application of a 
phonological rule?? The two different patterns of 
variation?polarized in the stem+prefix case, 
continuous in the word+enclitic case?would 
have been very difficult to discover without cor-
pus data.  
This Tagalog corpus has already been used to 
investigate infixation in loans that begin with 
consonant clusters (Zuraw 2005). There, as men-
tioned in Section 2, the web-based nature of the 
65
corpus was of more than practical importance, 
because a large quantity of highly informal writ-
ing?unlikely to be found in a traditionally con-
structed written corpus?was needed. 
The corpus is also being used in ongoing work 
on nasal substitution, and will be used in the fu-
ture to investigate the other phenomena listed in 
Section 1. The corpus will also continue to grow; 
there seems to be little danger of running out of 
Tagalog-language web space to search in the 
foreseeable future. 
Acknowledgement  
Thanks to research assistant Ivan Tam for pro-
gramming that made this project possible, and to 
research assistant Nikki Foster for data entry. For 
valuable discussion about tapping, thanks to 
Colin Wilson, Bruce Hayes, and participants the 
UCLA phonology seminar. Thanks also to two 
anonymous reviewers for several ideas that have 
been incorporated into the paper. 
 
References  
Baroni, Marco (2001). The representation of prefixed 
forms in the Italian lexicon: Evidence from the dis-
tribution of intervocalic [s] and [z] in northern Ital-
ian. In Geert Booij and Jaap van Marle (eds.), 
Yearbook of Morphology 1999, Springer, 
Dordrecht: 121-152. 
Baroni, Marco and S. Bernardini (2004). BootCaT: 
Bootstrapping corpora and terms from the web. 
Proceedings of LREC 2004. 
English, Leo (1986). Tagalog-English Dictionary. 
Congregation of the Most Holy Redeemer, Manila. 
Distributed by (Philippine) National Book Store. 
Ghani, Rayid, Rosie Jones & Dunja Mladeni (2004). 
Building minority language corpora by learning to 
generate Web search queries. Knowledge and In-
formation Systems 7: 56-83. 
Hay, Jennifer (2003). Causes and Consequences of 
Word Structure. Routledge, New York and Lon-
don. 
McCarthy, John & Alan Prince (1995). Faithfulness 
and reduplicative identity. Papers in Optimality 
Theory, UMass Occasional Papers in Linguistics 
18: 249-348 
Nespor, Marina and Irene Vogel (1986). Prosodic 
Phonology. Foris, Dordrecht. 
Peperkamp, Sharon (1997). Prosodic Words. Holland 
Academic Graphics, The Hague. 
Prince, Alan and Paul Smolensky (1993/2004). Opti-
mality Theory: Constraint Interaction in Genera-
tive Grammar. Blackwell. 
Rackowski, Andrea (1999). Morphological optional-
ity in Tagalog aspectual reduplication. Papers on 
Morphology and Syntax, Cycle Two, MIT Working 
Papers in Linguistics 34: 107-136. 
Ross, Kie (1996). Floating phonotactics: infixation 
and reduplication in Tagalog loanwords. UCLA 
M.A. thesis. 
Schachter, Paul and Fe Otanes (1972) Tagalog Refer-
ence Grammar. University of California Press, 
Berkeley. 
Steriade, Donca (2000). Paradigm Uniformity and the 
phonetics/phonology boundary. In Janet Pierre-
humbert and Michael Broe (eds.), Papers in Labo-
ratory Phonology vol. 6, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge. 
Wilbur, Ronnie Bring (1973). The Phonology of Re-
duplication. Indiana University Linguistics Club, 
Bloomington. 
Zuraw, Kie (2000). Patterned exceptions in phonol-
ogy. UCLA Ph.D. dissertation. 
Zuraw, Kie (2002). Aggressive reduplication. Pho-
nology 19: 395-439. 
Zuraw, Kie (2005). The role of phonetic knowledge in 
phonological patterning: Corpus and survey evi-
dence from Tagalog. Manuscript, UCLA. 
66
Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 873?877,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Does Korean defeat phonotactic word segmentation? 
Robert Daland 
Department of Linguistics 
University of California, Los Angeles 
3125 Campbell Hall, Box 951543 
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1543, USA 
r.daland@gmail.com 
Kie Zuraw 
Department of Linguistics 
University of California, Los Angeles 
3125 Campbell Hall, Box 951543 
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1543, USA 
kie@ucla.edu 
 
  
Abstract 
Computational models of infant word 
segmentation have not been tested on a 
wide range of languages. This paper ap-
plies a phonotactic segmentation model 
to Korean. In contrast to the underseg-
mentation pattern previously found in 
English and Russian, the model exhibited 
more oversegmentation errors and more 
errors overall. Despite the high error rate, 
analysis suggested that lexical acquisition 
might not be problematic, provided that 
infants attend only to frequently seg-
mented items. 
1 Introduction 
The process by which infants learn to parse the 
acoustic signal into word-sized units?word 
segmentation?is an active area of research in 
developmental psychology (Polka and Sundara 
2012; Saffran et al 1996) and cognitive model-
ing (Daland and Pierrehumbert 2011 [DP11], 
Goldwater et al 2009 [GGJ09]). Word segmen-
tation is a classic bootstrapping problem: to learn 
words, infants must segment the input, because 
around 90% of the novel word types they hear 
are never uttered in isolation (Aslin et al 1996; 
van de Weijer 1998). However, in order to seg-
ment infants must know some words, or gener-
alizations about the properties of words. How 
can infants form generalizations about words 
before learning words themselves? 
1.1 DiBS 
Two approaches in the literature might be termed 
lexical and phonotactic. Under the lexical ap-
proach, exemplified by GGJ09, infants are as-
sumed to exploit the Zipfian distribution of lan-
guage, identifying frequently recurring and mu-
tually predictive sequences as words. In the pho-
notactic approach, infants are assumed to lever-
age universal and/or language-specific knowl-
edge about the phonological content of se-
quences to infer the optimal segmentation. The 
present study focuses on the phonotactic ap-
proach outlined in DP11, termed DiBS. For other 
examples of approaches that use phonotactics, 
see Fleck 2008, Blanchard et al 2010.  
A (Di)phone-(B)ased (S)egmentation model 
consists of an inventory of segment-segment se-
quences, with an estimated probability that a 
word boundary falls between the two segments. 
For example, when [pd] occurs in English, the 
probability of an intervening word boundary is 
very high: Pr(# | [pd]) ? 1. These probabilities 
are the parameters of the model to be learned. In 
the supervised setting (baseline model), these 
parameters may be estimated directly from data 
in which the word boundaries are labeled: Pr(# | 
pd) = Fr(# ^ pd) / (Fr(# ^ pd) + Fr(?# ^ pd)) 
where Fr(# ^ pd) is the number of [pd] sequences 
separated by a word boundary, and Fr(?# ^ pd) 
the number of [pd]?s not separated by a word 
boundary. For assessment purposes, these prob-
abilities are converted to hard decisions. 
DP11 describe an unsupervised learning algo-
rithm for DiBS that exploits a positional inde-
pendence assumption, treating phrase edges as a 
proxy for word edges (phrasal model). This 
learning model?s performance on English is on 
par with state-of-the-art lexical models (GGJ09), 
reflecting the high positional informativeness of 
diphones in English. We apply the baseline and 
phrasal models to Korean. 
1.2 Linguistic properties of Korean 
Korean is unrelated to languages previously 
modeled (English, Dutch, French, Spanish, Ara-
873
bic, Greek, Russian), and it is an interesting test 
case for both phonotactic and lexical approaches. 
Korean syntax and morphology (Sohn 1999) 
present a particular challenge for unsupervised 
learning. Most noun phrases are marked with a 
limited set of case suffixes, and clauses generally 
end in a verb, inflected with suffixes ending in a 
limited set of sounds ([a,?,i,jo]). Thus, the 
phrase-final distribution may not reflect the 
overall word-final distribution?problematic for 
some phonotactic approaches. Similarly, the high 
frequency and positional predictability of affixes 
could lead a lexical model to treat them as words. 
A range of phonological processes apply in Ko-
rean, even across word boundaries (Sohn 1999), 
yielding extensive allomorphy. Phonotactic 
models may be robust to this kind of variation, 
but it is challenging for current lexical models 
(see DP11).  
Korean consonantal phonology gives diphones 
several informative properties, including: 
? Various consonant clusters (obstruent-
lenis, lenis-nasal, et al) are possible only 
if they span a word boundary 
? Various consonants cannot precede a 
word boundary 
? [?] cannot follow a word boundary  
Conversely, unlike in previously studied lan-
guages, vowel-vowel sequences are common 
word-internally. This is likely to be problematic 
for phonotactic models, but not for lexical ones. 
2 Methods 
We obtained a phonetic corpus representing Ko-
rean speech by applying a grapheme-to-phonetic 
converter to a text corpus. First, we conducted an 
analysis of this phonetic corpus, with results in 
Table 1. Next, for comparability with previous 
studies, two 750,000-word samples (representing 
approximately one month of child input each) 
were randomly drawn from the phonetic cor-
pus?the training and test corpora. The phrasal 
and baseline DiBS models described above were 
trained and tested on these corpora; results are 
reported in Table 2. Finally, we inspected one 
?day? worth of segmentations, and offer a quali-
tative assessment of errors. 
2.1 Corpus and phonetic conversion 
The Korean Advanced Institute of Science and 
Technology Raw Corpus, available from the Se-
mantic Web Research Center, semantic-
web.kaist.ac.kr/home/index.php/KAIST_Corpus 
contains approximately 70,000,000 words from 
speeches, novels, newspapers, and more. The 
corpus was preprocessed to supply phrase breaks 
at punctuation marks and strip XML.  
The grapheme-to-phonetic conversion system 
of Kim et al (2002) was generously shared by its 
creators. It includes morphosyntactic processing, 
phrase-break detection, and a dictionary of pho-
netic exceptions. It applies regular and lexically-
conditioned phonological rules, but not optional 
rules. Kim et al reported per-grapheme accuracy 
of 99.7% in one corpus and 99.98% in another. 
An example of original text and the phonetic 
conversion is given below, with phonological 
changes in bold: 
 
orthographic: ??? 1 ???? 2 ?? 3. 
??? 4 ??????? 5 ???? 6. 
phonetic: ???????1 ?????? 2 
?????? 3 # ??????? 4 
????????????????? 5 
????????? 6 
IPA: k j? ? k i t o1  j? t? u e s ?2   t?? u l s* ? 
?3   #   t? u ? a ? t ?4   m u n e t?? a ? t? a k? a k 
k* wa l ? l5   t? o l ? p? ? t t* a6 
(the * diacritic indicates tense consonants) 
gloss: Born3 in Yeoju2, Gyeonggi-do1. 
Graduated6 from Jungang University4 
Department of Creative Writing5. 
We relied on spaces in the corpus to indicate 
word boundaries, although, as in all languages, 
there can be inconsistencies in written Korean.  
2.2 Error analysis 
An under-researched issue is the nature of the 
errors that segmentation algorithms make. For a 
given input word in the test corpus, we defined 
the output projection as the minimal sequence of 
segmented words containing the entire input 
word. For example, if the#kitty were segmented 
as thekitty, then thekitty would be the output pro-
jection for both the and kitty. Similarly, for a 
posited word in the segmentation/output of the 
test corpus, we defined the input projection. For 
example, if the#kitty were segmented as 
theki#tty, then the the#kitty would be the input 
projection of both theki and tty. For each word, 
we examined the input-output relationship. Sev-
eral questions were of interest. Are highly fre-
quent items segmented frequently enough that 
the child is likely to be able to learn them? Is it 
874
the case that all or most items which are seg-
mented frequently are themselves words? Are 
there predicted errors which seem especially se-
rious or difficult to overcome? 
3 Results and discussion 
The 1350 distinct diphones found in the phonetic 
corpus were grouped into phonological classes. 
Table 1 indicates the probabilities (percentage) 
that a word boundary falls inside the diphone; 
when the class contains 3 or more diphones, the 
median and range are shown. Because of various 
phonological processes, some sequences cannot 
exist (blank cells), some can occur only word-
internally (marked int), and some can occur only 
across word boundaries (marked span). For ex-
ample, the velar nasal [?] cannot begin a word, 
so diphones of the form X? must be word-
internal. Conversely, a lenis-/h/ sequence indi-
cates a word boundary, because within a word a 
lenis stop merges with following /h/ to become 
an aspirated stop. If all diphones in a cell have a 
spanning rate above 90%, the cell says span*, 
and if below 10%, int*. This means that all the 
diphones in that class are highly informative; 
other classes contain a mix of more and less in-
formative diphones. 
The performance of the DiBS models is 
shown in Table 2. An undersegmentation error is 
a true word boundary which the segmentation 
algorithm fails to find (miss), while an overseg-
mentation error is a falsely posited boundary 
(false alarm). The under- and over-segmentation 
error rates are defined as the number of such er-
rors per word (percent). We also report the preci-
sion, recall, and F scores for boundary detection, 
word token segmentation, and type segmentation 
(for details see DP11, GGJ09). 
 
model baseline phrasal 
under (errs per wd) 43.4 72.5 
over (errs per wd) 17.7 22.0 
prec (bdry/tok/type) 68/36/34 28/11/12 
recall (bdry/tok/type) 46/27/29 11/6/8 
F (bdry/tok/type) 55/31/31 15/8/9 
Table 2: Results of DiBS models 
 
On the basis of the fact that the oversegmenta-
tion error rate in English and Russian was con-
sistently below 10% (<1 error/10 wds), DP11 
conjectured that phonotactic segmenters will, 
cross-linguistically, avoid significant overseg-
mentation. The results in Table 2 provide a coun-
terexample: oversegmentation is distinctly higher 
than in English and Russian. Indeed, Korean is a 
more challenging language for purely phonotac-
tic segmentation.  
3.1 Phonotactic cues to word segmentation 
Because phonological processes are more likely 
to apply word-internally, word-internal se-
quences are more predictable (Aslin et al 1996; 
DP11; GGJ09; Saffran et al 1996; van de Weijer 
1998). The phonology of Korean is a potentially 
        seg. 2 
seg. 1   
lenis 
stop 
lenis 
non-stop 
tense asp. h n m ? liquid vowel diphth. 
lenis stop span 100 
4-100 
int* 27 
5-53 
span 100 
98-100 
span  100 
10-100 
int* 7 
0-100 
lenis  
  non-stop 
         int int 
tense          int int 
aspirated          int int 
h          int int 
n 65 
29-66 
46, 57 38 
18-82 
45 
32-67 
35 32 61  span* 12 
1-37 
53 
20-99 
m 19 
14-21 
18, 18 14 
4-57 
14 
12-26 
14 int* 21  span int* 12 
1-92 
? 12 
11-13 
10, 12 9 
6-55 
11 
10-15 
int* int* 10  span 6 
0-64 
18 
4-86 
liquid 55 
43-63 
84, 88 71 
6-90 
53 
17-68 
42 90 53  int* 3 
0-14 
39 
7-95 
vowel 16 
6-87 
32 
12-82 
36 
4-97 
18 
3-88 
38 
9-84 
5 
1-31 
13 
2-70 
int int* 44 
1-90 
51 
3-100 
diphthong 10 
0-79 
12 
0-55 
21 
0-100 
11 
0-87 
16 
0-88 
3 
0-15 
19 
0-74 
int int* 26 
0-100 
31 
0-100 
Table 1: Diphone behavior 
875
rich source of information for word segmenta-
tion: obstruent-initial diphones are generally in-
formative as to the presence/absence of word 
boundaries. However, as we suspected, vowel-
vowel sequences are problematic, since they oc-
cur freely both within words and across word 
boundaries. Korean differs from English in that 
most English diphones occur nearly exclusively 
within words, or nearly exclusively across word 
boundaries (DP11), while in Korean most sono-
rant-obstruent sequences occur both within and 
across words. 
3.2 Errors and word-learning 
It seems reasonable to assume that word-learning 
is best facilitated by seeing multiple occurrences 
of a word. A segmentation that is produced only 
once might be ignored; thus we defined an input 
or output projection as frequent if it occurred 
more than once in the test sample. 
A word learner relying on a phonotactic model 
could expect to successfully identify many fre-
quent words. For 73 of the 100 most frequent 
input words, the only frequent output projection 
in the baseline model was the input word itself, 
meaning that the word was segmented correctly 
in most contexts. For 20 there was no frequent 
output projection, meaning that the word was not 
segmented consistently across contexts, which 
we assume is noise to the learner. In the phrasal 
model, for 16 items the most frequent output pro-
jection was the input word itself and for 64 there 
was no frequent output projection. 
Conversely, of the 100 most frequent potential 
words identified by the baseline model, in 26 
cases the most frequent input projection was the 
output word itself: a real word was correctly 
identified. In 26 cases there was no frequent in-
put projection, and in 48 another input projection 
was at least as frequent as the output word. One 
such example is [mj?n] ?cotton?, frequently seg-
mented out when it was a bound morpheme (?if? 
or ?how many?). The most frequently segmented 
item was [ke], which can be a freestanding word 
(?there/thing?), but was often segmented out from 
words suffixed with [-ke] ?-ly/to? and [-eke] ?to?. 
What do these results mean for a child using a 
phonotactic strategy? First, many of the types 
segmented in a day would be experienced only 
once (and presumably ignored). Second, infants 
would not go far astray if they learned fre-
quently-segmented items as words. 
3.3 Phrase edges and independence 
We suspected the reason that the phrasal DiBS 
model performed so much worse than baseline 
was its assumption that phrase-edge distributions 
approximate word-edge distributions. Phrase be-
ginnings were a good proxy for word beginnings, 
but there were mismatches phrase-finally. For 
example, [a] is much more frequent phrase-
finally than word-finally (because of common 
verb suffixes ending in [a]), while [n] is much 
more frequent word-finally (because of non-
sentence-final suffixes ending in [n]). The posi-
tional independence assumption is too strong. 
4 Conclusion 
This paper extends previous studies by applying 
a computational learning model of phonotactic 
word segmentation to Korean. Various properties 
of Korean led us to believe it would challenge 
both unsupervised phonotactic and lexical ap-
proaches. 
Phonological and morphological analysis of 
errors yielded novel insights. For example, the 
generally greater error rate in Korean is partly 
caused by a high tolerance for vowel-vowel se-
quences within words. Interactions between 
morphology and word order result in violations 
of a key positional independence assumption.  
Phonotactic segmentation was distinctly worse 
than in previous languages (English, Russian), 
particularly for oversegmentation errors. This 
implies the segmentation of simplistic diphone 
models is not cross-linguistically stable, a find-
ing that aligns with other cross-linguistic com-
parisons of segmentation algorithms. In general, 
distinctly worse performance is found for lan-
guages other than English (Sesotho: Blanchard et 
al. 2010; Arabic and Spanish: Fleck 2008). These 
facts suggest that the successful segmentation 
model must incorporate richer phonotactics, or 
integrate some lexical processing. On the bright 
side, we found that frequently segmented items 
were mostly words, so a high segmentation error 
rate does not necessarily translate to a high error 
rate for word-learning. 
References 
Aslin, R. N., Woodward, J. Z., LaMendola, N. P., & 
Bever, T. G. (1996). Models of word segmentation 
in fluent maternal speech to infants. In J. L. Mor-
gan & K. Demuth (Eds.). Signal to syntax. Mah-
wah, NJ: LEA, pp. 117?134. 
Blanchard, D., Heinz, J., & Golinkoff, R. (2010). 
Modeling the contribution of phonotactic cues to 
876
the problem of word segmentation. Journal of 
Child Language 37(3), 487-511. 
Daland, R. & Pierrehumbert, J.B. (2011). Learnability 
of diphone-based segmentation. Cognitive Science 
35(1), 119-155. 
Fleck, M. (2008). Lexicalized phonotactic word seg-
mentation. Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, 130-138. 
Goldwater, S., Griffiths, T. L., & Johnson, M. (2009). 
A Bayesian framework for word segmentation: 
Exploring the effects of context. Cognition 112(1), 
21-54. 
Kim, B., Lee, G., & Lee, J.-H. (2002). Morpheme-
based grapheme to phoneme conversion using 
phonetic patterns and morphophonemic connec-
tivity information. ACM Trans. Asian Lang. Inf. 
Process. 1(1), 65-82. 
Polka, L. & Sundara, M. (2012). Word segmentation 
in monolingual infants acquiring Canadian-English 
and Canadian-French: Native language, cross-
language and cross-dialect comparisons. Infancy 
17(2), 198-232. 
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996). 
Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science 
275(5294), 1926-1928. 
Sohn, H.-M. (1999). The Korean Language. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press. 
van de Weijer, J. (1998). Language input for word 
discovery. MPI series in psycholinguistics (No. 9). 
877
