Coling 2008: Companion volume ? Posters and Demonstrations, pages 145?148
Manchester, August 2008
Online-Monitoring of Security-Related Events
Martin Atkinson, Jakub Piskorski, Bruno Pouliquen
Ralf Steinberger, Hristo Tanev, Vanni Zavarella
Joint Research Centre of the European Commission
Institute for the Protection and Security of the Citizen
Via Fermi 2749, 21027 Ispra (VA), Italy
firstname.lastname@jrc.it
Abstract
This paper presents a fully operational
real-time event extraction system which is
capable of accurately and efficiently ex-
tracting violent and natural disaster events
from vast amount of online news articles
per day in different languages. Due to the
requirement that the system must be mul-
tilingual and easily extendable, it is based
on a shallow linguistic analysis. The event
extraction results can be viewed on a pub-
licly accessible website.
1 Introduction
Gathering information about violent and natural
disaster events from online news is of paramount
importance to better understand conflicts and to
develop global monitoring systems for the auto-
matic detection of precursors for threats in the
fields of conflict and health. This paper reports
on a fully operational live event extraction system
to detect information on violent events and natural
disasters in large multilingual collections of online
news articles collected by the news aggregation
system Europe Media Monitor (Best et al, 2005),
http://press.jrc.it/overview.html.
Although a considerable amount of work on the
automatic extraction of events has been reported,
it still appears to be a lesser studied area in com-
parison to the somewhat easier tasks of named-
entity and relation extraction. Two comprehensive
examples of the current functionality and capabil-
ities of event extraction technology dealing with
c
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported li-
cense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
Some rights reserved.
the identification of disease outbreaks and con-
flict incidents are given in (Grishman et al, 2002)
and (King and Lowe, 2003) respectively. The most
recent trends and developments in this area are re-
ported in (Ashish et al, 2006)
In order to be capable of processing vast
amounts of textual data in real time (as in the case
of EMM)we follow a linguistically lightweight ap-
proach and exploit clustered news at various pro-
cessing stages (pattern learning, information fu-
sion, geo-tagging, etc.). Consequently, only a tiny
fraction of each text is analysed. In a nutshell, our
system deploys simple 1 and 2-slot extraction pat-
terns to identify event-relevant entities. These pat-
terns are semi-automatically acquired in a boot-
strapping manner by using clustered news data.
Next, information about events scattered over dif-
ferent documents is integrated by applying voting
heuristics. The results of the core event extraction
system are integrated into a real-world global mon-
itoring system. Although we mainly cover the se-
curity domain, the techniques deployed in our sys-
tem can be applied to other domains, such as for
instance tracking business-related events for risk
assessment.
In the remaining part of this paper we give a
brief overview of the real-time event extraction
processing chain and describe the particularities of
selected subcomponents. Finally, the online appli-
cation is presented.
2 Real-time Event Extraction Process
The real-time event extraction processing chain is
depicted in Figure 1. First, news articles are gath-
ered by dedicated software for electronic media
monitoring, namely the EMM system (Best et al,
2005). EMM receives an average of 50,000 news
articles per day from about 1,500 news sources in
145
over 40 languages, and regularly checks for up-
dates of news. Secondly, the input data is grouped
into news clusters ideally including documents
on one topic or event. Then, clusters describing
security-related events are selected using keyword-
based heuristics. For each such cluster, the system
tries to detect and extract only the main event by
analysing all documents in the cluster.
EMM
News
Clustering / 
Geo Tag
Text Pre-
Processing 
Pattern 
Matching
Information 
Aggregation 
Events
NEXUS
Figure 1: Real-time processing chain.
Next, each cluster is processed by our core event
extraction engine. For each detected violent event,
it produces a frame, whose main slots are: date and
location, number of killed, injured or kidnapped
people, actors, type of event, weapons used, etc.
In an initial step, each document in the cluster
is linguistically pre-processed in order to produce
a more abstract representation of the texts. This
encompasses: fine-grained tokenisation, sentence
splitting, matching of known named entities, la-
belling of key terms and phrases like action words
(e.g. kill, shoot) and person groups.
Once texts are grouped into clusters and lin-
guistically pre-processed, the pattern engine ap-
plies a cascade of extraction grammars (consisting
of 1 and 2-slot extraction patterns) on each docu-
ment within a cluster. For creating extraction pat-
terns, we apply a blend of machine learning and
knowledge-based techniques. The extraction pat-
terns are matched against the first sentence and the
title of each article from the cluster. By processing
only the top sentence and the title, the system is
more likely to capture facts about the most impor-
tant event in the cluster. Even if we fail to detect
a single piece of information in one document in a
cluster, the same information is likely to be found
in another document of the cluster, where it may
be expressed in a different way.
Finally, since information about events is scat-
tered over different articles, the last step con-
sists of cross-document cluster-level information
fusion, i.e., we aggregate and validate information
extracted locally from each single article in the
same cluster. For this purpose, simple voting-like
heuristics are deployed.
Every ten minutes, EMM clusters the articles
found during the last four hours. The event extrac-
tion engine analyses each of these clusters. The
event information is thus always up-to-date. The
output of the event extraction engine constitutes
the input for a global monitoring system.
3 Geo-tagging Clusters
Challenges for geo-tagging clusters are that place
names can be homographic with person names and
with other place names. We solve the former am-
biguity by first identifying person names found
in our automatically populated database of known
people and organisations. For the latter ambiguity,
we adopted a cluster-centric approach by weight-
ing all place names found in a cluster and by select-
ing the one with the highest score. For each cluster,
we thus first establish all possible candidate loca-
tions by looking up in the texts all place, province,
region and country names found in a multilingual
gazetteer (including name variants). The weights
of the locations are then based on the place name
significance (e.g., a capital city scores higher than
a village) and on the place name hierarchy (i.e. if
the province or region to which the place belongs
are also mentioned in the text, it scores higher).
4 Pattern Acquisition
For pattern acquisition, we deploy a weakly super-
vised bootstrapping algorithm (Tanev and Oezden-
Wennerberg, 2008) similar in spirit to the one de-
scribed in (Yangarber, 2003), which involves some
manual validation. Contrary to other approaches,
the learning phase exploits the knowledge to which
cluster the news items belong. Intuitively, this
guarantees better precision of the learned patterns.
In particular, for each event-specific semantic role
(e.g. killed), a separate cycle of learning iterations
is executed (usually up to three) in order to learn
1-slot extraction patterns. Each cluster includes ar-
ticles from different sources about the same news
story. Therefore, we assume that each entity ap-
pears in the same semantic role (actor, victim, in-
jured) in the context of one cluster. An auto-
matic procedure for syntactic expansion comple-
ments the learning. This procedure accepts a man-
ually provided list of words which have identical
(or similar) syntactic usage patterns (e.g. killed,
assassinated, murdered, etc.). It then generates
new patterns from the old ones by substituting for
each other the words in the list. After 1-slot pat-
terns are acquired, some of them are used to man-
ually create 2-slot patterns like X shot Y.
146
5 Pattern matching engine
In order to guarantee that massive amounts of tex-
tual data can be processed in real time, we have
developed ExPRESS (Piskorski, 2007), an effi-
cient extraction pattern engine, which is capable of
matching thousands of patterns against MB-sized
texts within seconds. The pattern specification lan-
guage is a blend of two previously introduced IE-
oriented grammar formalisms, namely JAPE used
in GATE (Cunningham et al, 2000) and XTDL,
used in SPROUT (Dro?zd?zy?nski et al, 2004).
A single pattern is a regular expression over flat
feature structures (FS), i.e., non-recursive typed
feature structures without structure sharing, where
features are string-valued and ? unlike in XTDL
types ? are not organised in a hierarchy. Each such
regular expression is associated with a list of FSs
which constitute the output specification. Like in
XTDL, we deploy variables and functional oper-
ators for forming slot values and for establishing
contact with the ?outer world?. Further, we adapted
JAPEs feature of associating patterns with mul-
tiple actions, i.e., producing multiple annotations
(possibly nested). An empirical comparison of the
run-time behaviour of the new formalism against
the other 2 revealed that significant speed-ups can
be achieved (at least 30 times faster). ExPRESS
comes with a pool of highly efficient core linguis-
tic processing resources (Piskorski, 2008).
6 Information Aggregation
Once single pieces of information are extracted by
the pattern engine, they are merged into event de-
scriptions by applying an information aggregation
algorithm. This algorithm assumes that each clus-
ter reports at most one main event of interest. It
takes as input the text entities extracted from one
news cluster with their semantic roles and consid-
ers the sentences from which these entities are ex-
tracted. If one and the same entity has two roles as-
signed, a preference is given to the role assigned by
the most reliable group of patterns (e.g., 2-slot pat-
terns are more reliable). Another ambiguity which
has to be resolved arises from the contradictory in-
formation which news sources give about the num-
ber of victims. We use an ad-hoc heuristic for
computing the most probable estimation for these
numbers, i.e., firstly the largest group of numbers
which are close to each other is selected and sec-
ondly the number closest to the average in that
group is chosen. After this estimation is com-
puted, the system discards from each news clus-
ter all the articles whose reported victim numbers
significantly differ from the estimated numbers for
the whole cluster. Additionally, some victim arith-
metic is applied, i.e., a small taxonomy of person
classes is used to sum victim numbers (e.g., gun-
men and terrorists belong to the same class ofNon-
GovernmentalArmedGroup).
7 Event Classification
After the single pieces of information are assem-
bled into the event description, an event classifica-
tion is performed. Some of the most used event
classes are Terrorist Attack, Bombing, Shooting,
Air Attack, etc. The classification algorithm uses
a blend of keyword matching and domain spe-
cific rules. As an example, consider the following
domain-specific rule: if the event description in-
cludes named entities, which are assigned the se-
mantic role kidnapped, as well as entities which
are assigned the semantic role released, then the
type of the event is Hostage Release, rather than
Kidnapping. If the event refers to kidnapped peo-
ple and at the same time the news articles contain
words like video or videotape, then the event type
is Hostage Video Release. The second rule has a
higher priority, therefore it impedes the Hostage
Release rule to fire erroneously, when the release
of a hostage video is reported.
8 Monitoring Events
The core event extraction engine for English is
fully operational since December 2007. There are
two online applications running on top of it which
allow monitoring events. The first one is a dedi-
cated webpage using the Google Maps JavaScript
API (see Figure 2). It is publicly accessible at:
http://press.jrc.it/geo?type=event
&format=html&language=en and provides
an instant overview of what is occurring where in
the world. A small problem with this application
is that it overlays and hides events that are close to
each other.
The second application shows the same events
using the Google Earth client application. The
geo-located data is transmitted via the Keyhole
Markup Language (KML) format
1
supported di-
rectly by Google Earth.
2
The application is re-
1
http://code.google.com/apis/kml/documentation/
2
In order to run it, start Google Earth with KML:
http://press.jrc.it/geo?type=event&format=kml&language=en
147
Figure 2: Event visualisation with Google Maps
stricted to displaying at most half the globe, but
it allows expanding overlaid events.
Since it is important for stakeholders to be
quickly and efficiently informed about the type and
gravity of the event, various icons are used to rep-
resent the type or group of events visually (see Fig-
ure 3). We use general forms of icons for violent
events and specific forms of icons for natural and
man-made disasters. For violent events, the gen-
eral form represents the major consequence of the
event, except for kidnappings, where specific icons
are used. Independently of the type of event, all
icons are sized according to the damage caused,
i.e. it is dependent on the number of victims in-
volved in the event. Also, to highlight the events
with a more significant damage, a border is drawn
around the icon to indicate that a threshold of peo-
ple involved has been passed.
The online demo is available for English, Italian
and French. We are currently working on adapt-
ing the event extraction engine to other languages,
including Russian, Spanish, Polish, German and
Arabic. A more thorough description of the sys-
tem can be found in (Tanev et al, 2008; Piskorski
et al, 2008).
References
Ashish, N., D. Appelt, D. Freitag, and D. Zelenko. 2006.
Proceedings of the workshop on Event Extraction and Syn-
thesis, held in conjunction with the AAAI 2006 conference.
Menlo Park, California, USA.
Best, C., E. van der Goot, K. Blackler, T. Garcia, and
D. Horby. 2005. Europe Media Monitor. Technical Re-
port EUR 22173 EN, European Commission.
Cunningham, H., D. Maynard, and V. Tablan. 2000. JAPE: a
Java Annotation Patterns Engine (Second Edition). Tech-
nical Report, CS?00?10, University of Sheffield, Depart-
ment of Computer Science.
?
Kidnap
K
A
Arrest
R
Release
V
Video
V
Man
Made
?Violent EventUndefined Violent EventKilled Violent EventInjured Violent EventKindnapped Violent EventArrest Hostage Release VideoRelease Violent EventNo Consequneces
Man Made
Disaster
Man Made 
Fire
Man Made
Explosion
ND
!
Natural
Dister
Volcanic 
Eruption
Tsunami Earthquake Landslide
?
Avalanche Tropical
Storm
Lightning
Strike
Storm
Snow
Storm
Flood Wild Fire
Heatwave
Key to Symbols
Consequence Significance (number of people involved)
No Circle  = up to 10 Red Circle = More than 100Yellow Circle= between 10 and 100
Humanitarian
Crisis
Trial
Unclassified
Figure 3: Key to event type icons and magnitude
indicators
Dro?zd?zy?nski, W., H.-U. Krieger, J. Piskorski, U. Sch?afer,
and F. Xu. 2004. Shallow Processing with Unification
and Typed Feature Structures ? Foundations and Appli-
cations. K?unstliche Intelligenz, 2004(1):17?23.
Grishman, R., S. Huttunen, and R. Yangarber. 2002. Real-
time Event Extraction for Infectious Disease Outbreaks.
Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Confer-
ence (HLT) 2002.
King, G. and W. Lowe. 2003. An Automated Information
Extraction Tool for International Conflict Data with Per-
formance as Good as Human Coders: A Rare Events Eval-
uation Design. International Organization, 57:617?642.
Piskorski, J., H. Tanev, M. Atkinson, and E. Van der Goot.
2008. Cluster-centric Approach to News Event Extraction.
In Proceedings of MISSI 2008, Wroclaw, Poland.
Piskorski, J. 2007. ExPRESS Extraction Pattern Recogni-
tion Engine and Specification Suite. In Proceedings of the
International Workshop Finite-State Methods and Natu-
ral language Processing 2007 (FSMNLP?2007), Potsdam,
Germany.
Piskorski, J. 2008. CORLEONE ? Core Linguistic Entity
Online Extraction. Technical report 23393 EN, Joint Re-
search Centre of the European Commission, Ispra, Italy.
Tanev, H. and P. Oezden-Wennerberg. 2008. Learning to
Populate an Ontology of Violent Events (in print). In
Fogelman-Soulie, F. and Perrotta, D. and Piskorski, J. and
Steinberger, R., editor, NATO Security through Science Se-
ries: Information and Communication Security. IOS Press.
Tanev, H., J. Piskorski, and M. Atkinson. 2008. Real-
Time News Event Extraction for Global Crisis Monitor-
ing. In Proceedings of the 13
th
International Conference
on Applications of Natural Language to Information Sys-
tems (NLDB 2008, Lecture Notes in Computer Science Vol.
5039), pages 207?218. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
Yangarber, R. 2003. Counter-Training in Discovery of Se-
mantic Patterns. In Proceedings of the 41
st
Annual Meet-
ing of the ACL.
148
Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 25?30,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
ONTS: ?Optima? News Translation System
Marco Turchi?, Martin Atkinson?, Alastair Wilcox+, Brett Crawley,
Stefano Bucci+, Ralf Steinberger? and Erik Van der Goot?
European Commission - Joint Research Centre (JRC), IPSC - GlobeSec
Via Fermi 2749, 21020 Ispra (VA) - Italy
?[name].[surname]@jrc.ec.europa.eu
+[name].[surname]@ext.jrc.ec.europa.eu
brettcrawley@gmail.com
Abstract
We propose a real-time machine translation
system that allows users to select a news
category and to translate the related live
news articles from Arabic, Czech, Danish,
Farsi, French, German, Italian, Polish, Por-
tuguese, Spanish and Turkish into English.
The Moses-based system was optimised for
the news domain and differs from other
available systems in four ways: (1) News
items are automatically categorised on the
source side, before translation; (2) Named
entity translation is optimised by recog-
nising and extracting them on the source
side and by re-inserting their translation in
the target language, making use of a sep-
arate entity repository; (3) News titles are
translated with a separate translation sys-
tem which is optimised for the specific style
of news titles; (4) The system was opti-
mised for speed in order to cope with the
large volume of daily news articles.
1 Introduction
Being able to read news from other countries and
written in other languages allows readers to be
better informed. It allows them to detect national
news bias and thus improves transparency and
democracy. Existing online translation systems
such as Google Translate and Bing Translator1
are thus a great service, but the number of docu-
ments that can be submitted is restricted (Google
will even entirely stop their service in 2012) and
submitting documents means disclosing the users?
interests and their (possibly sensitive) data to the
service-providing company.
1http://translate.google.com/ and http:
//www.microsofttranslator.com/
For these reasons, we have developed our
in-house machine translation system ONTS. Its
translation results will be publicly accessible as
part of the Europe Media Monitor family of ap-
plications, (Steinberger et al 2009), which gather
and process about 100,000 news articles per day
in about fifty languages. ONTS is based on
the open source phrase-based statistical machine
translation toolkit Moses (Koehn et al 2007),
trained mostly on freely available parallel cor-
pora and optimised for the news domain, as stated
above. The main objective of developing our in-
house system is thus not to improve translation
quality over the existing services (this would be
beyond our possibilities), but to offer our users a
rough translation (a ?gist?) that allows them to get
an idea of the main contents of the article and to
determine whether the news item at hand is rele-
vant for their field of interest or not.
A similar news-focused translation service is
?Found in Translation? (Turchi et al 2009),
which gathers articles in 23 languages and trans-
lates them into English. ?Found in Translation? is
also based on Moses, but it categorises the news
after translation and the translation process is not
optimised for the news domain.
2 Europe Media Monitor
Europe Media Monitor (EMM)2 gathers a daily
average of 100,000 news articles in approximately
50 languages, from about 3,400 hand-selected
web news sources, from a couple of hundred spe-
cialist and government websites, as well as from
about twenty commercial news providers. It vis-
its the news web sites up to every five minutes to
2http://emm.newsbrief.eu/overview.html
25
search for the latest articles. When news sites of-
fer RSS feeds, it makes use of these, otherwise
it extracts the news text from the often complex
HTML pages. All news items are converted to
Unicode. They are processed in a pipeline struc-
ture, where each module adds additional informa-
tion. Independently of how files are written, the
system uses UTF-8-encoded RSS format.
Inside the pipeline, different algorithms are im-
plemented to produce monolingual and multilin-
gual clusters and to extract various types of in-
formation such as named entities, quotations, cat-
egories and more. ONTS uses two modules of
EMM: the named entity recognition and the cate-
gorization parts.
2.1 Named Entity Recognition and Variant
Matching.
Named Entity Recognition (NER) is per-
formed using manually constructed language-
independent rules that make use of language-
specific lists of trigger words such as titles
(president), professions or occupations (tennis
player, playboy), references to countries, regions,
ethnic or religious groups (French, Bavarian,
Berber, Muslim), age expressions (57-year-old),
verbal phrases (deceased), modifiers (former)
and more. These patterns can also occur in
combination and patterns can be nested to capture
more complex titles, (Steinberger and Pouliquen,
2007). In order to be able to cover many different
languages, no other dictionaries and no parsers or
part-of-speech taggers are used.
To identify which of the names newly found
every day are new entities and which ones are
merely variant spellings of entities already con-
tained in the database, we apply a language-
independent name similarity measure to decide
which name variants should be automatically
merged, for details see (Pouliquen and Stein-
berger, 2009). This allows us to maintain a
database containing over 1,15 million named en-
tities and 200,000 variants. The major part of
this resource can be downloaded from http:
//langtech.jrc.it/JRC-Names.html
2.2 Category Classification across
Languages.
All news items are categorized into hundreds of
categories. Category definitions are multilingual,
created by humans and they include geographic
regions such as each country of the world, organi-
zations, themes such as natural disasters or secu-
rity, and more specific classes such as earthquake,
terrorism or tuberculosis,
Articles fall into a given category if they sat-
isfy the category definition, which consists of
Boolean operators with optional vicinity opera-
tors and wild cards. Alternatively, cumulative
positive or negative weights and a threshold can
be used. Uppercase letters in the category defi-
nition only match uppercase words, while lower-
case words in the definition match both uppercase
and lowercase words. Many categories are de-
fined with input from the users themselves. This
method to categorize the articles is rather sim-
ple and user-friendly, and it lends itself to dealing
with many languages, (Steinberger et al 2009).
3 News Translation System
In this section, we describe our statistical machine
translation (SMT) service based on the open-
source toolkit Moses (Koehn et al 2007) and its
adaptation to translation of news items.
Which is the most suitable SMT system for
our requirements? The main goal of our system
is to help the user understand the content of an ar-
ticle. This means that a translated article is evalu-
ated positively even if it is not perfect in the target
language. Dealing with such a large number of
source languages and articles per day, our system
should take into account the translation speed, and
try to avoid using language-dependent tools such
as part-of-speech taggers.
Inside the Moses toolkit, three different
statistical approaches have been implemented:
phrase based statistical machine translation (PB-
SMT) (Koehn et al 2003), hierarchical phrase
based statistical machine translation (Chiang,
2007) and syntax-based statistical machine trans-
lation (Marcu et al 2006). To identify the
most suitable system for our requirements, we
run a set of experiments training the three mod-
els with Europarl V4 German-English (Koehn,
2005) and optimizing and testing on the News
corpus (Callison-Burch et al 2009). For all of
them, we use their default configurations and they
are run under the same condition on the same ma-
chine to better evaluate translation time. For the
syntax model we use linguistic information only
on the target side. According to our experiments,
in terms of performance the hierarchical model
26
performs better than PBSMT and syntax (18.31,
18.09, 17.62 Bleu points), but in terms of transla-
tion speed PBSMT is better than hierarchical and
syntax (1.02, 4.5, 49 second per sentence). Al-
though, the hierarchical model has the best Bleu
score, we prefer to use the PBSMT system in our
translation service, because it is four times faster.
Which training data can we use? It is known
in statistical machine translation that more train-
ing data implies better translation. Although, the
number of parallel corpora has been is growing
in the last years, the amounts of training data
vary from language pair to language pair. To
train our models we use the freely available cor-
pora (when possible): Europarl (Koehn, 2005),
JRC-Acquis (Steinberger et al 2006), DGT-
TM3, Opus (Tiedemann, 2009), SE-Times (Ty-
ers and Alperen, 2010), Tehran English-Persian
Parallel Corpus (Pilevar et al 2011), News
Corpus (Callison-Burch et al 2009), UN Cor-
pus (Rafalovitch and Dale, 2009), CzEng0.9 (Bo-
jar and Z?abokrtsky?, 2009), English-Persian paral-
lel corpus distributed by ELRA4 and two Arabic-
English datasets distributed by LDC5. This re-
sults in some language pairs with a large cover-
age, (more than 4 million sentences), and other
with a very small coverage, (less than 1 million).
The language models are trained using 12 model
sentences for the content model and 4.7 million
for the title model. Both sets are extracted from
English news.
For less resourced languages such as Farsi and
Turkish, we tried to extend the available corpora.
For Farsi, we applied the methodology proposed
by (Lambert et al 2011), where we used a large
language model and an English-Farsi SMT model
to produce new sentence pairs. For Turkish we
added the Movie Subtitles corpus (Tiedemann,
2009), which allowed the SMT system to in-
crease its translation capability, but included sev-
eral slang words and spoken phrases.
How to deal with Named Entities in transla-
tion? News articles are related to the most impor-
tant events. These names need to be efficiently
translated to correctly understand the content of
an article. From an SMT point of view, two main
issues are related to Named Entity translation: (1)
such a name is not in the training data or (2) part
3http://langtech.jrc.it/DGT-TM.html
4http://catalog.elra.info/
5http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/
of the name is a common word in the target lan-
guage and it is wrongly translated, e.g. the French
name ?Bruno Le Maire? which risks to be trans-
lated into English as ?Bruno Mayor?. To mitigate
both the effects we use our multilingual named
entity database. In the source language, each news
item is analysed to identify possible entities; if
an entity is recognised, its correct translation into
English is retrieved from the database, and sug-
gested to the SMT system enriching the source
sentence using the xml markup option 6 in Moses.
This approach allows us to complement the train-
ing data increasing the translation capability of
our system.
How to deal with different language styles
in the news? News title writing style contains
more gerund verbs, no or few linking verbs,
prepositions and adverbs than normal sentences,
while content sentences include more preposi-
tion, adverbs and different verbal tenses. Starting
from this assumption, we investigated if this phe-
nomenon can affect the translation performance
of our system.
We trained two SMT systems, SMTcontent
and SMTtitle, using the Europarl V4 German-
English data as training corpus, and two dif-
ferent development sets: one made of content
sentences, News Commentaries (Callison-Burch
et al 2009), and the other made of news ti-
tles in the source language which were trans-
lated into English using a commercial transla-
tion system. With the same strategy we gener-
ated also a Title test set. The SMTtitle used a
language model created using only English news
titles. The News and Title test sets were trans-
lated by both the systems. Although the perfor-
mance obtained translating the News and Title
corpora are not comparable, we were interested
in analysing how the same test set is translated
by the two systems. We noticed that translat-
ing a test set with a system that was optimized
with the same type of data resulted in almost 2
Blue score improvements: Title-TestSet: 0.3706
(SMTtitle), 0.3511 (SMTcontent); News-TestSet:
0.1768 (SMTtitle), 0.1945 (SMTcontent). This
behaviour was present also in different language
pairs. According to these results we decided
to use two different translation systems for each
language pair, one optimized using title data
6http://www.statmt.org/moses/?n=Moses.
AdvancedFeatures#ntoc4
27
and the other using normal content sentences.
Even though this implementation choice requires
more computational power to run in memory two
Moses servers, it allows us to mitigate the work-
load of each single instance reducing translation
time of each single article and to improve transla-
tion quality.
3.1 Translation Quality
To evaluate the translation performance of ONTS,
we run a set of experiments where we translate a
test set for each language pair using our system
and Google Translate. Lack of human translated
parallel titles obliges us to test only the content
based model. For German, Spanish and Czech we
use the news test sets proposed in (Callison-Burch
et al 2010), for French and Italian the news test
sets presented in (Callison-Burch et al 2008),
for Arabic, Farsi and Turkish, sets of 2,000 news
sentences extracted from the Arabic-English and
English-Persian datasets and the SE-Times cor-
pus. For the other languages we use 2,000 sen-
tences which are not news but a mixture of JRC-
Acquis, Europarl and DGT-TM data. It is not
guarantee that our test sets are not part of the train-
ing data of Google Translate.
Each test set is translated by Google Translate
- Translator Toolkit, and by our system. Bleu
score is used to evaluate the performance of both
systems. Results, see Table 1, show that Google
Translate produces better translation for those lan-
guages for which large amounts of data are avail-
able such as French, German, Italian and Spanish.
Surprisingly, for Danish, Portuguese and Polish,
ONTS has better performance, this depends on
the choice of the test sets which are not made of
news data but of data that is fairly homogeneous
in terms of style and genre with the training sets.
The impact of the named entity module is ev-
ident for Arabic and Farsi, where each English
suggested entity results in a larger coverage of
the source language and better translations. For
highly inflected and agglutinative languages such
as Turkish, the output proposed by ONTS is poor.
We are working on gathering more training data
coming from the news domain and on the pos-
sibility of applying a linguistic pre-processing of
the documents.
Source L. ONTS Google T.
Arabic 0.318 0.255
Czech 0.218 0.226
Danish 0.324 0.296
Farsi 0.245 0.197
French 0.26 0.286
German 0.205 0.25
Italian 0.234 0.31
Polish 0.568 0.511
Portuguese 0.579 0.424
Spanish 0.283 0.334
Turkish 0.238 0.395
Table 1: Automatic evaluation.
4 Technical Implementation
The translation service is made of two compo-
nents: the connection module and the Moses
server. The connection module is a servlet im-
plemented in Java. It receives the RSS files,
isolates each single news article, identifies each
source language and pre-processes it. Each news
item is split into sentences, each sentence is to-
kenized, lowercased, passed through a statisti-
cal compound word splitter, (Koehn and Knight,
2003), and the named entity annotator module.
For language modelling we use the KenLM im-
plementation, (Heafield, 2011).
According to the language, the correct Moses
servers, title and content, are fed in a multi-
thread manner. We use the multi-thread version
of Moses (Haddow, 2010). When all the sentences
of each article are translated, the inverse process
is run: they are detokenized, recased, and untrans-
lated/unknown words are listed. The translated ti-
tle and content of each article are uploaded into
the RSS file and it is passed to the next modules.
The full system including the translation mod-
ules is running in a 2xQuad-Core with In-
tel Hyper-threading Technology processors with
48GB of memory. It is our intention to locate
the Moses servers on different machines. This is
possible thanks to the high modularity and cus-
tomization of the connection module. At the mo-
ment, the translation models are available for the
following source languages: Arabic, Czech, Dan-
ish, Farsi, French, German, Italian, Polish, Por-
tuguese, Spanish and Turkish.
28
Figure 1: Demo Web site.
4.1 Demo
Our translation service is currently presented on
a demo web site, see Figure 1, which is available
at http://optima.jrc.it/Translate/.
News articles can be retrieved selecting one of the
topics and the language. All the topics are as-
signed to each article using the methodology de-
scribed in 2.2. These articles are shown in the left
column of the interface. When the button ?Trans-
late? is pressed, the translation process starts and
the translated articles appear in the right column
of the page.
The translation system can be customized from
the interface enabling or disabling the named
entity, compound, recaser, detokenizer and un-
known word modules. Each translated article is
enriched showing the translation time in millisec-
onds per character and, if enabled, the list of un-
known words. The interface is linked to the con-
nection module and data is transferred using RSS
structure.
5 Discussion
In this paper we present the Optima News Trans-
lation System and how it is connected to Eu-
rope Media Monitor application. Different strate-
gies are applied to increase the translation perfor-
mance taking advantage of the document struc-
ture and other resources available in our research
group. We believe that the experiments described
in this work can result very useful for the develop-
ment of other similar systems. Translations pro-
duced by our system will soon be available as part
of the main EMM applications.
The performance of our system is encouraging,
but not as good as the performance of web ser-
vices such as Google Translate, mostly because
we use less training data and we have reduced
computational power. On the other hand, our in-
house system can be fed with a large number of
articles per day and sensitive data without includ-
ing third parties in the translation process. Per-
formance and translation time vary according to
the number and complexity of sentences and lan-
guage pairs.
The domain of news articles dynamically
changes according to the main events in the world,
while existing parallel data is static and usually
associated to governmental domains. It is our in-
tention to investigate how to adapt our translation
system updating the language model with the En-
glish articles of the day.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank the JRC?s OPTIMA team for
its support during the development of ONTS.
References
O. Bojar and Z. Z?abokrtsky?. 2009. CzEng0.9: Large
Parallel Treebank with Rich Annotation. Prague
Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics, 92.
C. Callison-Burch and C. Fordyce and P. Koehn and
C. Monz and J. Schroeder. 2008. Further Meta-
Evaluation of Machine Translation. Proceedings of
the Third Workshop on Statistical Machine Transla-
tion, pages 70?106. Columbus, US.
C. Callison-Burch, and P. Koehn and C. Monz and J.
Schroeder. 2009. Findings of the 2009 Workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation. Proceedings of
the Fourth Workshop on Statistical Machine Trans-
lation, pages 1?28. Athens, Greece.
C. Callison-Burch, and P. Koehn and C. Monz and K.
Peterson and M. Przybocki and O. Zaidan. 2009.
Findings of the 2010 Joint Workshop on Statisti-
cal Machine Translation and Metrics for Machine
Translation. Proceedings of the Joint Fifth Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation and Met-
ricsMATR, pages 17?53. Uppsala, Sweden.
D. Chiang. 2005. Hierarchical phrase-based transla-
tion. Computational Linguistics, 33(2): pages 201?
228. MIT Press.
B. Haddow. 2010. Adding multi-threaded decoding to
moses. The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Lin-
guistics, 93(1): pages 57?66. Versita.
K. Heafield. 2011. KenLM: Faster and smaller lan-
guage model queries. Proceedings of the Sixth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, Ed-
inburgh, UK.
29
P. Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for
Statistical Machine Translation. Proceedings of
the Machine Translation Summit X, pages 79-86.
Phuket, Thailand.
P. Koehn and F. J. Och and D. Marcu. 2003. Statistical
phrase-based translation. Proceedings of the 2003
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics on Hu-
man Language Technology, pages 48?54. Edmon-
ton, Canada.
P. Koehn and K. Knight. 2003. Empirical methods
for compound splitting. Proceedings of the tenth
conference on European chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 187?193. Bu-
dapest, Hungary.
P. Koehn and H. Hoang and A. Birch and C. Callison-
Burch and M. Federico and N. Bertoldi and B.
Cowan and W. Shen and C. Moran and R. Zens
and C. Dyer and O. Bojar and A. Constantin and E.
Herbst 2007. Moses: Open source toolkit for sta-
tistical machine translation. Proceedings of the An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, demonstration session, pages 177?180.
Columbus, Oh, USA.
P. Lambert and H. Schwenk and C. Servan and S.
Abdul-Rauf. 2011. SPMT: Investigations on Trans-
lation Model Adaptation Using Monolingual Data.
Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Statistical
Machine Translation, pages 284?293. Edinburgh,
Scotland.
D. Marcu and W. Wang and A. Echihabi and K.
Knight. 2006. SPMT: Statistical machine trans-
lation with syntactified target language phrases.
Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
48?54. Edmonton, Canada.
M. Pilevar and H. Faili and A. Pilevar. 2011. TEP:
Tehran English-Persian Parallel Corpus. Compu-
tational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing,
pages 68?79. Springer.
B. Pouliquen and R. Steinberger. 2009. Auto-
matic construction of multilingual name dictionar-
ies. Learning Machine Translation, pages 59?78.
MIT Press - Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems Series (NIPS).
A. Rafalovitch and R. Dale. 2009. United nations
general assembly resolutions: A six-language par-
allel corpus. Proceedings of the MT Summit XIII,
pages 292?299. Ottawa, Canada.
R. Steinberger and B. Pouliquen. 2007. Cross-lingual
named entity recognition. Lingvistic? Investiga-
tiones, 30(1) pages 135?162. John Benjamins Pub-
lishing Company.
R. Steinberger and B. Pouliquen and A. Widiger and
C. Ignat and T. Erjavec and D. Tufis? and D. Varga.
2006. The JRC-Acquis: A multilingual aligned par-
allel corpus with 20+ languages. Proceedings of
the 5th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, pages 2142?2147. Genova,
Italy.
R. Steinberger and B. Pouliquen and E. van der Goot.
2009. An Introduction to the Europe Media Monitor
Family of Applications. Proceedings of the Infor-
mation Access in a Multilingual World-Proceedings
of the SIGIR 2009 Workshop, pages 1?8. Boston,
USA.
J. Tiedemann. 2009. News from OPUS-A Collection
of Multilingual Parallel Corpora with Tools and
Interfaces. Recent advances in natural language
processing V: selected papers from RANLP 2007,
pages 309:237.
M. Turchi and I. Flaounas and O. Ali and T. DeBie
and T. Snowsill and N. Cristianini. 2009. Found in
translation. Proceedings of the European Confer-
ence on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discov-
ery in Databases, pages 746?749. Bled, Slovenia.
F. Tyers and M.S. Alperen. 2010. South-East Euro-
pean Times: A parallel corpus of Balkan languages.
Proceedings of the LREC workshop on Exploita-
tion of multilingual resources and tools for Central
and (South) Eastern European Languages, Valletta,
Malta.
30
