HOW TO INTEGRATE LINGUISTIC INFORMATION
IN FILES AND GENERATE
FEEDBACK FOR GRAMMAR ERRORS
Rodolfo Delmonte, Luminita Chiran, Ciprian Bacalu
Dipartimento di Scienze del Linguaggio
Ca' Garzoni-Moro, San Marco 3417
Universit? "Ca Foscari"
30124 - VENEZIA
Tel. 39-41-2578464/52/19 - Fax. 39-41-5287683
E-mail: delmont@unive.it - website: byron.cgm.unive.it
Abstract
We present three applications which share
some of their linguistic processor. The first
application ?FILES? ? Fully Integrated
Linguistic Environment for Syntactic and
Functional Annotation - is a fully integrated
linguistic environment for syntactic and
functional annotation of corpora currently
being used for the Italian Treebank. The
second application is a shallow parser ? the
same used in FILES ? which has been
endowed with a feedback module in order to
inform students about their grammatical
mistakes, if any, in German. Finally an LFG-
based multilingual parser simulating parsing
strategies with ambiguous sentences. We
shall present the three applications in that
sequence.
1. FILES
FILES has been used to annotate a number of
corpora of Italian within the National Project
currently still work in progress. Input to FILES is
the output of our linguistic modules for the
automatic analysis of Italian, a tokenizer, a
morphological analyser, a tagger equipped with a
statistic and syntactic disambiguator and finally a
shallow parser. All these separate modules
contribute part of the input for the system which is
then used by human annotators to operate at
syntactic level on constituent structure, or at
function level on head-features functional
representation. We don?t have here space to
describe the linguistic processors ? but see [8, 9,
10, 11, 12]. As to tag disambiguation, this is
carried out in a semi-automatic manner by the
human annotator, on the basis of the automatic
redundant morphological tagger. The
disambiguator takes each token and in case of
ambiguity it alerts the annotator to decide which is
the tag to choose: the annotator is presented with
the best candidate computed on the basis both of
syntactic and statistical information. Low level
representations are integrated in a relational
database and shown in the FILES environment
which is an intelligent browser allowing the
annotation to operate changes and create XML
output automatically for each file. Here below is a
snapshot of the six relational databases where all
previously analysed linguistic material has been
inputted. It contains tokens, lemmata, POS
tagging, empty categories, sentences containing
each token, tokens regarded as heads as
separated from tokens regarded as features and
verb subacategorization list.
Fig.1 Relational databases to be used as input for the
Syntactic and Functional Annotation
An interesting part of the browser is the
availability of subcategorization frames for verbs:
these are expressed in a compact format which
are intended to help the annotator in the most
difficult task, i.e. that of deciding whether a given
constituent head must be interpreted as either an
argument or an adjunct; and in case it is an
argument, whether it should be interpreted as
predicative or ?open? in LFG terms, or else as
non-predicative or ?close?. The list of
subcategorization frames contains 17,000 entries.
Of course the annotator can add new entries
either as new lexical items or simply as new
subcategorizations frames, which are encoded in
the current list. Notable features of the browser
are the subdivision into two separate columns of
verbal heads from non verbal ones, whereas the
actual sentence highlights all heads verbal and non
verbal in bold. On the righthand side there is a
scrollable list of relations and the possibility to
move from one sentence to another at will. Finally
the XML button to translate the contents of each
or any number of sentences into xml format.
Fig.2 Browser for Functional Annotation with
Structural representation
2. GRAMMCHECK
The second application is a Grammar Checker for
Italian students of German and English. The one
for students of English is based on GETARUNS
and uses a highly sophisticated grammar which is
however a completely separated system from the
one presented here and requires a lot more space
for its presentation ? see [13, 14]. It is available
under Internet and will be shown as such.
The one for students of German on the contrary,
is based on the shallow parser of Italian used to
produce the syntactic constituency for the
National Treebank. The output of the parser is a
bracketing of the input tagged word sequence
which is then passed to the higher functional
processor. This is an LFG-based c-structure to f-
structure mapping algorithm which has three
tasks: the first one is to compute features from
heads; the second one is to compute agreement.
The third task is to impose LFG?s grammaticality
principles: those of Coherence and Consistency,
i.e. number and type of arguments are constrained
by the lexical form of the governing predicate.
The parser is an RTN which has been endowed
with a grammar and a lexicon of German of about
8K entries. The grammar is written in the usual
arc/transition nodes formalism, well-known in
ATNs. However, the aim of the RTN is that of
producing a structured output both for wellformed
and illformed grammatical sentences of German.
To this end, we allowed the grammar to keep part
of the rules of Italian at the appropriate structural
level, though. Grammar checking is not
accomplished at the constituent structure building
level, but at the f-structure level.
2.1 THE SHALLOW PARSER
The task of the Shallow Parser is that of creating
syntactic structures which are eligible for
Grammatical Function assignment. This task is
made simpler given the fact that the disambiguator
will associate a net/constituency label to each
disambiguated tag. Parsing can then be defined as
a Bottom-Up collection of constituents which
contain either the same label, or which may be
contained in/be member of the same net/higher
constituent. No attachment is performed in order
to avoid being committed to structural decisions
which might then reveal themselves to be wrong.
We prefer to perform some readjustment
operations after structures have been built rather
than introducing errors from the start.
Readjustment operations are in line with LFG
theoretical framework which assumes that f-
structures may be recursively constituted by
subsidiary f-structures, i.e. by complements or
adjuncts of a governing predicate. So the basic
task of the shallow parser is that of building
shallow structures for each safely recognizable
constituent and then pass this information to the
following modules.
2.2 Syntactic Readjustment Rules
Syntactic structure is derived from shallow
structures by a restricted and simple set of
rewriting operations which are of two categories:
deletions, and restructuring. Here are some
examples of both:
a. Deletion
Delete structural labels internally with the same
constituent label that appears at the beginning as
in Noun Phrases, whenever a determiner is taken
in front of the head noun;
b. Restructuring
As explained above, we want to follow a policy of
noncommittal as to attachment of constituents:
nonetheless, there are a number of restructuring
operations which can be safely executed in order
to simplify the output without running the risk of
taking decisions which shall have later to be
modified.
Restructuring is executed taking advantage of
agreement information which in languages like
Italian or German, i.e. in morphologically rich
languages, can be fruitfully used to that aim. In
particular, predicative constituents may belong to
different levels of attachment from the adjacent
one. More Restructuring is done at sentence level,
in case the current sentence is a coordinate or
subordinate sentence.
3 FROM C-STRUCTURE TO F-
STRUCTURE
Before working at the Functional level we
collected 2500 grammatical mistakes taken from
real student final tests. We decided to keep trace
of the following typical grammatical mistakes:
- Lack of Agreement NP internally;
- Wrong position of Argument Clitic;
- Wrong Subject-Verb Agreement;
- Wrong position of finite Verbs both in Main,
Subordinate and Dependent clauses;
- Wrong case assignment.
Example 1. Heute willst ich mich eine bunte
Krawatte umbinden.
cp-[
savv-[avv-[heute]],
vsec-[vsupp-[willst],
       fvsec-[sogg2-[sn-[pers-[ich]]],
ogg-[sn-[clitdat-[mich]]],
ogg1-[snsempl-[art-[eine],ag-[bunte],
 n-[krawatte]]],
ibar2-[vit-[umbinden]]]
], punto-[.]]
The parser will issue two error messages:
The first one is relative to Case assignment,
?mich? is in the accusative while dative is
required. The second one is relative to Subject-
Verb agreement, ?willst? is second person
singular while the subject ?ich? is first person
singular.
As to the use of f-structure for grammar checking
the implementation we made in GETARUN ? a
complete system for text understanding, is a case
where parsing strategies are used.
This is a web-based multilingual parser which is
based mainly on LFG theory and partly on
Chomskian theories, incorporating a number of
Parsing Strategies which allow the student to
parse ambiguous sentences using the appropriate
strategy in order to obtain an adequate
grammatical output. The underlying idea was that
of stimulating the students to ascertain and test by
themselves linguistic hypotheses with a given
linguistically motivated system architecture. The
parser builds c-structure and f-structure and
computer anaphoric binding at sentence level; it
also has provision for quantifier raising and
temporal local interpretation. Predicates are
provided for all lexical categories, noun, verb,
adjective and adverb and their description is a
lexical form in the sense of LFG. It is composed
both of functional and semantic specifications for
each argument of the predicate: semantic
selection is operated by means both of thematic
role and inherent semantic features or selectional
restrictions. Moreover, in order to select adjuncts
appropriately  at each level of constituency,
semantic classes are added to more traditional
syntactic ones like transitive, unaccusative,
reflexive and so on. Semantic classes are of two
kinds: the first class is related to extensionality vs
intensionality, and is used to build discourse
relations mainly; the second class is meant to
capture aspectual restrictions which decide the
appropriateness and adequacy of adjuncts, so that
inappropriate ones are attached at a higher level.
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE I?
Top-Down
DGC-based
Grammar Rules
Lexical Look-Up
Or 
Full Morphological
Analysis
Deterministic
Policy:
Look-ahead
WFST 
Verb Guidance From 
Subcategorization
Frames
Semantic Consistency Check
for every
Syntactic Constituent
Starting from CP level
Phrase Structure Rules
==> F-structure
check for Completeness
Coherence, UniquenessTense, Aspect and
Time Reference:
Time Relations and
Reference Interval
Quantifier Raising
Pronominal Binding at f-structure level
TABLE 1. GETARUNS PARSER
3.1 Parsing Strategies
Ambiguities dealt with by the parser go from
different binding solution of a pronoun contained in
a subordinate clause by two possible antecedents,
chosen according to semantic and pragmatic
strategies based on semantic roles and meaning
associated to the subordinating conjunction, as in
the following examples:
i.The authorities refused permission to the
demonstrators because they feared violence
ii.The authorities refused permission to the
demonstrators because they supported the
revolution
iii.The cop shot the thief because he was escaping
iv.Mario criticized Luigi because he is
hypercritical
v.Mario criticized Luigi because he ruined his
party
vi.Mario called Luigi because he needed the file
vii.The thieves stole the paintings in the museum
viii.The thieves stole the painting in the night
The underlying mechanisms for ambiguity
resolution takes one analysis as default in case it
is grammatical and the other/s plausible
interpretations are obtained by activating one of
the available strategies which are linguistically and
psychologically grounded.
From our perspective, it would seem that parsing
strategies should be differentiated according to
whether there are argument requirements or
simply semantic compatibily evaluation for
adjuncts. As soon as the main predicate or head is
parsed, it makes available all lexical information in
order to predict if possible the complement
structure, or to guide the following analysis
accordingly. As an additional remark, note that not
all possible syntactic structure can lead to
ambiguous interpretations: in other words, we
need to consider only cases which are factually
relevant also from the point of view of language
dependent ambiguities. To cope with this problem,
we built up a comprehensive taxonomy from a
syntactic point of view which takes into account
language dependent ambiguities
A. Omissibility of Complementator
? NP vs S complement
? S complement vs relative clause
B. Different levels of attachment for
Adjuncts
? VP vs NP attachment of pp
? Low vs high attachment of relative clause
C. Alternation of Lexical Forms
? NP complement vs main clause subject
D. Ambiguity at the level of lexical category
? Main clause vs reduced relative clause
? NP vs S conjunction
E. Ambiguities due to language specific
structural proprieties
? Preposition stranding
? Double Object
? Prenominal Modifiers
? Demonstrative-Complementizer Ambiguity
? Personal vs Possessive Pronoun
Here below is a snapshot of the output of the
parser for the sentence: ?The doctor called in the
son of the pretty nurse who hurt herself/himself?.
The c-structure is followed by the f-structure
representation where binding has taken place and
relative clause attachment is consequently realized
with the higher or lower NP head according to the
different agreement requirements imposed by the
two reflexive pronouns herself/himself either with
?the nurse? or with ?the son?.
From a theoretical point of view this phenomenon
is dubbed Short Binding, and is dealt with at the
same level of Grammaticality Principles, rather
than as a case of Anaphoric Binding. In this way
a failure is imposed to the parser by agreement
constraints between the reflexive pronoun and its
binder.
References
[1] P. Tapanainen and Voutilainen A.(1994),
Tagging accurately - don't guess if you know,
Proc. of ANLP '94,  pp.47-52, Stuttgart,
Germany.
[2] Brants T. & C.Samuelsson(1995), Tagging the
Teleman Corpus, in Proc.10th Nordic
Conference of Computational Linguistics,
Helsinki, 1-12.
[3] Lecomte J.(1998), Le Categoriseur Brill14-
JL5 / WinBrill-0.3, INaLF/CNRS,
[4] Chanod J.P., P.Tapanainen (1995), Tagging
French - comparing a statistical and a constraint-
based method". Proc. EACL'95, pp.149-156.
[5] Brill E. (1992), A Simple Rule-Based Part of
Speech Tagger, in Proc. 3rd Conf. ANLP, Trento,
152-155.
[6] Cutting D., Kupiec J., Pedersen J., Sibun P.,
(1992), A practical part-of-speech tagger, in Proc.
3rd Conf. ANLP, Trento.
[7] Voutilainen A. and P. Tapanainen,(1993),
Ambiguity resolution in a reductionistic parser, in
Sixth Conference of the European Chapter of
the ACL, pp. 394-403. Utrecht.
[8] Delmonte R., E.Pianta(1996), "IMMORTALE
- Analizzatore Morfologico, Tagger e
Lemmatizzatore per l'Italiano", in Atti V
Convegno AI*IA, Napoli, 19-22.
[9] Delmonte R. G.A.Mian, G.Tisato(1986), A
Grammatical Component for a Text-to-Speech
System, Proceedings of the ICASSP'86, IEEE,
Tokyo, 2407-2410.
[10] Delmonte R., R.Dolci(1989), Parsing Italian
with a Context-Free Recognizer, Annali di Ca'
Foscari XXVIII, 1-2,123-161.
[11] Delmonte R., E.Pianta(1999), Tag
Disambiguation in Italian, in Proc.Treebanks
Workshop ATALA, pp.41-49.
[12] Delmonte R.(1999), From Shallow Parsing to
Functional Structure, in Atti del Workshop AI*IA
- IRST Trento,pp.8-19.
[13] Delmonte R.(2000), Parsing with
GETARUN, Proc.TALN2000, 7? conf?rence
annuel sur le TALN,Lausanne, pp.133-146.
[14]  Delmonte R.(2000),  Generating and Parsing
Clitics with GETARUN, Proc. CLIN'99, Utrech,
pp.13-27.
Fig. 3 GETARUN parsing from user window
