Proceedings of the 9th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 37?45,
Columbus, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Reactive Redundancy and Listener Comprehension in Direction-Giving 
 
Rachel E. Baker Alastair J. Gill, Justine Cassell 
Department of Linguistics Center for Technology and Social Behavior 
Northwestern University Northwestern University 
Evanston, IL 60208 Evanston, IL 60208 
r-baker2@northwestern.edu {alastair,justine}@northwestern.edu 
 
 
Abstract 
We explore the role of redundancy, both in 
anticipation of and in response to listener 
confusion, in task-oriented dialogue. We 
find that direction-givers provide redundant 
utterances in response to both verbal and 
non-verbal signals of listener confusion. 
We also examine the effects of prior ac-
quaintance and visibility upon redundancy. 
As expected, givers use more redundant ut-
terances overall, and more redundant utter-
ances in response to listener questions, 
when communicating with strangers. We 
discuss our findings in relation to theories 
of redundancy, the balance of speaker and 
listener effort, and potential applications. 
1 Introduction 
Our everyday conversations represent a carefully 
negotiated balance between the perceived needs of 
the speaker and the listener. These opposing forces 
affect every aspect of language from phonetics to 
pragmatics. A careful balance between these two 
forces allows speakers to produce language that is 
both efficient and effective at communicating a 
message (Lindblom, 1990; Horn, 1993). Of course, 
the same balance is not appropriate for every situa-
tion. When accuracy is critical to the message, or 
when the speaker perceives the listener to have 
difficulty understanding, the speaker is more likely 
to prioritize clarity over efficiency, resulting in 
more explicit communication. In contrast, during 
casual conversation or when speed is a factor, the 
speaker may choose a more reduced, efficient, 
communication style (Lindblom, 1990; Horton and 
Keysar, 1996). A number of scholars have pointed 
out that speakers seem to use the information 
available to themselves rather than that available to 
the listener to guide certain linguistic decisions, 
such as clarity of pronunciation and choice of syn-
tactic structure (Bard et al, 2000; Branigan et al, 
2003). However, these studies examine utterance 
form, while our study examines content, which is 
more influenced by audience design (Branigan et 
al., 2003). In every utterance, a speaker either re-
duces the likelihood of listener misunderstanding 
by being more explicit, or reduces their own effort 
by providing a minimal amount of information. 
Regardless of whether speakers pro-actively moni-
tor the information needs of listeners, they do need 
to respond when listeners say or do something to 
indicate confusion. Developing a better under-
standing of the factors that affect how and when 
speakers respond to signs of listener confusion is 
important at both theoretical and applied levels: 
first, it can better explain the variation in discourse 
strategies used in different communicative situa-
tions; second, it can help in the design of dialogue 
systems (Kopp et al, 2008; Theune et al, 2007). 
In this study, we examine what types of listener 
behavior increase the likelihood that a speaker will 
produce a redundant utterance. We also examine 
how communicative context affects the amount 
redundancy a speaker produces overall (Walker, 
1992, 1996) and a speaker?s use of redundancy in 
response to listener confusion. In contrast to pre-
vious work, we study reactive redundancy, or re-
dundancy produced in response to signs of listener 
confusion. We investigate two factors that may 
influence a speaker?s tendency to produce redun-
dant utterances and to respond to listener confusion 
with redundancy: the relationship between the in-
terlocutors and their visual contact.  
In the following section, we review relevant li-
terature and present our hypotheses; we then de-
scribe the direction-giving experiment which we 
used to examine redundancy in task-oriented di-
alogue, and present our results; we discuss our re-
sults in light of the literature and conclude by 
noting potential applications and future work.  
37
2 Related Work and Predictions 
2.1 Redundancy 
Grice?s (1975) second Maxim of Quantity: ?Do not 
make your contribution more informative than is 
required? has led to the general impression that 
redundancy (providing discourse-old information) 
is avoided in language (Stalnaker, 1978), with this 
mirrored by work in natural language generation 
(Dalianis, 1999). However, Walker (1992, 1996) 
points out that such conclusions relating to redun-
dancy are often based on flawed assumptions. For 
example, they assume that agents have unlimited 
working memory and the ability to automatically 
generate all the inferences entailed by every utter-
ance, that utterance production should be mini-
mized, and that assertions by Agent A are accepted 
by default by Agent B (Walker, 1996: 183).  
In fact, redundancy can serve many desirable 
purposes in communication. Redundancy has been 
shown to increase text cohesion and readability 
(Horning, 1991) as well as provide evidence of 
understanding and grounding, make a proposition 
salient, and make inferences explicit (Walker, 
1996). A computer simulation of a cooperative task 
dialogue between two agents suggested that the use 
of certain types of redundant utterances improved 
the performance of the pair (Walker, 1996). 
Fussell and Krauss (1989a) point out that there 
are two methods that speakers can use to tailor 
their message for the listener. The first method in-
volves predicting what information it is necessary 
to communicate, using knowledge of the listener?s 
interests and background. The second method in-
volves modifying the message in response to lis-
tener feedback. Walker?s model only captures the 
use of redundancy in the service of the first me-
thod. We will refer to this type of redundancy as 
proactive redundancy, whereby a speaker provides 
redundant information without waiting for the lis-
tener to express a need for it. The advantages of 
providing redundant information proactively in-
clude being able to integrate the redundant infor-
mation with the new information, and avoiding 
conflict by removing the necessity for the listener 
to express a lack of understanding (Brown and Le-
vinson, 1987).  
We hypothesize that speakers also use redun-
dancy reactively, after the listener signals a lack of 
understanding, either verbally or non-verbally. 
This is redundancy in service of Fussell and 
Krauss? second method of message-tailoring. The 
advantages of providing redundant information 
reactively include increasing the efficiency of the 
exchange by only providing redundant information 
that the listener communicates a need for, and re-
ducing the burden on the speaker of having to de-
cide when to include redundant information.  
One important distinction between proactive 
and reactive redundancy is the grounding status of 
the redundant information. Reactive redundancy is 
likely to provide information that has not been ac-
cepted by the listener, and is therefore not part of 
the common ground (Clark and Schaeffer, 1989), 
even though it is discourse-old. In contrast, proac-
tive redundancy is likely to provide information 
from the interlocutors? common ground. Indeed, 
Walker (1996) describes Attitude redundant utter-
ances as providing evidence of grounding. Walk-
er?s other types of proactive redundancy 
(Consequence and Attention) make inferences 
based on grounded utterances explicit and make 
elements of the common ground salient again.  
Reactive redundancy is one type of repair, like 
expansions and replacements, which can be used in 
response to non-understanding or misunderstand-
ing (Hirst et al, 1994). The type of miscommuni-
cation may influence a speaker?s choice of repair 
strategy, with reactive redundancy being an appro-
priate response to mishearing or misremembering.  
However, producing redundant information, 
even when the listener signals a need for it, incurs 
a cost. Including redundant information increases 
the length of the dialogue and the speaker?s effort, 
and decreases the amount of new information pro-
vided within a certain length of time. In these cases 
the speaker must decide how much redundant in-
formation to provide and when to provide it.  
2.2 Signals of Confusion 
Listeners can express a need for information to be 
repeated or restated in a number of ways, both ver-
bally and non-verbally. Brinton et al (1988) used 
questions and statements of confusion (?I didn?t 
understand?) as signs of communication break-
downs. Morrow et al (1993) describe inaccurate 
and partial repetitions of instructions as elements 
of miscommunication. This prior work leads us to 
examine questions, utterances signaling non-
understanding (e.g. ?I don?t remember what?s 
38
next?), incorrect repetitions (e.g. ?take the third 
right? after the direction-giver said ?take the 
second right?) and abandoned utterances (e.g. 
?Then I?ll turn??) as possible signs of listener 
confusion. We predict redundancy after such 
statements because they all indicate that a piece of 
information has not been understood. 
We also examine eye-gaze as a non-verbal 
marker of listener comprehension. Goodwin (1981) 
described gaze towards the speaker as a sign of 
listener attention. However, Nakano et al (2003) 
found that speakers seemed to interpret a listener 
gazing at them rather than at a map as a sign of 
listener misunderstanding. Therefore, shifting eye-
gaze away from the speaker can signal that a lis-
tener is losing attention, perhaps due to confusion, 
while shifting gaze towards the speaker can signal 
misunderstanding. In this study there is no map, 
and listeners who can see the speaker spend most 
of the conversation gazing at the speaker. Still, due 
to the opposing findings in the literature, we ana-
lyze eye-gaze shifts both towards and away from 
the speaker as potential signs of listener confusion.  
2.3 Relationship and Communication 
Speakers are more explicit when communicating 
with strangers or people with whom they share less 
common ground. This explicitness can take the 
form of highly informative self-introductions on 
the phone (Hornstein, 1985), longer descriptions of 
abstract figures (Fussell and Krauss, 1989b), and 
explicit references to utterance topics (Svedsen and 
Evjemo, 2003). These studies indicate that speak-
ers attempt to make up for the small amount of 
common ground they share with strangers by in-
cluding more information in the discourse itself.  
Another difference between friends and non-
friends is that acquaintances tend to be more for-
mal, more concerned with self presentation, less 
negative, and less likely to disagree than friends 
(Schlenker, 1984; Tickle-Degnen and Rosenthal, 
1990; Planalp and Benson, 1992). Therefore, we 
expect that in an initial interaction, a speaker will 
try to appear competent and avoid conflict.  
As noted above, speakers talking to strangers 
are more explicit, leading us to predict more re-
dundancy overall. They are also more likely to try 
to impress their interlocutor and avoid conflict, 
leading to more reactive redundancy in response to 
confusion when the pair are strangers.  
2.4 Visibility and Communication 
Visibility also has a number of effects on commu-
nication. One of the most basic is that when inter-
locutors cannot see each other they cannot use non-
verbal signals to communicate, so they must rely 
on verbal communication. For example, the use of 
eye-gaze as a sign of listener attention (Argyle and 
Cook, 1976; Goodwin, 1981) is only possible 
when interlocutors can see each other. When they 
cannot see each other, they must indicate attention 
verbally or do without this information.  
Visibility affects both the form and the out-
comes of a conversation. When interlocutors can-
not see each other, conversations are longer and 
contain more, shorter, utterances than when they 
can (Nakano et al, 2003). Interlocutors in an in-
vestment game who could not see each other also 
did not establish trust to the same extent as those 
who met face-to-face (Bos et al, 2002).  
Because speakers who cannot see each other 
have fewer channels of communication available to 
them, their interaction can be more difficult than a 
face-to-face interaction. We predict that this will 
lead them to use more redundancy and more reac-
tive redundancy in an effort to be clear. 
2.5 Hypotheses 
In order to study how responsive speakers are to 
signs of listener confusion, we must first determine 
what signs speakers respond to. In this study we 
examine a number of verbal and non-verbal signs 
speakers may use to gauge listener confusion. In 
particular, we expect that speakers will provide 
redundancy in response to both verbal signs like 
questions, statements of non-understanding, incor-
rect statements, and abandoned utterances, and 
non-verbal signs like eye-gaze changes. We expect 
that speakers will strike a different balance be-
tween efficiency (minimizing speaker effort) and 
clarity (minimizing listener effort) depending on 
the relationship between the speaker and listener, 
and the physical context of the interaction. We ex-
pect speakers to use redundancy strategies focused 
on minimizing speaker effort when addressing 
friends and people they can see. Such strategies 
involve less redundancy (and therefore less speak-
ing), and less reactive redundancy (requiring less 
listener monitoring). Conversely, we expect to find 
redundancy strategies maximizing clarity when 
39
speakers address strangers and people they cannot 
see. Such strategies involve more redundancy 
overall (providing the listener with more informa-
tion in general) as well as more reactive redundan-
cy (which provides the listener with the specific 
information they may require). 
Hypothesis 1 - Redundancy and Non-
Understanding 
(a) Verbal cues - Direction-givers will provide 
redundancy when the receiver verbally expresses a 
lack of understanding by asking a question, aban-
doning an utterance, making an incorrect statement 
or explicitly expressing non-understanding.  
(b) Non-verbal cues - Givers will provide redun-
dancy when the receiver non-verbally expresses a 
lack of understanding by shifting eye-gaze.  
Hypothesis 2 - Redundancy and Relationship 
Givers will prioritize clarity over efficiency in their 
redundancy use when speaking to strangers, pro-
viding (a) more redundancy and (b) more reactive 
redundancy than when speaking to friends.  
Hypothesis 3 - Redundancy and Visual Contact 
Givers will prioritize clarity over efficiency in their 
redundancy use when they cannot see their partner, 
providing (a) more redundancy and (b) more reac-
tive redundancy than when they can see them. 
3 Methods 
3.1 Participants 
Twenty-four university students participated, re-
sulting in twelve dyads. All were paid $10 for their 
participation and received $5 gift certificates if 
they successfully completed the task. In each dyad 
the direction-giver was familiar with the building 
in which the experiment took place, and the direc-
tion-receiver was unfamiliar with it. Half the dyads 
were pairs of friends and half were strangers.  
3.2 Procedure 
The task consisted of three consecutive direction-
giving sessions, as described in Cassell et al 
(2007). At the start of each session, the experimen-
ter led the direction-giver to a point in the building, 
and back to the experiment room. Half of the dyads 
sat facing each other during the direction-giving 
(the Vision condition) and half sat back-to-back 
with a screen between them (the No-vision condi-
tion). The direction-giver then explained the route 
to the direction-receiver. There were no time limits 
or restrictions on what could be said, but the dyads 
could not use maps or props. When the dyad de-
cided that direction-giving was complete, they sig-
naled the experimenter, who the receiver led to the 
goal, following the directions.  
The direction-giving sessions were videotaped. 
Participants? speech was transcribed and coded for 
possible redundancy triggers and redundant utter-
ances using the coding scheme described below. 
The time-aligned codings for the giver and receiver 
were aligned with each other using scripts that cal-
culated which of the receiver?s utterances or ac-
tions directly preceded which of the giver?s 
utterances. The scripts classify a receiver?s utter-
ance or action as ?preceding? a giver?s utterance if 
its start precedes the start of the giver?s utterance 
and its end is not more than two seconds before the 
start of the giver?s utterance. The two-second limit 
was used to avoid positing connections between a 
giver?s utterance and receiver utterances that came 
long before it.  
3.3 Data Coding 
Each dialogue was divided into clauses, defined as 
units that include a subject and predicate and ex-
press a proposition. Each clause was coded using a 
modified version of DAMSL (Core and Allen, 
1997). Direction-givers? and receivers? speech was 
coded differently because we only studied redun-
dancy produced by the giver. We coded the receiv-
er?s speech for signs of confusion. We describe the 
labels we used in more detail below.  
Each direction-giver?s clauses were coded for 
Statements and Info-requests. The Info-request tag 
marks questions and other requests for informa-
tion. In a Statement, a speaker makes a claim about 
the world. The class of Statements was broken 
down into Non-redundant, in which the speaker is 
trying to change or add to the hearer?s beliefs, and 
Redundant, which contain only information that 
has already been stated or entailed. 
Each direction-receiver?s clauses were coded 
for Statements, Info-requests, Signal non-
understandings (S.N.U.), and Abandoned utter-
ances. The receiver?s Statements were classified as 
either Correct or Incorrect. If an utterance explicit-
ly expressed non-understanding of an earlier utter-
ance it was coded as Signal non-understanding. 
This label was only used for direct statements of 
non-understanding, such as ?I didn?t follow that,? 
40
and not for signals of non-understanding covered 
by other labels such as Info-requests and Incorrect 
Statements. Utterances that were abandoned (the 
speaker stops the utterance and it provides no con-
tent to the dialogue) were coded as Abandoned. 
Receiver utterances that were not coded as Info-
requests, Incorrect Statements, Signal-non-
understandings, or Abandoned, were coded as No-
trigger. No-trigger utterances included correct 
statements and statements about task management.  
4 Results 
We found that a large proportion of giver utter-
ances were redundant, ranging from 17% to 38% 
with a mean of 25%. Examples of redundancy 
from our recordings are listed in the Appendix.  
We first analyzed the data using a hierarchical 
loglinear analysis with the variables: visual condi-
tion (Vision, No-vision), relationship (Friends, 
Strangers), receiver-utterance (Info-request, Incor-
rect statement, Signal non-understanding, Aban-
doned, No-trigger), and giver-utterance 
(Redundant, Non-redundant). The overall model is 
significant (?2(39,5294)=13254.157,p<.001), justify-
ing chi-square comparisons of individual factors 
within the model. We report tests of partial associ-
ation and chi-square tests to indicate where signifi-
cant differences lie between groups.  
4.1 Redundancy and Non-Understanding 
Verbal Signals of Non-Understanding 
We tested part (a) of Hypothesis 1 by running a 
test of partial associations (adjusted for all effects 
in the model) and an unpartialled chi-square (ig-
noring variables not included in the effect being 
tested). These showed a significant association be-
tween receiver-utterance and giver-utterance type 
(Partial ?2(4,5294)=117.7, p<.001; 
?2(4,5294)=121.2,p<.001). 
Chi-square tests comparing giver-utterances fol-
lowing predicted redundancy triggers to giver-
utterances after No-trigger receiver utterances, in-
dicate that Info-requests, Incorrect statements and 
Abandoned utterances all significantly increase the 
likelihood that the giver will produce a redundant 
utterance (?2(1,4907)=57.3,p<.001; ?2(1,4562)=28.4, 
p<.001; ?2(1,4651)=49.1,p<.001, respectively). Expli-
cit Signal-non-understandings do not have signifi-
cant effects on the likelihood of a redundant-
utterance (?2(1,4539)=.3,p=.619). Figure 1 shows the 
percentages of giver utterances that were redundant 
following various receiver dialogue acts.  
Non-Verbal Signals of Non-Understanding 
We tested part (b) of Hypothesis 1 with a separate 
hierarchical loglinear analysis examining only the 
dyads in the Vision condition for the effects of: 
relationship, receiver-utterance, giver-utterance, 
and receiver-gaze (Gaze-to, Gaze-away, and No-
gaze-change). The first- and second-order effects 
are significant (?2(59,2815)=9582.4, p<.001).  
A test of partial associations and a chi-square 
test indicate a significant association between giv-
er-utterance and receiver-gaze (Partial ?2(2,2815)= 
22.7, p<.001; ?2(2,2815)=24.7,p<.001). Chi-square 
tests comparing receiver gaze changes to non-
changes show that redundant utterances are signifi-
cantly more likely after a gaze change toward the 
giver (?2(1,2433)=21.5,p<.001) and after a gaze 
change away from the giver (?2(1,2475)=6.5,p<.05) 
than after no gaze change. A chi-square test com-
paring gaze change toward the giver to gaze 
change away from the giver shows that the differ-
ence between them is not significant (?2(1,722)=2.7, 
p=.098). These effects are shown in Figure 2.  
 
 
     
52.2% 48.7% 41.0%
27.3% 24.0%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
Red
und
ant 
 GIv
er  U
ttera
nces
 (%) **
*
 
Figure 1. Percent of redundant giver utterances fol-
lowing various receiver dialogue acts. 
 
        
39.7%
33.8%
27.4%
0%5%
10%15%
20%25%
30%35%
40%45%
Towards Away No changeRed
und
ant 
 Giv
er  U
ttera
nces
 (%)
Gaze
* *
 
Figure 2. Percent of redundant giver utterances fol-
lowing receiver eye-gaze changes toward and away 
from the giver, and following no gaze change 
 
41
4.2 Redundancy and Relationship 
Part (a) of Hypothesis 2 was confirmed by the sig-
nificant association between relationship and giv-
er-utterance (Partial ?2(1,5294)=13.3, p<.001; 
?2(1,5294)=6, p<.05) in our original analysis. A larger 
percentage of giver utterances are redundant in the 
Strangers condition (27.8%) than in the Friends 
condition (24.8%). 
 
To examine part (b) of Hypothesis 2 we ran a 
hierarchical loglinear analysis after collapsing all 
receiver-utterances into question/non-question cat-
egories. This reveals a significant partial associa-
tion among giver-utterance, receiver-utterance, and 
relationship (Partial ?2(1,5294)=7.5, p<.01). A chi-
square test comparing utterances after questions in 
the Friends and Strangers conditions shows that 
redundant utterances are significantly more likely 
after questions in the Strangers condition than the 
Friends condition (?2(1,412)= 14.6, p<.0005), as 
shown in Figure 3.  
Three-way interactions among giver-utterance, 
receiver-utterance and relationship are not signifi-
cant in any of the other analyses. 
4.3 Redundancy and Visual Contact 
There is a trend-level association between visual 
condition and giver-utterance type (Partial ?2(1,5294) 
=4.6,p<.05; ?2(1,5294)=3.3,p=.071). Contrary to Hy-
pothesis 3, a larger percentage of utterances are 
redundant in the Vision condition (27.7%) than in 
the No-vision condition (25.5%). No significant 
association was found among giver-utterance, re-
ceiver-utterance, and visual condition, even when 
collapsed into question/non-question categories. 
5 Discussion 
This study set out to discover what verbal and non-
verbal behaviors increase the likelihood of redun-
dant utterances in direction-givers? speech. We 
also examined whether the interlocutors? relation-
ship or visual contact influence whether speakers 
provide redundant utterances in anticipation of and 
in response to listener confusion. We found that 
givers used a large proportion of redundant utter-
ances, (around 25% of utterances). Walker (1996) 
found that about 12% of utterances were redundant 
in a corpus of recordings from a call-in financial 
radio show. The higher proportion of redundant 
utterances in our study is predicted by Walker?s 
(1996) model, in which a task?s tolerance for com-
prehension errors influences whether redundant 
utterances are produced. In a radio advice show, a 
misunderstanding may be more easily recovered 
from than in direction-giving, in which one wrong 
turn could make it impossible to reach the goal.  
In addition to revealing the impact of task toler-
ance to error on redundancy, this study sheds light 
on other circumstances that influence redundancy 
use. Givers produced reactive redundancy in re-
sponse to the verbal triggers: Info-requests, Aban-
doned utterances, and Incorrect statements. 
However, even these triggers were not always fol-
lowed by redundancy. In fact, only around 50% of 
the utterances following these triggers were redun-
dant. Such a low response rate is surprising until 
we consider the diversity of utterances covered by 
these labels. For instance, some Info-requests seek 
new information (e.g. ?What?s at the top of the 
stairs??), and some receiver utterances are aban-
doned because the giver interrupts with new in-
formation. Our study lays the groundwork for 
future examinations of speaker responses to listen-
er confusion, which can refine these broad catego-
ries. We must also consider the variability in 
responses to listener confusion. We found that giv-
ers are more likely to provide redundant utterances 
in response to questions when speaking to stran-
gers, but this is only one of many factors that could 
affect levels of responsiveness, including speaker 
personality, time pressure, and task difficulty.  
The non-significant effect of Signals non-
understandings on redundancy is surprising. This 
may be due to the small number of examples of 
this category in our recordings. We found only 44 
instances of Signal non-understandings, in contrast 
to, for example, 156 Abandoned utterances.  
The non-verbal cue gaze change also increased 
the likelihood of a redundant utterance. Interesting-
ly, gaze changes both to and away from the giver 
              
37%
24%
52%
27%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
Question Non-question
Re
du
nd
an
t  
Gi
ve
r 
 
Ut
te
ra
nc
es
 
(%
) FriendsStrangers
*
 
Figure 3. Percent of redundant giver utterances fol-
lowing questions and non-questions, by relationship. 
 
42
triggered redundancy. This is consistent with both 
Nakano et al?s (2003) finding that gazing at the 
speaker signals listener misunderstanding and 
Goodwin?s (1981) finding that gazing away from 
the speaker indicates a lack of listener attention.  
It is interesting that 24% of giver utterances fol-
lowing No-trigger receiver utterances were redun-
dant. These probably include both redundant 
utterances triggered by signs of listener confusion 
that we did not code for, and proactive redundancy. 
Proactive redundancy can appear within the first 
description of some directions (see the No-trigger 
example in the Appendix) and when the whole set 
of directions is repeated as a memory aid.  
The relationship between the interlocutors does 
affect the amount of redundancy speakers produce 
overall and in response to listener signs of confu-
sion. Strangers used more redundant utterances 
than friends and provided more redundant utter-
ances after questions. This supports our hypothesis 
that direction-givers speaking to strangers will pri-
oritize clarity over efficiency. The more consistent 
use of reactive redundancy in the Strangers condi-
tion may be due to speakers? tendency to avoid 
confrontation with strangers. When responding to 
questions from friends, direction-givers may pro-
vide some new information because they know that 
their friend will feel comfortable asking another 
question if their answer is unclear. However, when 
answering questions from a stranger, the giver may 
wish to avoid the embarrassment of further confu-
sion by repeating more discourse-old information.  
However, contrary to our predictions, we did 
not find more redundancy or more reactive redun-
dancy in the No-vision condition than the Vision 
condition. In fact, we found numerically more re-
dundancy in the Vision condition. Given the low 
level of significance, we do not discuss this in de-
tail, however we suggest that this could be due to 
the fact that there are more ways of signaling non-
understanding available to the receivers in the Vi-
sion condition (both verbal and non-verbal). There-
fore, even if givers do not increase their rates of 
reactive redundancy in the Vision condition, they 
could provide more reactive redundancy (and more 
redundancy overall) because they are receiving 
more cues to react to. Not all situations leading to 
communication difficulties encourage more redun-
dancy or more reactive redundancy, but the in-
creased explicitness and positivity typical of 
conversation between strangers do encourage it.   
6 Conclusion 
This study explored the use of redundancy in task-
oriented dialogue, specifically the effects of listen-
er behavior and communicative context on the 
amount of redundancy produced. We found that 
direction-givers provided redundant utterances in 
response to verbal and non-verbal signs of listener 
confusion. As predicted, givers were more likely to 
prioritize clarity over efficiency in their redundan-
cy use (using more redundancy overall and more 
redundancy in response to questions) when speak-
ing to strangers than friends. Contrary to our pre-
dictions, givers did not provide more redundant 
utterances when they could not see their listener.   
Direction-giving, due to its high memory load 
and the need for the receiver to understand the giv-
er almost completely, is a type of discourse that 
may encourage more redundancy than other types. 
Indeed, we note that our data have a much greater 
proportion of redundancies than discussions taken 
from radio talk shows (Walker, 1996). Future work 
should examine the nature of proactive and reac-
tive redundancy in more varied discourse contexts, 
such as negotiation, teaching, and play. It should 
also explore the effects of memory load on redun-
dancy by varying task complexity, which may be 
easier with a more controlled task like the Map-
task. Researchers could study the relationship be-
tween saliency and redundancy by studying 
correlations between a segment?s salience and its 
likelihood of being used in a redundant utterance.  
Our findings can be used to improve the com-
municative efficacy of natural language generation 
systems like those used in Embodied Conversa-
tional Agents (ECAs; Kopp et al, 2008). For ex-
ample, like strangers, direction-giving ECAs could 
use increased overall and reactive redundancy to 
compensate for the lack of shared common ground 
with the human user of the system. Analyses of the 
syntactic structures of different types of redundant 
utterances will be important for incorporating these 
results into generation systems. 
Acknowledgments 
We thank Paul Tepper, Gregory Ward, Darren 
Gergle, Alex Podbelski, and our anonymous re-
viewers for their helpful advice and hard work. We 
are grateful for generous funding from Motorola 
and NSF HCC 0705901. 
43
References  
M. Argyle and M. Cook. 1976. Gaze and Mutual Gaze. 
Cambridge University Press, New York. 
E. Bard, A. Anderson, C. Sotillo, M. Aylett, G. Doher-
ty-Sneddon and A. Newlands. 2000. Controlling the 
intelligibility of referring expressions in dialogue. J. 
Memory and Language, 42(1):1-22. 
N. Bos, J. Olson, D. Gergle, G. Olson, and Z. Wright. 
2002. Effects of four computer-mediated communica-
tion channels on trust development. In Proceedings of 
SIGCHI 2002, pages 135-140, Minneapolis, MN. 
H. P. Branigan, J. F. McLean, and H. Reeve. 2003. 
Something old, something new: Addressee knowledge 
and the given-new contract. In Proceedings of the 
25th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science So-
ciety, pages 180-185, Boston, MA. 
B. Brighton, M. Fujiki, and E. Sonnenberg. 1988. Res-
ponses to requests for clarification by linguistically 
normal and language-impaired children in conversa-
tion. J. Speech and Hearing Disorders, 53:383-391. 
P. Brown and S. C. Levinson. 1987. Politeness: Some 
Universals in Language Usage. Cambridge Universi-
ty Press, Cambridge, UK. 
J. Cassell, A. J. Gill, and P. Tepper. 2007. Coordination 
in conversation and rapport. In Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Embodied Language Processing at 
ACL, pages 41-50, Prague. 
H. H. Clark and E. F. Schaeffer. 1989. Contributing to 
discourse. Cognitive Science,13:259-294.  
M. G. Core and J. F. Allen. 1997. Coding dialogs with 
the DAMSL annotation scheme. In Proceedings of 
AAAI Fall Symposium on Communicative Action in 
Humans and Machines, pages 28-35, Boston, MA. 
H. Dalianis. 1999. Aggregation in natural language gen-
eration. J. Computational Intelligence, 15(4):384-414. 
S. R. Fussell and R. M. Krauss. 1989 a. The effects of 
intended audience on message production and com-
prehension: Reference in a common ground frame-
work. European J. Social Psychology, 25:203-219. 
S. R. Fussell and R. M. Kraus. 1989 b. Understanding 
friends and strangers: The effects of audience design 
on message comprehension. European J. Social Psy-
chology, 19:445-454. 
C. Goodwin. 1981. Conversational Organization: Inte-
raction between Speakers and Hearers. Academic 
Press, New York. 
H. P. Grice. 1975. Logic and conversation. In P. Cole 
and J. Morgan, editors, Syntax and Semantics III ? 
Speech Acts. Academic Press,New York, pages 41-58. 
G. Hirst, S. McRoy, P. Heeman, P. Edmonds, and D. 
Horton. 1994. Repairing conversational misunders-
tandings and non-understandings. Speech Communi-
cation, 15: 213-230. 
L. Horn. 1993. Economy and redundancy in a dualistic 
model of natural language. SKY 1993: Yearbook of 
the Linguistic Association of Finland: 33-72. 
A. Horning. 1991. Readable writing: The role of cohe-
sion and redundancy. J. Advanced Composition, 
11:135-145. 
G. Hornstein. 1985. Intimacy in conversational style as 
a function of the degree of closeness between mem-
bers of a dyad. J. Personality and Social Psychology, 
49(3):671-681. 
W. Horton and B. Keysar. 1996. When do speakers take 
into account common ground? Cognition, 59:91?117. 
S. Kopp, P. Tepper, K. Ferriman, K. Striegnitz and J. 
Cassell. 2008. Trading spaces: How humans and hu-
manoids use speech and gesture to give directions. In 
T. Nishida, editor, Conversational Informatics. John 
Wiley & Sons, New York, pages 133-160. 
B. Lindlom. 1990. Explaining phonetic variation: A 
sketch of the H and H theory. In W. Hardcastle & A. 
Marchal, editors, Speech Production and Speech 
Modeling. Kluwer, Dordrecht, pages 403-439. 
D. Morrow, A. Lee, and M. Rodvold. 1993. Analysis of 
problems in routine controller-pilot communication. 
International J. Aviation Psychology. 3(4): 285-302. 
Y. Nakano, G. Reinstein, T. Stocky, and J. Cassell. 
2003. Towards a model of face-to-face grounding. In 
Proceedings of ACL 2003, pages 553-561, Sapporo, 
Japan. 
S. Planalp and A. Benson. 1992. Friends' and acquain-
tances' conversations I: Perceived differences. J. So-
cial and Personal Relationships, 9:483-506.  
B. Schlenker. 1984. Identities, identifications, and rela-
tionships. In V. Derlega, editor, Communication, In-
timacy and Close Relationships. Academic Press, 
New York, pages 71-104. 
R. Stalnaker. 1978. Assertion. In P. Cole, editor, Syntax 
and Semantics, Volume 9: Pragmatics. Academic 
Press, New York, pages 315-332. 
G. Svendsen and B. Evjemo. 2003. Implicit referring as 
an indication of familiarity in face-to-face and phone 
conversations. In Proceedings of INTERACT '03: 
pages 920-923, Zurich.  
M. Theune, D. Hofs and M. van Kessel. 2007. The Vir-
tual guide: A direction giving embodied conversa-
tional agent. In Proceedings of Interspeech 2007, 
pages 2197-2200, Antwerp, Belgium. 
L. Tickle-Degnen and R. Rosenthal. 1990. The nature of 
rapport and its nonverbal correlates. Psychological 
Inquiry, 1(4):285-293. 
M. A. Walker. 1992. Redundancy in collaborative di-
alogue. In Proceedings of the 14th International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics, pages 345-351, 
Nantes, France. 
M. A. Walker. 1996. The effect of resource limits and 
task complexity on collaborative planning in dialo-
gue. Artificial Intelligence Journal, 85:181-243. 
44
Appendix: Examples from Dialogues 
 
In the following examples, utterances in italics are 
the triggers produced by the receiver, and under-
lined utterances are redundant.  Commas indicate 
pauses.  Receiver utterances in square brackets 
overlap with the portion of the preceding giver ut-
terance in brackets.   
 
 
Question Example 
Giver (G): as soon as you come outta the door, 
uhh on the second floor you?ll [see like a win-
dow] in front of you 
Receiver (R): [mmhm] 
G: [and then], you?ll wanna take a left 
R: [hm] 
? 
G: if you look to your left you?ll see the exit sign, 
uhh with for the stairwell 
R: ok so then I go to this second floor 
G: mmhm 
R: and then do I go right? 
G: no 
R: or left? 
G: you go left [once you come outta] the second 
floor 
R: [you go left] 
 
 
Incorrect Statement Example 
G: and you?re gonna go towards the computer, and 
pass the computer, and there will be, copy ma-
chines on your right after you pass the computer  
R: mhmm  
G: so after you, walk, just past the copy machines 
you?re gonna want to take a hard left, almost like 
a U-turn 
? 
G: once you turn to the right at after the first stairs 
you?ll you?ll see a computer 
R: oh a computer right ok and then I?m gonna take 
a really hard left like a U-turn 
G: right well you go past the computer and then 
you?ll see copying machines 
R: oh ok  
G: and then but, the copy machines are like maybe 
three five feet after the computer 
R: ok 
G: and then that?s when you take the hard left 
 
Abandoned Example 
G: and then you?re gonna hear some kids and 
people talking and stuff, you?re gonna be head-
ing toward the clinic 
R: oh okay 
G: okay, the clinic you?re is gonna come up on 
your right, [there?s gonna] be, kind of, semi cir-
cular blue couches  
R: [okay], uhhuh 
G: down there, the stapler, is on the floor, right 
next to a pillar, [um] so basically you?re gonna 
like, you?re gonna kind of, turn right to look into 
the clinic 
R: [okay], okay 
G: and then, the stapler?s kinda just over there to 
the left, on the floor by one of the pillars 
? 
G: and you?re gonna hear people talking and 
there?s gonna [be kids] 
R: [okay] so and then the, pillar its? like gonna be 
one of the pillars on the, right by like I guess it?s 
on the  
G: basically, basically um you walk into, the clin-
ic, and there?s blue, couches 
R: mmhm 
G: and then it?s just a little bit over to the left 
R: oh okay 
G: on the floor 
 
 
No-Trigger Example 
G: open the door, and you?re gonna see a set of 
stairs 
R: okay  
G: go down those stairs, to the second floor 
R: mmhm 
G so you?re gonna be on the third floor, you?re 
gonna then you?re gonna take the stairs down to 
the second floor 
R: okay 
45
