Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Issues in Teaching Computational Linguistics (TeachCL-08), pages 10?18,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Building a Flexible, Collaborative, Intensive Master?s
Program in Computational Linguistics
Emily M. Bender
University of Washington
Department of Linguistics
Box 354340
Seattle WA 98195-4340
ebender@u.washington.edu
Fei Xia
University of Washington
Department of Linguistics
Box 354340
Seattle WA 98195-4340
fxia@u.washington.edu
Erik Bansleben
University of Washington
Educational Outreach
UW Tower, Box 359485
4333 Brooklyn Ave., NE
Seattle, WA 98105-9485
ebansleben@extn.washington.edu
Abstract
We present the design of a professional mas-
ter?s program in Computational Linguistics.
This program can be completed in one-year of
full-time study, or two-three years of part-time
study. Originally designed for CS profession-
als looking for additional training, the pro-
gram has evolved in flexibility to accommo-
date students from more diverse backgrounds
and with more diverse goals.
1 Introduction
In the past two decades, there has been tremendous
progress in natural language processing and various
undergraduate/graduate programs in language tech-
nology have been established around the world (Koit
et al, 2002; Frederking et al, 2002; Dale et al,
2002; Uszkoreit et al, 2005; Pilon et al, 2005).
This paper introduces the University of Wash-
ington?s Professional Masters Program in Computa-
tional Linguistics (CLMA)?one of the largest pro-
grams of its kind in the United States?and high-
lights unique features that are key to its success. The
CLMA program is currently operating in its third
year as a fee-based degree program managed jointly
by the Department of Linguistics and the Educa-
tional Outreach arm of the University. The program
is distinguished by its programmatic focus, its flexi-
bility, its format and delivery as well as in the part-
nerships that are an integral part of this degree.
This paper highlights how these features of our
program contribute to effective teaching in our in-
terdisciplinary field as well as making the program
relevant to both working professionals and students
on the research track. We provide a brief program
overview highlighting the people and partnerships
involved, course design, practicum and research op-
tions, and dealing with student diversity. We then
reflect on how we have approached the challenges
of setting up the program and our future plans.
2 Program Overview
With working professionals who wanted to return
to school to retool for a career change in mind, we
designed a curriculum that can be completed in 12
months of intensive full-time study. In this way, stu-
dents can complete the degree without leaving the
working world for too long. In addition, the com-
pactness of the program means that even with part-
time study (one-two courses per quarter), the pro-
gram can be completed within a reasonable time
horizon (two-three years). Once the program got
underway, we found that we also had strong interest
from Linguistics students. The flexibility of the part-
time option has allowed us to develop a two-year
schedule which accommodates students who need
time to get up to speed with key CS concepts.
The curriculum is designed around hands-on and
collaborative work which prepares students for in-
dustry jobs. At the same time, the courses are struc-
tured around fundamental building blocks rather
than applications in order to teach students to think
like computational linguists, and to provide them
with an educational foundation which will remain
relevant for years to come.
This section gives an overview of the CLMA pro-
gram, including its structure and participants.
10
2.1 Program Structure
The CLMA program comprises three quarters (nine
courses) of coursework and a summer master?s
project, which can take the form of an internship
or a master?s thesis (?3.5). The courses, described
in more detail in ?3 below, include three courses in
Linguistics and six in Computational Linguistics.
The program also offers a series of talks by com-
putational linguists working at local companies, an
informal seminar of the computational Linguistics
lab group (which includes PhD students and focuses
on research methodology), and career development
services as we work with students to place them in
internships and post-degree jobs.
2.2 The new certificate program
This summer, the program is branching out with
a new Certificate in Natural Language Technol-
ogy. This three-course Certificate includes two NLP
courses from the Masters degree and an introduc-
tory course titled ?Computational Linguistics Foun-
dations? which serves both this Certificate audience
and acts as a refresher course for some degree stu-
dents. It reinforces the concepts from Linguistics,
CS and statistics that students rely on heavily in the
core course sequence (see ?4). The Certificate is an
alternate course of study for those students wanting
to study a single topic in depth but who are not yet
ready to commit to the entire degree.
2.3 Synchronous online and in-person courses
As part of the certificate summer launch, we will
be offering a selection of courses in a synchronous
online and in-person format, streaming the content
from the classroom to a live remote audience. This
will allow us to extend the reach of the program and
make study in Computational Linguistics available
to students who otherwise would not have access to
instruction in this field without relocating.
In the context of current globalization trends, the
need for online and distance education is grow-
ing (Zondiros, 2008), and indeed we hope that our
audience will extend beyond North America. At
the same time, we agree with Neal and Miller?s
(2004) position that even with remote participants,
the classroom remains a key part of the educational
experience. We have thus adopted an approach that
allows students to be part of a virtual classroom
where they can engage with other students while still
working from a remote location. This surmounts the
hurdle of more traditional distance or online educa-
tion that is primarily text-based and asynchronous.
In a pilot of an online course offering in Autumn
2007 (with Intro to Syntax), we found that most
of the pieces were already in place for taking our
courses online: Course materials are already dissem-
inated through websites, student programming work
is done on a server cluster that is always accessed
remotely, and most of the discussion outside of class
happens on electronic discussion boards.
2.4 Faculty and Staff
The CLMA program is taught by a group of instruc-
tors who combine academic knowledge and practi-
cal expertise in the field. The program budget sup-
ports two faculty positions, one tenure-track (and
guaranteed by the College of Arts and Sciences), and
one two-year visiting position.1 Each of these fac-
ulty teach two of the core NLP courses described in
?3.1 below and one seminar each year. In addition,
they share the work of supervising MA theses and
internships over the summer. In recognition of this
supervising load, their schedules are arranged so that
they each have one non-summer quarter off from
teaching. A third faculty member in Computational
Linguistics teaches three graduate-level courses in
Computational Linguistics per year, and takes on
one-two MA students from each CLMA cohort.
The program also includes a part-time administra-
tor and a technical specialist within the Department
of Linguistics. In addition, the program includes af-
filiated instructors and guest lecturers, ranging from
faculty members of other departments such as CS
and Statistics to researchers from industry.
2.5 Students
A strength of the program is its emphasis on stu-
dent diversity and allowance for individualized stu-
dent needs. The program allows for both part-
time and full-time enrollment and includes both re-
cent college graduates as well older, more non-
traditional students who work in industry. We have
students from throughout the US, as well as from
1To be converted to tenure-track in the future, once the pro-
gram has a longer track-record.
11
Canada, China, Germany, India, Japan, and Russia.
Two-year course schedules allow students to begin
CLMA course work while simultaneously taking CS
and statistics courses in the first year, increasing the
diversity of backgrounds of our students. The pro-
gram is starting to deliver several courses online (see
?2.3) which provides additional flexibility to local
students while also reaching a wider national and
international audience. Lastly, the program seeks to
foster both research and industry interests by provid-
ing both thesis and internship options.
2.6 Advisory board
The program maintains an advisory board composed
of significant industry researchers and practition-
ers, including representatives from AT&T, Boeing,
Google, IBM, Microsoft, Nuance, PARC, and Ya-
hoo!, and faculty from several departments at the
University. This board was instrumental in develop-
ing the original program focus and curriculum out-
line, as well as providing input from the perspective
of employers as the University decided whether or
not to launch the program. It continues to be en-
gaged in guiding the program?s content, providing
internship opportunities for students, and keeping
the content relevant to current industry trends.
2.7 Support from Educational Outreach
Another element of success is a centralized in-
frastructure of administration and support available
through the University?s Educational Outreach divi-
sion (UWEO) which manages the CLMA program,
among more than 30 degree offerings.
UWEO provides many benefits, including con-
siderable institutional knowledge in starting a new
degree program, providing methods of separating
fee-based revenue from that of state-run programs,
marketing expertise, fiscal management, registration
services and more. As the outreach arm of the Uni-
versity, UWEO works closely with non-traditional
students and is able to leverage its industry contacts
to assist serving this community most effectively.
Lastly, partnering with UWEO also serves as a
method of risk management for all new degree pro-
grams. As a state school, the University may have
difficulty in getting state approval and funding for
new degree programs unless initial need and demand
can be demonstrated persuasively. UWEO can as-
sume a certain degree of risk during the start-up
phase of new programs allowing for additional flex-
ibility and time to reach financial viability.
3 Curriculum Design
The program curriculum was designed according to
the following principles: (1) we should provide stu-
dents with an educational foundation that is relevant
in the long term; (2) we should emphasize hands-
on coursework to provide depth of understanding as
well as practical experience students can point to
when looking for a job; and (3) we should highlight
unifying themes in a diverse set of subject matter.
The courses were designed by taking an inven-
tory of the applications and research areas that com-
prise Computational Linguistics, and then breaking
them down into subtasks. These subtasks were then
grouped by similarity into coherent courses, and the
courses into core and elective sets. Three topics re-
sisted classification into any particular course: am-
biguity resolution, evaluation, and multilingualism.
These became our cross-cutting themes which are
highlighted throughout all of the courses. In addi-
tion to understanding each subtask, working compu-
tational linguists need to know how to combine the
stages of linguistic processing into end-to-end sys-
tems. For this reason, we include a capstone ?Sys-
tems and Applications? course in which students
work in groups to create an NLP application.
Key to making the Computational Linguistics cur-
riculum fit into one calendar year was deciding not
to include the course ?Intro to Computational Lin-
guistics.? Such a course serves to expose students to
a broad range of topics in the field and get them in-
terested in exploring further. CLMA students are al-
ready interested in further studies in Computational
Linguistics, and will be exposed to a broad range
of topics throughout the curriculum. However, we
did still want to give the students an overview of
the field so that they could see how the rest of their
studies will fit in. This is done through a two-day
orientation at the start of each year. The orienta-
tion also introduces the three cross-cutting themes
mentioned above, gives the students a chance to get
to know each other and the CLMA faculty, and pro-
vides practical information about the university such
as libraries, computing lab facilities, etc.
12
3.1 Required courses
There are six required courses: The first two are Lin-
guistics courses, and the remaining four form the
NLP core courses. Among the four NLP courses,
Ling 572 should be taken after Ling 570, and Ling
573 should be taken after Ling 570, 571, and 572.
Ling 450 (Intro to Linguistic Phonetics): Intro-
duction to the articulatory and acoustic correlates
of phonological features. Issues covered include
the mapping of dynamic events to static represen-
tations, phonetic evidence for phonological descrip-
tion, universal constraints on phonological structure,
and implications of psychological speech-sound cat-
egorization for phonological theory.
Ling 566 (Intro to Syntax for Computational
Linguistics): Introduction to syntactic analysis and
concepts (e.g., constituent structure, the syntax-
semantics interface, and long-distance dependen-
cies). Emphasis is placed on formally precise en-
coding of linguistic hypotheses and designing gram-
mars so that they can be scaled up for practical appli-
cations. Through the course we progressively build
up a consistent grammar for a fragment of English.
Problem sets introduce data and phenomena from
other languages.
Ling 570 (Shallow Processing Techniques for
NLP): Techniques and algorithms for associating
relatively surface-level structures and information
with natural language data, including tasks such as
tokenization, POS tagging, morphological analysis,
language modeling, named entity recognition, shal-
low parsing, and word sense disambiguation.
Ling 571 (Deep Processing Techniques for NLP):
Techniques and algorithms for associating deep or
elaborated linguistic structures with natural lan-
guage data (e.g., parsing, semantics, and discourse)
and for associating natural language strings with in-
put semantic representations (generation).
Ling 572 (Advanced Statistical Methods in NLP):
Major machine learning algorithms for NLP, includ-
ing Decision Tree, Naive Bayes, kNN, Maximum
Entropy, Support Vector Machine, Transformation-
Based Learning, and the like. Students implement
many of these algorithms and use them to solve clas-
sification and sequence labeling problems.
Ling 573 (NLP Systems and Applications): De-
sign and implementation of coherent systems for
practical applications, with topics varying year to
year. Sample topics: machine translation, ques-
tion answering, information retrieval, information
extraction, dialogue systems, and spell/grammar
checking. In 2006, the students collectively built a
question answering system, which was further de-
veloped into a submission to the TREC competition
(Jinguji et al, 2006). This year?s class is developing
a chatbot to submit to the Loebner Prize competi-
tion, an implementation of the Turing Test.
Among the required courses, Ling 566 was cre-
ated a year before the CLMA program started, and
has been taught four times. Ling 450 is an estab-
lished course from our Linguistics curriculum. Ling
570-573 were newly created for this program, and
have each been taught three times now. We have
put much effort in improving course design, as dis-
cussed in (Xia, 2008).
3.2 The prerequisites for the required courses
In order to cover the range of methodologies and
tasks that our program does in its core sequence, we
need to set as a prerequisite the ability to program,
including knowledge of data structures and algo-
rithms, and expertise in C++ or Java.2 Another pre-
requisite is a college-level course in probability and
statistics. Without such knowledge, it is all but im-
possible to discuss the sophisticated statistical mod-
els covered in the core NLP courses. For the two
Linguistics required courses, the only prerequisite is
a college-level introductory course in Linguistics or
equivalent. Because our students have very diverse
backgrounds, we have tried several approaches to
help the students meet al these prerequisites, which
will be discussed in ?4.
3.3 Elective courses
All students must take three electives, including
one in Linguistics, one in Computational Linguis-
tics, and one more in Computational Linguistics or
a related field. The Linguistics electives are drawn
from the broad range of graduate-level Linguistics
courses offered in the department. The related fields
2Knowing Perl or Python is recommended but not required,
as we believe that good C++ or Java programmers can learn Perl
or Python quickly.
13
electives include courses in CS and Electrical Engi-
neering on topics such as Machine Learning, Graph-
ical Models, Artificial Intelligence, and Human-
Computer Interaction as well as courses in the In-
formation School on topics such as Information Re-
trieval. We maintain a list of pre-approved courses,
which grows as students find additional courses of
interest and petition to have them approved.
The annual elective offerings in Computational
Linguistics include Multilingual Grammar Engi-
neering, as well as seminars taught by the Com-
putational Linguistics faculty and by guest experts
(including researchers in local industry), covering
new topics each year. Recent topics include: Cor-
pus Management, Development and Use, Text-to-
Speech, Multimodal Interfaces, Lexical Acquisition
for Precision Grammars, Semi-supervised and Un-
supervised Learning for NLP, and Information Ex-
traction from Heterogeneous Resources. There are
four-five such seminars per year, three from the
Computational Linguistics faculty and one-two from
guest experts.
We ask students to present their choices of elec-
tives for approval, and require that they articulate
reasons why their range of choices constitutes a co-
herent course of study.
3.4 Hands on, interactive courses
All of the courses in the curriculum are hands-on,
emphasizing learning through doing as well as col-
laboration between the students. Theoretical con-
cepts introduced in lecture are put into practice
with problem sets (e.g., in Intro to Syntax), pro-
gramming assignments (in the core sequence) and
opened-ended projects (in the Systems and Applica-
tions course and the seminars). Student collabora-
tion is promoted through group projects as well as
active online discussion boards where students and
faculty together solve problems as they arise.
3.5 The master?s project
In addition to nine courses, the students need to
complete a master?s project, either through an in-
ternship or through completing a master?s thesis.
The internship option: Internships counting to-
wards the MA degree must be relevant to Compu-
tational Linguistics or human language technology
more broadly. Students develop a pre-internship
proposal, including a statement of the area of inter-
est and proposed contributions, a discussion of why
the company targeted is a relevant place to do this
work, and a list of relevant references. Once the stu-
dents have been offered and accepted an internship,
they write a literature review on existing approaches
to the task in question.
At the end of the internship, students write a self-
evaluation which they present to the internship su-
pervisor for approval and then to the faculty advisor.
In addition, we require a confidential, written evalu-
ation from the intern?s supervisor which references
the self-evaluation. If this evaluation does not indi-
cate satisfactory work, the internship will not count.
Students also write a post-internship report, in-
cluding a description of the activities undertaken
during the internship and their results, a discussion
of how the program course work related to and/or
prepared the student for the internship work, and a
second version of the literature review. We expect
the second review to be different from the initial
version in incorporating the additional perspective
gained in the course of the internship as well as any
additional key papers that the student discovered in
the course of internship work.
The thesis option: This option is recommended for
students who wish to petition for admission to the
Department?s PhD program, and encouraged for stu-
dents who wish to apply to other PhD programs in
the near future. An MA thesis typically involves
the implementation of working systems (or exten-
sions or experimental evaluations thereof). In some
cases, they may provide theoretical contributions in-
stead. MA theses require a thorough literature re-
view, are typically longer (30-50 pages), and repre-
sent the kind of research which could be presented
at major conferences in our field.
The milestones: While the internship and a sig-
nificant portion of the thesis work are conducted in
the summer for full-time students, we start monthly
graduation planning meetings as early as the pre-
ceding October to help students decide which op-
tion they should take. For those seeking internships,
we will help them identify the companies that match
their interests and make the contact if possible.
14
Students who choose the thesis option are re-
quired to turn in an initial thesis proposal that in-
cludes a thesis topic, a summary of major existing
approaches, the students? proposed approach, and a
plan for evaluation. With the feedback from the fac-
ulty, the students will revise their proposals several
times before finalizing the thesis topic. Students are
encouraged to take elective courses relevant to their
topic. Because the amount of research is required for
a good master?s thesis, we expect students with this
option to take one or two additional quarters to finish
than the ones who choose the internship option.
4 Challenges
In this section, we address several challenges that we
encountered while establishing the new program.
Students enrolling in our program have varied
backgrounds in Linguistics, CS and other under-
graduate majors. In addition, some students come
to us straight from undergraduate studies, while oth-
ers are re-entry students. To better prepare students
for the program, starting this year we offer an eight-
week summer refresher course, which reinforces the
most important skills from contributing disciplines
to prepare students for the CLMA core courses. The
course covers the following topics: (1) formal gram-
mars and formal languages, (2) finite-state automata
and transducers, (3) review of main concepts from
probability and statistics, (4) review of major data
structures and algorithms, and (5) using Unix and
computer clusters.
After students are admitted to the program, they
are asked to take an online placement test to identify
the areas that they need to strengthen before enter-
ing the program. They can then choose to take the
summer course or study on their own.
While some of our students, typically fresh out
of college or stepping out of the workforce for re-
training to switch careers, are eager to complete the
degree in one year, others wish to complete the pro-
gram while continuing their current employment or
simply need more time. We offer various options to
accommodate different needs:
Part-time vs. full-time Students can complete the
program in one year, taking three classes each quar-
ter and completing the master?s project in the sum-
mer. At this pace, the program is very intense.
The program also offers part-time options, allow-
ing students to take courses one or two at a time.
This works well for students who are currently em-
ployed and also leaves time for students coming
from a Linguistics background to take CS and Statis-
tics courses before approaching the Computational
Linguistics core sequence. While full-time students
must start in Autumn quarter, part-time students can
start in any academic quarter.
Curriculum flexibility Students who come to us
with an extensive background in Linguistics (e.g., a
prior MA), can waive one or more of the Linguistics
requirements, giving them more time in their sched-
ule for Computational Linguistics or related fields
courses, such as CS.
Program options Our courses are open to qual-
ified students for single-course enrollment, allow-
ing people who don?t have the time or financial re-
sources to commit to the whole master?s program
to benefit from the course offerings. In addition,
the three-course certificate provides more continuity
than single-course enrollment (though less than the
full master?s program) as well as the recognition of a
certificate. In either case, graduate non-matriculated
status allows such students to apply their coursework
to the master?s program at a later date.
Master?s project options In providing for both in-
ternships and master?s theses, the program can ac-
commodate students seeking training for positions
in industry as well as those seeking to continue grad-
uate studies. In the former case, the practical ex-
perience of an internship together with the indus-
try connections it can provide are most valuable. In
the latter case, a chance to do independent research
is more appropriate. Students who spread the pro-
gram out over more than one year can do internships
in the summer between years one and two in addi-
tion to the master?s project (internship or thesis) in
the second summer. Finally, the ?internship option?
can also be fulfilled by ordinary full-time employ-
ment: when students begin full-time positions in the
summer after they complete coursework or apply the
knowledge gained in the master?s program to new
projects at their current places of employment.
In class or online By offering our courses in a hy-
brid, synchronous in-person and online format, we
15
add the flexibility to attend our program from any-
where in the world while still benefiting from the
same courses, lectures, online discussions and col-
laborative work. The online option is also benefi-
cial to local students, allowing them to tune in, for
example, when home caring for a sick child, to re-
view lectures previously attended, to attend online
on days without other on-campus obligations and to
avoid the commute. In the 2008-2009 school year,
three of our courses will be offered in this format,
and we plan to extend the offerings going forward.
5 Outcomes
5.1 Enrollment, graduation rate and placement
In years 1-3, 70 students have enrolled, and about
30 of them enrolled as full-time students.3 To data
13 have completed the program, and at least nine
of them are currently in jobs related to Computa-
tional Linguistics. Another 12 are projected to grad-
uate this year. Out of these 25 students, 15 chose
the internship option and 10 chose the thesis option.
We have placed students in internships with com-
panies such as Amazon.com, Google, Microsoft,
PARC, Tegic (Nuance), and VoiceBox, and have
graduates working at companies such as Cataphora,
Cisco, Google, InXight, Tegic (Nuance), and Voice-
Box. Among the 10 students who took the thesis op-
tion, four received RAships from CLMA faculty?s
research grants, and at least two will enroll in our
Ph.D. program after receiving their MAs.
Recent internal research completed by UWEO
identified a total of 34 CL programs, 23 in the US
and 11 in Western Europe. These programs vary
from named degrees in Computational Linguistics or
a similar variant, to concentrations in other degrees
and to loose courses of study. It appears that there is
one other university in the US that has enrollment as
high or higher than our own, but all other programs
typically have at least 50% fewer students enrolling
as of 2007. Given that this program is only in its
third year, we consider this level of high compara-
tive enrollment a strong measure of success. Addi-
tionally, during this 3 year period, there has been an
upward trend in applications which may be a reflec-
3Some of them later switched to part-time status due to vari-
ous reasons (e.g., the intensity of the program, financial consid-
eration).
tion on the growth and awareness of the discipline,
but may also be a reflection on the growing reputa-
tion of the program.
5.2 Student feedback
We sent an anonymous survey to all alumni and
current students (N=70) asking them about the ef-
fectiveness of the overall CLMA program, individ-
ual courses, the curriculum, success in getting a job
as well as for some qualitative feedback about the
strengths and weaknesses of the program. We re-
ceived 31 responses (44% response rate). For the
sake of brevity, we will provide a selection of ques-
tions and categorize the results as follows: positive
(1=very well, 2=fairly well), neutral (3=so so); neg-
ative (4=not very well, 5=poorly).
0%10%
20%30%
40%50%
60%
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5
Percentage of r
esponses very wellfairly wellso sonot very wellpoorly
Figure 1: Student and alumni responses
As shown in Figure 1, the responses were over-
whelmingly positive. The first four questions ask
how well the program as a whole helped the students
achieve the goals of learning to think like a computa-
tional linguist (Q1), understanding the state of the art
in Computational Linguistics (Q2), understanding
the potential contributions of both machine learning
and knowledge engineering (Q3), and preparation
for a job in industry (Q4). The fifth question asks
how helpful the CLMA experience has been/will be
in finding a job.4 There were a number of other ques-
tions, but the results are all very similar to the ones
above. These same questions were also asked with
respect to individual courses. The results were again
similar, although slightly lower. Positive responses
were in the range of 80%-95%, neutral in the range
4Each of these questions was answered by 24-27 students.
16
of 5-20% and negative responses were usually lim-
ited to no more than 5%. For the question of how
well the program has prepared students for their cur-
rent job (alumni only, N=5), 100% answered posi-
tively. For the question about how important the pro-
gram was in attaining their current job, again 100%
felt that the program was crucial.
We also received valuable qualitative feedback on
this survey. The majority of students (67%) felt that
the program was very intense, but very much worth-
while. The faculty consistently receives high praise;
students enjoy the small hard-working community;
and comments indicate that the coursework is rele-
vant for their future career. When asked about sug-
gestions for improvement, students provided a num-
ber of logistical suggestions, would like to see some
degree of student mentoring, and seek to find ways
to reduce the intensity of the program, especially
for part-time students who are working. It is clear,
though, from the overall survey results, that students
feel very positive about the program as a whole, and
its relevance for their professional future.
While we at first thought the program to be pri-
marily a one-year program, the intensity of the cur-
riculum has resulted in a number students taking
longer than one year to complete the program which
has impacted the number of students who have thus
far completed. Consequently, we will consider stu-
dent feedback from the survey which?in conjunc-
tion with the new preparatory course?should lead
us to find methods of reducing the intensity but
maintaining the high quality.
6 Conclusion and future directions
6.1 Lessons learned
In starting this program, we had the privilege of de-
signing the curriculum first and then hiring faculty to
teach the required courses. We worked closely with
our advisory board to develop a course of study well-
suited to training students for industry jobs, while
also striving to design a program that will remain
relevant to graduates many years down the line.
Financial support from UWEO allowed us to
jump in with both feet, offering the full curriculum
from year one. This was critical in attracting a strong
and reasonably large student body. It also provided
the freedom to design a curriculum that goes in-
depth into Computational Linguistics.
Other facets of our curriculumwhich contribute to
its success include: (1) We combine in-depth explo-
ration of particular topics with cross-cutting themes
that tie the courses together. (2) The courses em-
phasize hands-on work, providing immediate moti-
vation to delve deeper into the theoretical concepts
presented. (3) The program combines high inten-
sity with high levels of support: We ask the stu-
dents to attempt real-world scale projects and then
assist them in achieving these goals through provid-
ing software to work from, offering high levels of
online interaction to answer questions, and facili-
tating collaboration. By working together, the stu-
dents can build more interesting systems than any-
one could alone, and therefore explore a broader ter-
ritory. In addition, collaborative projects help stu-
dents benefit from each other?s diverse backgrounds.
At the same time, we?ve found providing multi-
ple ways of completing program requirements to be
key to allowing students from different backgrounds
to succeed. Exceptional students coming from Lin-
guistics can get up to speed quickly enough to com-
plete the program on a full-time schedule (and some
have), but many others benefit from being able to
take it more slowly, as do some students from a CS
background. We also find that having expertise in
Linguistics among the students significantly benefits
the overall cohort.
6.2 Future directions
In the near future, we plan to expand our online of-
ferings, which directly expands our audience and
benefits local students as described above. We have
found connecting course work to faculty research
and/or external competitions such as TREC and the
Loebner Prize to be extremely motivating and re-
warding for students, and plan to seek more opportu-
nities for doing so. We are also expanding out inter-
disciplinary reach within the university. The TREC
submission was done jointly with faculty from the
Information School. This year?s guest faculty course
will be offered jointly with a course in the School
of Art on interface design. In pursuing all of these
directions, we will benefit from input from our advi-
sory board as well as feedback from current students
and alumni.
17
References
Robert Dale, Diego Molla Aliod, and Rolf Schwit-
ter. 2002. Evangelising Language Technology: A
Practically-Focussed Undergraduate Program. In Pro-
ceedings of the First ACL Workshop on Effective Tools
and Methodologies for Teaching NLP and CL.
Robert Frederking, Eric H. Nyberg, Teruko Mitamura,
and Jaime G. Carbonell. 2002. Design and Evolution
of a Language Technologies Curriculum. In Proceed-
ings of the First ACL Workshop on Effective Tools and
Methodologies for Teaching NLP and CL.
Dan Jinguji, William D. Lewis, Efthimis N. Efthimiadis,
Joshua Minor, Albert Bertram, Shauna Eggers, Joshua
Johanson, Brian Nisonger, Ping Yu, and Zhengbo
Zhou. 2006. The University of Washington?s UW-
CLMAQA system. In Proceedings of the Text Re-
trieval Conference (TREC) 2006, Gaithersburg, Mary-
land.
Mare Koit, Tiit Roosmaa, and Haldur Oim. 2002. Teach-
ing Computational Linguistics at the University of
Tartu: Experience, Perspectives and Challenges. In
Proceedings of the First ACL Workshop on Effective
Tools and Methodologies for Teaching NLP and CL.
Diane Neal, Lisa nad Miller. 2004. Distance educa-
tion. In Robert W. Proctor and Kim-Phuong L. Vu,
editors, Handbook of Human Factors in Web Design.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Sule?ne Pilon, Gerhard B Van Huyssteen, and Bertus
Van Rooy. 2005. Teaching language technology at the
North-West University. In Proceedings of the Second
ACL Workshop on Effective Tools and Methodologies
for Teaching NLP and CL.
Hans Uszkoreit, Valia Kordoni, Vladislav Kubon,
Michael Rosner, and Sabine Kirchmeier-Andersen.
2005. Language technology from a European perspec-
tive. In Proceedings of the Second ACL Workshop on
Effective Tools and Methodologies for Teaching NLP
and CL.
Fei Xia. 2008. The evolution of a statistical nlp course.
In Proceedings of the Third ACL Workshop on Effec-
tive Tools and Methodologies for Teaching NLP and
CL, Columbus, Ohio, June.
Dimitris Zondiros. 2008. Online, distance education
and globalization: Its impact on educational access,
inequality and exclusion. European Journal of Open,
Distance and E-Learning, Volume I.
18
