Dependency Annotation Scheme for Indian Languages 
 
Rafiya Begum, Samar Husain, Arun Dhwaj, Dipti Misra 
Sharma, Lakshmi Bai and Rajeev Sangal 
Language Technologies Research Center, 
IIIT, Hyderabad, India. 
{rafiya,samar}@research.iiit.ac.in, 
{dipti,lakshmi,sangal}@iiit.ac.in 
 
 
Abstract 
The paper introduces a dependency annota-
tion effort which aims to fully annotate a 
million word Hindi corpus. It is the first at-
tempt of its kind to develop a large scale 
tree-bank for an Indian language. In this 
paper we provide the motivation for fol-
lowing the Paninian framework as the an-
notation scheme and argue that the Pan-
inian framework is better suited to model 
the various linguistic phenomena manifest 
in Indian languages. We present the basic 
annotation scheme. We also show how the 
scheme handles some phenomenon such as 
complex verbs, ellipses, etc. Empirical re-
sults of some experiments done on the cur-
rently annotated sentences are also re-
ported. 
1 Introduction 
A major effort is currently underway to develop a 
large scale tree bank for Indian Languages (IL). 
The lack of such a resource has been a major limit-
ing factor in the development of good natural lan-
guage tools and applications for ILs. Apart from 
that, a rich and large-scale tree bank can be an in-
dispensable resource for linguistic investigations. 
Some notable efforts in this direction for other lan-
guages have been the Penn Tree Bank (Marcus et 
al., 1993) for English and the Prague Dependency 
Bank (Hajicova, 1998) for Czech.  
It is well known that context free grammar 
(CFG) is not well-suited for free-word order 
languages (Shieber, 1985); instead dependency 
framework appears to be better suited (Hudson, 
1984; Mel'Cuk, 1988, Bharati et al, 1995). Also, 
the dependency framework is arguably closer to 
semantics than the phrase structure grammar (PSG) 
if the dependency relations are judiciously chosen. 
In recent times many research groups have been 
shifting to the dependency paradigm due to this 
reason. Modern dependency grammar is attributed 
to Tesni?re (1959). In a dependency analysis, there 
is no hierarchical arrangement of phrases (or 
substrings) like in phrase structure grammar. 
Rather, we just have words connected via 
dependency relations between them.  
Prague Dependency Bank (PDT) for Czech 
(which has relatively free word order) is one such 
large-scale effort which implements a three-tier 
annotation scheme and annotates morphological 
information, analytical and tectogrammatical level 
annotations at these three levels. Out of the three 
levels, the analytical and tectogrammatical level 
are dependency based. The tectogrammatical level 
tries to capture the deep-semantics of the sentence; 
the annotation at this level is very rich and is 
linked to the other two lower levels. Other major 
efforts in the dependency framework are Alpino 
(van der Beek et. al, 2002) for Dutch, (Rambow et. 
al, 2002) for English, TUT (Bosco and Lombardo, 
2004) for Italian, TIGER (Brants et. al, 2002) 
(combines dependency with PSG) for German. In 
this paper we describe an approach to annotate ILs 
using the Paninian1 model. The paper is arranged 
as follows, Section 2 gives a brief overview of the  
           
          1Paninian theory was formulated by Panini about 
two thousand five hundred years ago for Sanskrit. It 
evolved with the contributions of grammarians that fol-
lowed. 
721
grammatical model and the motivation for 
following the framework. Section 3 talks about the 
chosen corpus and the annotation procedure. In 
Section 4 we discuss some dependency relations. 
Section 5 describes the evaluation procedure. We 
report the empirical results of experiments done on 
the annotated data in Section 6. Section 7, 
concludes the paper. 
2 Grammatical Model 
ILs are morphologically rich and have a relatively 
flexible word order. For such languages syntactic 
subject-object positions are not always able to ele-
gantly explain the varied linguistic phenomena. In 
fact, there is a debate in the literature whether the 
notions ?subject? and ?object? can at all be defined 
for ILs (Mohanan, 1982). Behavioral properties are 
the only criteria based on which one can confi-
dently identify grammatical functions in Hindi 
(Mohanan, 1994); it can be difficult to exploit such 
properties computationally. Marking semantic 
properties such as thematic role as dependency 
relation is also problematic. Thematic roles are 
abstract notions and will require higher semantic 
features which are difficult to formulate and to ex-
tract as well. So, thematic roles are not marked at 
this juncture. On the other hand, the notion of ka-
raka relations (explained shortly) provides us a 
level which while being syntactically grounded 
also helps in capturing some semantics. What is 
important to note here is that such a level can be 
exploited computationally with ease. This provides 
us with just the right level of syntactico-semantic 
interface. The experiments conducted on the pre-
sent annotated text provide empirical evidence for 
this claim (section 6). Paninian grammar is basi-
cally a dependency grammar (Kiparsky and Staal, 
1969; Shastri, 1973). In this section we briefly dis-
cuss the Paninian model for ILs and lay down 
some basic concepts inherent to this framework. 
The main problem that the Paninian approach 
addresses is to identify syntactico-semantic rela-
tions in a sentence. The Paninian approach treats a 
sentence as a series of modifier-modified relations. 
A sentence is supposed to have a primary modified 
(the root of the dependency tree) which is gener-
ally the main verb of the sentence. The elements 
modifying the verb participate in the action speci-
fied by the verb. The participant relations with the 
verb are called karaka. The appropriate mapping of 
the syntactic cues helps in identifying the appro-
priate karakas (?participants in an action?). The 
framework is inspired by an inflectionally rich lan-
guage like Sanskrit; it emphasizes the role of case 
endings or markers such as post-positions and ver-
bal inflections. 
There are six basic karakas, namely; adhikarana 
?location?,  apaadaan ?source?, sampradaan 
?recipient?,  karana ?instrument?, karma ?theme?, 
karta ?agent?. We must note here that although one 
can roughly map the first four karaka to their the-
matic role counterpart, karma and karta are very 
different from ?theme? and ?agent? respectively 
(see section 4.1.1).  
In our annotation scheme, we use chunks as a 
device for modularity. A chunk represents a set of 
adjacent words which are in dependency relations 
with each other, and are connected to the rest of 
the words by a single incoming dependency arc. 
The relations among the words in a chunk are not 
marked for now and hence allow us to ignore local 
details while building the sentence level depend-
ency tree. Thus, in our dependency tree each node 
is a chunk and the edge represents the relations 
between the connected nodes labeled with the ka-
raka or other relations. All the modifier-modified 
relations between the heads of the chunks (inter-
chunk relations) are marked in this manner. Intra-
chunk relations can be marked by a set of rules at a 
later point. Experiments have been conducted with 
high performance in automatically marking intra-
chunk dependencies.  
Using information such as karakas based on 
some vibhaktis (post-positions) and other informa-
tion like TAM (tense, aspect and modality) of the 
main verb seems very well suited for handling free 
word order languages. Other works based on this 
scheme like (Bharati et al, 1993; Bharati et al, 
2002; Pedersen et al, 2004) have shown promising 
results. We, therefore, propose the use of depend-
ency annotation based on the Paninian model in the 
Indian context. 
3 Annotation Procedure and Corpus De-
scription 
The annotation task is planned on a million word 
Hindi corpora obtained from CIIL (Central Insti-
tute for Indian Languages), Mysore, India. It is a 
representative corpus which contains texts from 
various domains like newspaper, literature, gov-
722
ernment reports, etc. The present subset on which 
the dependency annotation is being performed has 
already been manually tagged and chunked. Cur-
rently the annotation is being carried out by 2 an-
notators, who are graduate students with linguistic 
knowledge. The tool being used for the annotation 
is part of Sanchay (Singh, 2006) which is a collec-
tion of tools and APIs for South Asian languages. 
4 Scheme 
There are a total of 28 relations (see, 
http://ltrc.deptagset.googlepages.com/home) which 
we encode during the annotation. The total number 
of relations in the framework is few which has a 
direct bearing on the parser based on this frame-
work (both, rule based and statistical). We briefly 
discuss some of these relations in this section. 
4.1 Dependency relations 
As mentioned earlier, the proposed scheme uses 
the dependency relations from Paninian grammar. 
Section 4.1.1 below shows some karaka relations, 
section 4.1.2 shows some other relations; 
4.1.1 karaka relations 
(1) raama phala   khaataa hai 
?Ram?  ?fruit?     ?eat?    ?is? 
      ?Ram eats fruit? 
 
 
Figure1.  
 
(2) raama   chaaku   se     saiv     kaattaa hai 
?Ram?   ?knife?  -inst  ?apple? ?cut?     ?is? 
      ?Ram cuts the apple with a knife? 
 
 
Figure2.  
 
Examples (1), and (2) above show some simple 
cases which have karaka relations such as k3 
(karana; ?instrument?), k1 (karta), k2 (karma) (the 
term karta and karma can be roughly translated as 
?agent? and ?theme?). One must note here that the 
notion of karta, karma, etc, is not equivalent to that 
of the ?agent?, ?theme? thematic roles (although 
they might map to them sometimes). The reason 
for this divergence in the two notions (karaka and 
thematic role) is due to the difference in what they 
convey. Thematic role is purely semantic in nature 
whereas the karaka is syntactico-semantic. Exam-
ples (3), illustrates this point, 
 
(3) chaabhi  ne      darvaazaa   kholaa 
      ?key?     ?-erg?  ?door?      ?opened? 
      ?The key opened the door? 
 
In the above examples chaabhi is k1 (karta), 
whereas it takes instrument thematic role. While 
the karaka relations are primarily motivated via 
verbal semantics, syntactic cues like postpositions 
and verbal morphology play an important role too. 
For example in (3) above, the ergative case ?ne? 
provides a strong cue to identify karta. Panini de-
fines ?karta? as ?svatantra karta? which can be 
translated as ?the participant which is the most in-
dependent in a given action?. In (3) ?key? has such 
a property. When the speaker uses ?key? in (3), 
he/she intends to elevate the role of ?key? in the 
action of opening and does not communicate the 
actual agent of the action. The speaker uses ?key? 
as the independent participant in the act of open-
ing. Hence, ?key? is the karta (see Bharati et al, 
1995, pp. 65-73, for a more detailed discussion). 
4.2 Special Cases 
(a) POF (Part of relation) 
 
Conjunct verbs form a very challenging case for 
analysis in Indian languages. They have been ex-
tensively analyzed in the past. Some notable at-
tempts have been (Greaves, 1983; Kellogg, 1972; 
Mohanan, 1994; Butt, 2004). The example below 
shows a N+V conjunct verb usage; 
 
(4)  raama   ne    mujhase     prashna    kiyaa  
?Ram?  -erg  ?me-inst?  ?question?  ?do? 
           ?Ram asked me a question.? 
 
723
In example (4), prashna kiyaa is a conjunct verb 
and behaves as a single semantic unit. These verbs 
can also be discontiguous as in (5), 
 
(5) raama  ne    mujhase   prashna   pichle saal kiyaa   
     ?Ram? -erg  ?me-inst? ?question? ?last? ?year? ?did? 
     ?Ram asked me a question last year.? 
 
In the above example above a normal conjunct 
verb sequence prashna kiyaa is disjoint, making it 
rather difficult to annotate. In fact, practically 
anything can come between the disjointed 
elements. Ideally, the noun/adjective + verb 
sequence of the conjunct verb is placed in one 
chunk. Keeping this in mind, example (6) below is 
even more problematic, 
 
   (6)  maine     usase       ek       prashna  kiyaa 
   ?I-erg?  ?him-inst? ?one? ?question? ?did? 
         ?I asked him a question? 
 
The noun prashna ?question? within the con-
junct verb sequence prashna kiyaa is being modi-
fied by the adjective ek ?one? and not the entire 
noun-verb sequence; the annotation scheme should 
be able to account for this relation in the depend-
ency tree. If prashna kiyaa is grouped as a single 
verb chunk, it will not be possible to mark the ap-
propriate relation between ek and prashna. To 
overcome this problem it is proposed to break ek 
prashna kiyaa into two separate chunks, [ek 
prashna]/NP2 [kiyaa]/VG3. The dependency rela-
tion of prashna with kiyaa will be POF (?Part OF? 
relation), i.e. the noun or an adjective in the con-
junct verb sequence will have a POF relation with 
the verb. This way, the relation between ek and 
prashna becomes an intra-chunk relation as they 
will now become part of a single NP chunk. What 
makes such a sequence unique is the fact that the 
components which make up a conjunct verb are 
chunked separately, but semantically they consti-
tute a single unit. 
  The proposed scheme has the following advan-
tages: 
 
 (i) It captures the fact that the noun-verb seque 
ence is a conjunct verb by linking them with an 
appropriate tag, this information is extremely cruc- 
 
          2 Noun Phrase 
    3 Verb Group 
ial syntactically. 
 
(ii) It allows us to deal with the modifier-
modified relation between an adjective and its 
modified noun, as in example (6), which is a fre-
quent phenomenon.  
 
The tree below shows the proposed solution, 
where the adjective ek modifies the noun prashna 
instead of the entire prashna kiyaa, which would 
have been the case had we not separated prashna 
kiyaa into two separate chunks. 
 
 
Figure3.  
 
(b) ccof (?conjunct of? relation) and ellipses 
 
In the case of coordinating conjunction like aur 
?and? , the conjunct becomes the root and takes the 
two conjoined elements as children, the relation 
marked on the edges is ccof (conjunct of). This 
analysis captures the fact that neither of the con-
joined elements is the head. (The head of the two 
(or more) conjoined elements lies in the conjunct, 
and may be so computed when needed.) The ele-
ments participating in the coordination can belong 
to various categories, such as, noun, adjective, ad-
verbs etc; they can also be entire clauses, partici-
ples, etc. Other conjunct and punctuations which 
act like conjuncts are annotated similarly. 
When one or more element from a sentence is 
dropped, it is called ellipses. A null element 
marked with a special tag ?NULL? is introduced in 
cases of ellipses, where without inserting it the tree 
cannot be drawn. Null_NP, Null_VG, Null_CCP 
etc mark different kinds of ellipses.  
In this section, we have briefly discussed some 
of the relations and showed their actual usage us-
ing some sentences. The number of tags in the pro-
posed scheme is not very large. A limited set of 
tags helps immensely in developing high-
performance parsers (both rule based and statisti-
cal) and other related applications. We should note 
here that our tag-set, although small, is not a de-
724
limiting factor and is not a compromise on the se-
mantics, as these 28 relations are enough to fully 
parse the sentences in the language.  
5 Evaluation 
To make sure that the quality of the annotated cor-
pus is good, the annotators cross-validate each 
other?s work. A senior team member finally checks 
the annotated corpus (of both the annotators) to 
ensure that the errors are minimized. Note that 
such a setup is only temporary, we need such a 
thorough validation because we are still in the 
process of revising the guidelines. Once the guide-
lines become stable, the annotators won?t need to 
cross-validate. Of course, the task of final valida-
tion will still continue. 
6 Experiments 
Some preliminary experiments were conducted on 
a corpus of 1403 Hindi sentences that have been 
fully annotated. The aim was to access; 
 
1. Whether the syntactic cues can be ex-
ploited for better machine learnability. 
2. Whether certain generalization can be 
made for a constraint parser. 
3. How far would the automatic annotation 
help the annotators? 
 
We found a strong co-relation between most 
vibhakti-karaka occurrences (shaded cells in Table 
1). k7 (?place?) for example, overwhelmingly takes 
mem post-position, k3 (karana) takes se in all the 
cases. Of course, there are some competing rela-
tions which show preference for the same post-
position. In such cases only the post-position in-
formation will not be sufficient and we need to 
take into account other syntactic cues as well. 
These syntactic cues can be TAM (tense, aspect 
and modality) of the verb, verb class information, 
etc. For example, in case of karata karaka (k1), the 
following heuristics help resolve the ambiguities 
seen in Table 1. These heuristics are applied se-
quentially, i.e. if the first fails then the next follows. 
Note that the heuristics mentioned below are meant 
only for illustrative purpose. The cues mentioned 
in the heuristics will finally be used as features by 
an efficient ML technique to automate the task of 
annotation. 
H1: k1 agrees in gender, number and person 
with the verb if it takes a nominative case, 
H2: k1 takes a ko case-marker if the TAM of the 
verb has nA, 
H3: It takes a kaa/ke/ki if the verb is infinitive, 
H4: It takes a se or dvaara if the TAM of the 
verb is passive 
H5: It takes a ne case-marker if the verb is tran-
sitive and the TAM is perfective 
 
Table-2 shows the results when the heuristics 
were tested on the annotated corpus to test their 
effectiveness. 
 
 
Table 1. karaka-vibhakti correlation 
 
 
Table 2. Heuristics for k1 disambiguation 
 
The field ?Total? in Table-2 gives us the number 
of instances where a particular heuristic was ap-
plied. For example, there were 1801 instances 
where k1 appeared in a nominative case and H1 
correctly identified 1461 instances. H1 failed due 
to the errors caused by the morphological analyzer, 
presence of conjuncts, etc. Of particular interest 
are H2 and H3 which didn?t work out for large 
number of cases. It turns out that H2 failed for 
what is understood in the literature as dative sub-
jects. Dative subjects occur with some specific 
verbs, one possible solution could be to use such 
verbs for disambiguation. Automatic identification 
of conjunct verbs is a difficult problem; in fact, 
there isn?t any robust linguistic test which can be  
 
4 karaka relations (see, 
http://ltrc.deptagset.googlepages.com/home) 
    5 vibhakti (post-position) 
725
used to identify such verbs. Similar heuristics can 
be proposed for disambiguating other karaka based 
on some syntactic cues. Based on the above results 
one can safely conclude that arriving at some ro-
bust generalization (like, karaka-vibhakti correla-
tion) based on the syntactic cues is in fact possible. 
This can help us immensely in building an efficient 
parser for Hindi (and other ILs). It goes without 
saying that there exists a lot of scope for automat-
ing the annotation task. 
7 Conclusion 
In this paper we have introduced an ongoing effort 
to annotate Indian languages with dependency rela-
tion. We stated the motivation behind following 
the Paninian framework in the Indian Language 
scenario. We discussed the basic scheme along 
with some new relations such as ccof, POF, etc. 
We also showed the results of some experiments 
conducted on the annotated data which showed 
that there is a strong co-relation between vibhakti-
karaka relations. 
Acknowledgement 
Thanks are due to Prof. Ramakrishnamacharyulu 
who has been guiding us throughout the develop-
ment of the proposed scheme. 
References 
Akshar Bharati and Rajeev Sangal. 1993. Parsing Free 
Word Order Languages in the Paninian Framework, 
ACL93: Proc. of Annual Meeting of Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 
Akshar Bharati, Vineet Chaitanya and Rajeev Sangal. 
1995. Natural Language Processing: A Paninian 
Perspective, Prentice-Hall of India, New Delhi, pp. 
65-106. 
Akshar Bharati, Rajeev Sangal, T Papi Reddy. 2002. A 
Constraint Based Parser Using Integer Programming, 
In Proc. of ICON-2002: International Conference on 
Natural Language Processing, 2002. 
Cristina Bosco and V. Lombardo. 2004. Dependency 
and relational structure in treebank annotation. In 
Proceedings of Workshop on Recent Advances in 
Dependency Grammar at COLING'04. 
S. Brants, S. Dipper, S. Hansen, W. Lezius and G. 
Smith. 2002. The TIGER Treebank. In Proceedings 
of the Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theo-
ries. 
M. Butt. 2004. The Light Verb Jungle. In G. Aygen, C. 
Bowern & C. Quinn eds. Papers from the 
GSAS/Dudley House Workshop on Light Verbs. 
Cambridge, Harvard Working Papers in Linguistics, 
p. 1-50. 
Edwin Greaves. 1983. Hindi Grammar. Asian Educa-
tional Services, New Delhi, pp. 335-340 
E. Hajicova. 1998. Prague Dependency Treebank: From 
Analytic to Tectogrammatical Annotation. In Proc. 
TSD?98. 
R. Hudson. 1984. Word Grammar, Basil Blackwell, 108 
Cowley Rd, Oxford, OX4 1JF, England. 
S. H. Kellogg. 1972. A Grammar of the Hindi Language. 
Munshiram Manoharlal, New Delhi, pp. 271-279. 
P. Kiparsky and J. F. Staal. 1969. ?Syntactic and Rela-
tions in Panini?, Foundations of Language 5, 84-117. 
M. Marcus, B. Santorini, and M.A. Marcinkiewicz. 
1993. Building a large annotated corpus of English: 
The Penn Treebank, Computational Linguistics 1993. 
I. A. Mel'cuk. 1988. Dependency Syntax: Theory and 
Practice, State University, Press of New York. 
K. P. Mohanan. 1982. Grammatical relations in Malaya-
lam, In Joan Bresnan (ed.), The Mental Representa-
tion of Grammatical Relations, MIT Press, Cam-
bridge. 
Tara Mohanan, 1994. Arguments in Hindi. CSLI Publi-
cations. 
M. Pedersen, D. Eades, S. K. Amin, and L. Prakash. 
2004. Relative Clauses in Hindi and Arabic: A Pan-
inian Dependency Grammar Analysis. In COLING 
2004 Recent Advances in Dependency Grammar, 
pages 9?16. Geneva, Switzerland. 
O. Rambow, C. Creswell, R. Szekely, H. Taber, and M. 
Walker. 2002. A dependency treebank for English. In 
Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation. 
Anil Kumar Singh. 2006. 
http://sourceforge.net/projects/nlp-sanchay 
Charudev Shastri. 1973. Vyakarana Chandrodya (Vol. 1 
to 5). Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. (In Hindi) 
S. M. Shieber. 1985. Evidence against the context-
freeness of natural language. In Linguistics and Phi-
losophy, p. 8, 334?343. 
L. Tesni?re. 1959. El?ments de Syntaxe Structurale. 
Klincksiek, Paris.  
L. van der Beek, G. Bouma, R. Malouf, and G. van 
Noord. 2002. The Alpino dependency treebank. 
Computational Linguistics in the Netherlands. 
726
Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, pages 120?128,
Beijing, China, 21-22 August 2010. c?2010 Asian Federation for Natural Language Processing
A Preliminary Work on Causative Verbs in Hindi  
Rafiya Begum, Dipti Misra Sharma 
                Language Technologies Research Centre, IIIT. 
rafiya@research.iiit.ac.in, 
dipti@iiit.ac.in  
 
Abstract 
This paper introduces a preliminary 
work on Hindi causative verbs: their 
classification, a linguistic model for 
their classification and their verb 
frames. The main objective of this work 
is to come up with a classification of the 
Hindi causative verbs. In the classifica-
tion we show how different types of 
Hindi verbs have different types of 
causative forms. It will be a linguistic 
resource for Hindi causative verbs 
which can be used in various NLP ap-
plications. This resource enriches the al-
ready available linguistic resource on 
Hindi verb frames (Begum et al, 
2008b). This resource will be helpful in 
getting proper insight into Hindi verbs. 
In this paper, we present the morpholo-
gy, semantics and syntax of the causa-
tive verbs. The morphology is captured 
by the word generation process; seman-
tics is captured by the linguistic model 
followed for classifying the verbs and 
the syntax has been captured by the verb 
frames using relations given by Panini. 
1 Introduction  
Verbs play a major role in expressing the mean-
ing of a sentence and its syntactic behavior. 
They decide the number of participants that will 
participate in the action. Semantically verbs are 
classified into action verbs, state verbs and 
process verbs. Syntactically they are classified 
into intransitives, transitives and ditransitives. 
The morphological, semantic and syntactic 
properties of verbs play an important role in 
deeper level analysis such as parsing. 
Causative verbs are differently realized in dif-
ferent languages. These verbs have been an in-
teresting area of study. The study of causative 
constructions is important as it involves the in-
teraction of various components such as seman-
tics, syntax and morphology (Comrie, 1981). 
This paper presents the preliminary work on 
Hindi causative verbs. 
2 Causative Verbs 
Causative verbs mean that some actor makes 
somebody else do something or causes him to be 
in a certain state (Agnihotri, 2007). The causal 
verb indicates the causing of another to do 
something, instead of doing it oneself (Greaves, 
1983). Semantically causative verbs refer to a 
causative situation which has two components: 
(a) the causing situation or the antecedent; (b) 
the caused situation or the consequent. These 
two combine to make a causative situation (Ne-
dyalkov and Silnitsky, 1973). There are differ-
ent ways in which causation is indicated in dif-
ferent languages. There are three types of causa-
tives: Morphological causatives, Periphrastic 
causatives and Lexical causatives (Comrie, 
1981). 
Morphological Causatives indicate causa-
tion with the help of verbal affixes. Sanskrit, 
Hindi/Urdu, Persian, Arabic, Hebrew, Japanese, 
Khmer and Finnish languages have morpholog-
ical causatives. Periphrastic causatives indi-
cate causation with the help of a verb which 
occurs along with the main verb. For example, 
in English in a sentence such as:  
 
(1) John made the child drink milk. 
 
In the above example the verb make is ex-
pressing causation which is occurring along 
with the verb drink which in turn is expressing 
120
the main action. English, German and French 
are some of the languages which have periph-
rastic causatives. Lexical causatives are those 
in which there is no morphological similarity 
between the base verb root and the causative 
verb form. A different lexical item is used to 
indicate causation. For example, the causative 
of English eat is feed. English and Japanese 
have lexical causatives. English has both pe-
riphrastic and lexical causatives. 
3 Causative verbs in Hindi 
Causatives in Hindi are realized through a mor-
phological process. In Hindi, a base verb root  
changes to a causative verb when affixed by 
either an ?-aa? or a ?-vaa? suffix.  
 
Base verb First causal  Second causal 
so  sul-aa   sul-vaa  
?sleep?  ?put to sleep? ?cause to put to  
       sleep? 
 
In each step of causative derivation there is 
an increase in the valency of the verb (Kachru, 
2006; Comrie, 1981) 
 
(2) baccaa   soyaa                  
      child       sleep.Pst 
      ?The child slept.? 
 
(3) aayaa ne     bacce ko         sulaayaa   
      maid   Erg.  child Acc.      sleep.Caus.Pst 
      ?The maid put the child to sleep.? 
 
(4) maa.N  ne           aayaa se        bacce ko       
      mother Erg.        maid   by       child  Acc.      
      sulvaayaa   
      sleep.Caus.Pst       
      ?Mother caused the maid to put the child to    
       sleep.? 
 
Hindi verbs are divided into two groups 
based on their behaviour in causative sentences: 
affective verbs and effective verbs (Kachru, 
2006). The action of affective verbs benefits or 
affects the agent. Affective verbs will have both 
first and second causal forms. Verbs such as 
ronaa ?to cry? and dau.Dnaa ?to run? are affec-
tive intransitive verbs. Only verbs belonging to 
khaanaa ?to eat? class come under affective 
transitive verbs. The agent of the affective in-
transitive verb becomes the patient and the 
agent of the affective transitive verbs becomes 
the recipient in the first causal and they both 
will take a ko postpositon (Hindi case marker). 
Effective verbs and ditransitive verbs have only 
one causal form. The agent of the effective verb 
and ditransitive verb becomes the causative 
agent in the first causal. So this causative agent 
in the first causal takes a se ?with? postposition 
(Hindi case marker). Verbs belonging to karnaa 
?to do? class come under the effective verbs.  
The major studies in Hindi causatives: Kach-
ru (1966), Kachru (1980), Kachru (2006), 
McGregor (1995), Greaves (1983), Kellogg 
(1972), Agnihotri (2007), Sahaay (2004), Sa-
haay  (2007), Singh (1997) and Tripathi (1986). 
Kachru (1966) has given the classification of 
Hindi verbs based on their causativization beha-
vior. The others have mostly talked about the 
derivation process of the causative verbs. 
However the classification of causative verbs 
in Hindi remains an issue of discussion. Since 
they are morphologically related, the decision of 
what is the base verb form of these verbs re-
mains a point of discussion. There are two ap-
proaches which are followed in deciding the 
base verb: (1) causative formation based only 
on morphology, (2) causative formation based 
on morphology and semantics. 
 
I.Based on Morphology 
 
Base verb         First causal  Second causal 
(Intransitive)     (Transitive)        (Causative) 
khul         khol   khulvaa 
?open?    ?open?                ?cause to open? 
 
II. Based on Morphology and Semantics 
 
Intransitive         Base verb  Second causal 
(Intransitive)        (Transitive)     (Causative) 
khul            khol   khulvaa 
?open?                 ?open?             ?cause to open?          
 
In I, khul ?open? is taken as the base verb and 
khol ?open? and khulvaa ?cause to open? are de-
rived from it by adding suffix ?-aa? and ?-vaa? 
respectively to the base verb (Kachru, 1966; 
Kachru, 1980). The arrow denotes the direction 
of derivation from base verb. Here, the forward 
arrow denotes the increment of the argument 
from base to the causal forms. On the other 
121
hand, in II, khol ?open? is taken as the base verb. 
Here, other than morphology, the semantics of 
the verbs is also taken into consideration. Here 
khul ?open? and khulvaa ?cause to open? are de-
rived from the base verb khol ?open?. khulvaa 
?cause to open? is a causative verb which is de-
rived from the base verb by adding suffix ?-vaa? 
to it. khul ?open? is a derived intransitive form. 
The agent of the base verb khol ?open? is not 
realized on the surface level of the derived in-
transitive verb khul ?open? though it is implied 
semantically. Here there is both forward and 
backward derivation. From base verb to the de-
rived intransitive it is a backward derivation 
which means there is a reduction of one argu-
ment from base verb to the derived intransitive 
verb (Tripathi, 1986; Reinhart, 2005).  
In this paper, we motivate our work by pre-
senting our approach for classifying the causa-
tive verbs in Hindi. 
4 Our Approach 
4.1 Linguistic Model for Classifying Caus-
ative verbs 
We have followed Paninian Grammatical 
framework in this model as the theoretical basis 
for our approach. The meaning of every verbal 
root (dhaatu) consists of: (a) activity (vyaapaa-
ra) and; (b) result (phala). Activity denotes the 
actions carried out by the various participants 
(karakas) involved in the action. Result denotes 
the state that is reached, when the action is 
completed (Bharati et al, 1995). The partici-
pants of the action expressed by the verb root 
are called karakas. There are six basic karakas, 
namely; adhikarana ?location?, apaadaan 
?source?, sampradaan ?recipient?, karana ?in-
strument?, karma ?theme? and karta ?agent? 
(Begum et al, 2008a). Here the mapping be-
tween karakas and theta roles is a rough map-
ping. 
The karta karaka is the locus of the activity. 
Similarly karma karaka is the locus of the re-
sult. The locus of the activity implied by the 
verbal root can be animate or inanimate. Sen-
tence (2) given above, is the example where the 
locus of the activity is animate. Sentence (5) 
given below, is the example where the locus of 
the activity is inanimate.  
 
(5) darvaazaa   khulaa 
      door             open.Pst 
      ?Door opened.?   
   
(6) raam ne     darvaazaa    kholaa  
      ram   Erg.   door             open.Pst 
      ?Ram opened the door.? 
                       
(7) maiM ne      raam se      darvaazaa  
      I         Erg.   ram    by     door       
      khulvaayaa  
      open.Caus.Pst 
      ?I made Ram open the door.? 
 
 When we come to the causatives, the notion 
of prayojak karta ?causer?, prayojya karta 
?causee? and madhyastha karta ?mediator 
causer? are introduced. prayojak karta ?causer? 
is the initiator of the action. prayojya karta 
?causee? is the one who is made to do the action 
by the prayojak karta ?causer?. madhyasta karta 
?mediator causer? is the causative agent of the 
action. The karta of the base verb becomes the 
prayojya karta of the causative verb and the 
prayojak karta of the first causative becomes 
the madhyasta karta of the second causative.  
 This model takes both semantics and 
morphology into consideration. 
4.1.1 Semantics  
(8) caabii  ne    taalaa  kholaa   
      key      Erg   lock     open.Pst 
     ?The key opened the lock.? 
 
(9)* raam  ne   caabii  se   taalaa  khulvaayaa 
       ram   Erg.   key    by    lock    open.Caus.Pst    
       ?Ram caused the key to open the lock.?  
  
(10)raam ne   mohan  dvaaraa caabii  se  taalaa   
       ram  Erg. mohan  by           key     with lock   
      khulvaayaa   
      open.Caus.Pst. 
      ?Ram made Mohan open the lock with the   
       key.?  
 
In (8), caabii ?key? is the karta of the transi-
tive verb khol ?open?. caabii ?key? is an inani-
mate karta so this sentence can?t be causati-
vized. (8) has been tried to causativize in (9) 
which is unacceptable. (9) is actually interpreted 
as (10) where an inanimate  noun with a se 
?with? postposition acts as an instrument and not 
as a prayojya karta ?causee?. So in (10), caabii  
122
?key? is an inanimate noun and takes se ?with? 
postposition so caabii  se ?with the key? acts as 
instrument and mohan ?Mohan? acts as the 
prayojya karta ?causee? (Kachru, 1966). It 
seems that only those verbs can be causativized 
which take an animate karta.  
Out of the above two given approaches, we 
are following approach II where both morphol-
ogy and semantics are considered. In our ap-
proach we are saying that only those base verbs 
can be causativized which take an animate karta 
and it should also have volitionality (Tripathi, 
1986; Reinhart, 2005). Those base verbs which 
take an inanimate karta can?t be causativized. 
So in our approach the prayojya karta ?causee? 
in the causative sentence is always animate as 
the karta of the base verb becomes the prayojya 
karta ?causee? in the causative sentences. In our 
approach we have the notion of karmakartri 
which says an intransitive can be derived out of 
a basic transitive verb and the karma of the ba-
sic transitive verb becomes the karta of the de-
rived intransitive verb. So the karta of the de-
rived intransitive verb is called karmakartri. 
The derived intransitive verbs are like unaccusa-
tive verbs of English.  
Whereas in approach I, the intransitive base 
verbs that take both animate and inanimate kar-
ta can be causativized. But in case of transitives, 
base verbs which take only animate karta can be 
causativized. Ditransitives can also be causati-
vized. (Kachru 1966; Kachru 1980) 
We follow the dependency tagging scheme 
proposed by Begum et al (2008a) for the devel-
opment of a dependency annotation for Indian 
Languages. In this scheme prayojak karta 
?causer?, prayojya karta ?causee? and madhyas-
tha karta ?mediator causer? are represented as 
pk1, jk1 and mk1 respectively.  
Some of the base verb forms and their causa-
tive sentences are given below with dependency 
relations marked in the brackets for the appro-
priate arguments: 
 
(11) raam ne(k1)  seb(k2)       khaayaa  
      ram   Erg.      apple           eat.Pst 
     ?Ram ate an apple.?  
 
(12) siitaa ne(pk1) raam ko(jk1)  seb(k2)   
      sita    Erg.        ram   Acc.      apple   
      khilaayaa   
      eat.Caus.Pst 
     ?Sita fed Ram an apple.? 
 
(13)maa.N  ne(pk1) siitaa se(mk1) raam ko(jk1)                   
      mother  Erg.       sita     by          ram  Acc.        
      seb(k2)    khilvaayaa                             
      apple       eat.Caus.Pst. 
     ?Mother caused Sita to feed Ram an apple.? 
 
(14) naukar  ne(k1)  kaam(k2)  kiyaa   
        servant Erg.       work         do.Pst 
        ?The servant did the work.? 
 
(15) maalik ne(pk1) naukar  se(mk1)   kaam(k2) 
        master Erg.       servant by             work        
        karvaayaa 
        do.Caus.Pst 
       ?The master caused Ram to do the job.?  
 
(16) raam ne(k1)  siitaa ko(k4) kitaab (k2)  dii 
       ram    Erg.      sita    Dat.      book    give.Pst 
      ?Ram gave a book to Sita.? 
                             
(17) mohan ne(pk1) raam se(jk1) siitaa ko(k4)     
        mohan Erg.       ram   by        sita    Dat.   
        kitaab(k2)  dilaaii 
        book           give.Caus.Pst 
       ?Mohan made Ram give a book to Sita.? 
 
(18) mujhko(k4a)  chaa.Nd(k1)   dikhaa  
        I.Dat.              moon             appear.Pst 
       ?The moon became visible to me.? 
   
(19) maiM ne(k1)  chaa.Nd(k2)  dekhaa  
         I        Erg.       moon            see.Pst  
        ?I saw the moon.? 
 
(20) maiM    ne(pk1) raam ko(jk1)  chaa.Nd(k2) 
        mother Erg.         ram  Dat.       moon 
        dikhaayaa  
        see.Caus.Pst    
        ?Mother showed moon to Ram.? 
                  
(21) maiM ne(pk1)  mohan se(mk1)   
        I         Erg.        mohan by 
        raam ko(jk1)    chaa.Nd(k2)   dikhlaayaa  
        ram   Dat.          moon             see.Caus.Pst           
        ?Mother made Mohan show moon to Ram.? 
123
4.1.2 Morphology  
In this section we have given the derivation 
process of the Hindi causative verbs. We have 
studied 160 Hindi verbs and have come up with 
certain number of rules for the derivation 
process of causative verbs.  
When causative affixes are added to the base 
verb roots then some of the base verb roots 
change in form and some don?t. Various causal 
affixes are added to each verb type to form 
causatives. An example of affix addition for 
each verb type is discussed below. The affixes 
that are added are given in bold. The changes in 
the base verb root are underlined and made bold 
in both root form and the causal form. 
 
4.1.2.1 Type-1 and its causative forms: 
 
Suffix ?-aa? is added to the verb root to form the 
first causal and ?-vaa? to form the second 
causal.  
 
No Change in the Root: 
Chip  Chip-aa Chip-vaa 
?hide?  ?hide?  ?cause to hide? 
 
Change in the Root: 
? aa ??a 
 
naach        nach-aa         nach-vaa 
?dance?  ?make someone dance? ?cause to make  
                                                   someone dance? 
 
4.1.2.2 Type-2 and its causative forms: 
 
Suffix ?-aa? is added to the verb root to form the 
first causal and ?-vaa? to form the second 
causal.  
 
No Change in the Root: 
likh  likh-aa  likh-vaa 
?write?  ?dictate?          ?cause to dictate? 
 
Change in the root: 
? aa,  ii  ?  i;In addition, 'l' is    
      inserted here between the root and   
      the causative suffix.  
 
khaa          khi-l-aa khi-l-vaa 
?eat?         ?feed?   ?cause to feed? 
pii    pi-l-aa  pi-l-vaa 
?drink? ?make someone drink?  ?cause to make   
                                                    someone drink? 
 
4.1.2.3 Type-3 and its causative forms: 
 
Suffix ?-vaa? is added to the verb root to form 
the first causal. 
 
No Change in the Root: 
khariid   khariid-vaa 
?buy?   ?cause to buy? 
 
Change in the Root: 
? aa  ?  a 
 
gaa   ga-vaa 
?sing?   ?cause to sing? 
 
4.1.2.4 Type-4 and its causative forms: 
 
Suffix ?-aa/-vaa? is added to the verb root to 
form the first causal. 
 
No Change in the Root: 
paros   paros-vaa 
?serve?   ?cause to serve? 
 
Change in the root:  
? e  ?  i; In addition, 'l' is  
 inserted here between the root and  
 the causative suffix. 
 
de          di-l-aa /di-l-vaa 
?give?          ?cause to give? 
 
In case type-5 and type-6 verbs, we can de-
rive intransitive verbs out of transitive verbs. 
Here we have two types of word formations: 
 
? causative formation, 
?  Derived intransitive verb formation  
 
Causative derivation is the forward deriva-
tion and intransitive derivation is backward de-
rivation.  
 
4.1.2.5 Type-5 and its causative forms: 
 
Suffix ?-aa? is added to the verb root to form the 
first causal and ?vaa? to form  the second causal. 
In this verb type there is no example where the 
124
verb root form doesn?t change. 
 
Causative Formation: Change in the root  
? e  ?  i  
 
dekh     dikh-aa  dikh-vaa 
?see?              ?show?               ?cause to show? 
    
Derived intransitive formation: Change in 
the above root: 
? i          e 
     
dikh             dekh   
?appear?  ?see?      
 
4.1.2.6 Type-6 and its causative forms: 
 
Suffix ?-aa/-vaa? is added to the transitive verb 
root to form the first causal. 
 
Causative formation: No change in the root 
bhar   bhar-vaa /bhar-aa 
?fill?   ?cause someone to fill? 
  
Derived intransitive formation: No change in 
the root 
bhar                       bhar   
?to fill?                         ?to fill?  
   
Causative formation: Change in the root 
? o      ?    u; In addition, 'l' is inserted 
here between the root and the  
causative suffix  
 
dho   dhu-l-aa /dhu-l-vaa 
?wash?   ?cause to wash? 
 
Derived intransitive formation: Change in 
the above root: 
? u        o; In addition, 'l' is inserted at   
                    the end of the root 
   
dhu-l   dho   
?be washed?  ?cause to wash? 
 
In the implementation of the causative verbs, 
the causative feature of a verb is reflected in the 
morph analysis. There are two possible ways to 
implement causative information: (i) All the 
causative verb roots are included in the root dic-
tionary of the morph analyzer with an additional 
feature marking it a causative verb type. (ii) For 
all causative verbs the following information is 
marked; causative root, base root, verb type and 
causative suffix. In (i), the information of base 
verb root from which the causative root is de-
rived is missing which is captured in (ii). In the 
above mentioned two ways the latter gives more 
detailed information than the former. 
4.2 Methodology of the Work 
For this work, 160 base verbs were taken, their 
causative forms were given and were classified. 
Rules for deriving causative verb forms from 
their base forms were made. Verb frames for 
base verbs and their causative forms were de-
veloped. Based on the analysis of the base verbs 
certain problem cases were logged and generali-
zations regarding causativization were made. In 
this paper, we briefly discuss about all the 
points  mentioned above. 
4.3 Classification of Hindi Causative  
Verbs 
Here Hindi verbs have been classified into 6 
types based on their causativization behavior:  
 
? Type-1: Basic Intransitive verb  
 
Basic intransitive verb has two causal forms 
i.e., first causal and second causal form. First 
causal of the basic intransitive verb functions as 
a transitive verb. The subject of the basic intran-
sitive verb becomes the object of the transitive 
verb or the first causal form. The subject of the 
first causal form becomes the causative agent of 
the second causal form. Sentence (2) is the ex-
ample of basic intransitive and sentences (3) 
and (4) are its causative forms. 
 
? Type-2: Basic Transitive verb type-I (which 
is similar to khaanaa ?to eat? verb type giv-
en by Kachru (1966))  
 
? Type-3: Basic Transitive verb type-II 
(which is similar to karnaa ?to eat? verb 
type given by Kachru (1966)) 
 
Type-2 and type-3 are transitive verbs which 
are divided into two types based on their causa-
tivization behavior. Basic transitive verbs of 
type-I, like khaanaa ?to eat? have two causal 
forms. First causal of khaanaa ?to eat? type verb 
125
also functions as ditransitive. Whereas transitive 
verbs of type-II, like karnaa ?to do? have one 
causal form. First causal of karnaa ?to eat? type 
verb functions as causative. Sentences (11-13) 
are examples for type-2 verb. Sentences (14-15) 
are examples for type-3 verb.  
 
? Type-4: Basic Ditransitive verb  
 
Ditransitive verbs also have one causal form. 
Sentences (16-17) are examples for type-4 verb.  
 
? Type-5: Basic Transitive verb type-I, out of 
which intransitive verbs can be derived 
which takes a dative subject,  
 
? Type-6: Basic Transitive verb type-II, out 
of which intransitive verbs can be derived.  
 
Type-5 and type-6 are transitive verbs which 
have causal forms depending on whether it is 
type-I (khaanaa ?to eat?) transitive or type-II 
(karnaa ?to do?) transitive and in addition both 
have a derived intransitive form. Type-5 takes a 
dative subject in the base form. Sentences (18-
21) are examples for type-5 verb. Sentences (5-
7) are examples for type-6 verb. Other than the 
4 classes classified by Kachru (1966), we have 
two more extra classes, i.e., type-5 and type-6.  
An example for each verb type that goes into 
the classification is given below: 
 
? Type-1 
Base verb First causal Second Causal 
so  sulaa  sulvaa  
?sleep?       ?put to sleep? ?cause to put to sleep?          
                               
? Type-2 
Base verb First causal Second Causal 
khaa  khilaa  khilvaa 
?eat?  ?feed?  ?cause to feed? 
 
? Type-3 
Base verb First causal 
kar        karaa/karvaa 
?do?         ?cause to do? 
 
? Type-4 
Base verb First causal 
de         dilaa/dilvaa 
?give?         ?cause to give?  
 
? Type-5 
Intransitive  Base verb 
dikh             dekh 
?appear?            ?see? 
 
Base verb First causal Second Causal 
dekh  dikhaa  dikhvaa 
?see?  ?show?  ?cause to  
          show?  
? Type-6  
Intransitive  Base verb 
khul            khol  
?open?            ?open? 
 
Base verb   First causal 
khol      khulvaa 
?open?                 ?cause to open? 
5 Verb Frames 
In this section we list out the syntactic frames 
for all the causative types discussed in the pre-
vious sections. Verb frame (Begum et al, 
2008b) is given for the base form and for its 
first and second causal form. For ease of exposi-
tion, below we show only the relevant informa-
tion of a verb frame. Components not necessary 
for the present discussion have been left out. 
Here the structure of a verb frame is given in 
terms of dependency relation, postposition 
(Hindi case marker) and TAM. We have taken 
past tense (yaa is the past tense marker) in the 
TAM. Refer the examples given above for each 
type of causatives for a better understanding of 
the frames.   
 
I.Frame of Type-1 and its Causative Forms:  
 
        Relation-Postposition                    TAM 
 
(a)k1-0     yaa  
(b)pk1-ne      jk1-ko  yaa  
(c)pk1-ne      mk1-se jk1- ko  yaa  
 
II.Frame of Type-2 and its Causative Forms: 
 
        Relation-Postposition                    TAM 
 
(a)k1-ne   k2-0 yaa 
(b)pk1-ne          jk1-ko     k2-0 yaa  
126
(c)pk1-ne    mk1-se    jk1- ko     k2-0 yaa 
 
III. Frame of Type-3 and its Causative 
Forms: 
 
        Relation-Postposition                    TAM 
 
(a)k1-ne                           k2-0         yaa  
(b)pk1-ne       jk1-se        k2-0          yaa  
 
IV. Frame of Type-4 and its Causative 
Forms: 
 
        Relation-Postposition                    TAM 
 
 (a) k1-ne            k4-ko     k2-0        yaa  
 (b) pk1-ne     jk1-se    k4-ko      k2-0   yaa  
 
V. Frame of Type-5 and its Causative Forms: 
 
        Relation-Postposition                    TAM 
 
(a)k4a-ko  k1                      aa 
(b)k1-ne                   k2-0         aa 
(c)pk1-ne                        jk1-ko      k2-0       yaa  
(d)pk1-ne     mk1-se      jk1-ko       k2-0        yaa  
    
VI. Frame of Type-6 and its Causative 
Forms: 
          
        Relation-Postposition                    TAM 
 
(a)k1-0        aa 
(b)k1-ne       k2-0                   aa 
(c)pk1-ne       jk1-se           k2-0            yaa  
6 Issues and Observations 
There are some verbs which can?t be causati-
vized. Motion verbs like aa ?come? and jaa ?go? 
can? t be causativized. After analysing certain 
amount of corpus we have observed that not all 
motion verbs behave like the above verbs . aa-
naa ?to come? and jaanaa ?to go? verbs can't be 
causativized because these verbs always occur 
as main verbs and take the following verbs as 
manner adverbs: chalnaa, bhaagnaa, daudnaa. 
For instance, chalkar aayaa ?came running? and 
daudkar gayaa ?went running?. Those motion 
verbs which occur as manner adverbs and modi-
fy another motion verb can be causativized and  
those verbs which occur as main verbs and nev-
er occur as manner adverbs of another motion 
verb can't be causativized. Natural process verbs 
like khil ?blossom?, garajnaa ?thunder? and ug 
?rise? also can?t be causativized. 
There are three types of the verb nikal 
?leave?. All the three are used as intransitives. 
? derived intransitive: sense ? drain out  
(22) paanii  kamre se       nikal   gayaa 
        water   room  from   leave  go.Pst. 
        ?Water drained out of the room.? 
 
? Baisc Intransitive: sense ? walked out 
 
(23) raam  kamre  se     baahar  nikal    gayaa 
        ram    room  from  out         leave  go.Pst. 
        ?Ram walked out of the room.? 
 
? Baisc Intransitive which involves natural   
       process. 
 
(24) gangaa  gangotrii se       nikaltii            
        ganga     gangotri  from  emerge.Impf. 
        hai 
        be.Pres. 
        ?Ganga emerges from Gangotri.? 
 
The first type is a derived intransitive which 
is derived from the base transitive verb nikaal 
?remove?. This base transitive verb root can be 
causativized. The second type is basic intransi-
tive which can also be causativized. The third 
type which is natural process can?t be causati-
vized. This shows how important the property 
of animacy for making causatives is.  
7 Conclusion and Future Work 
In this work we flesh out the linguistic devices 
that work for causativization. In this paper we 
have introduced a preliminary work on Hindi 
causative verbs. We have given the classifica-
tion of causative verbs and the linguistic model 
followed for their classification. We have also 
given the verb frames of the causative verbs. 
These insights have been incorporated in the 
Hindi dependency treebank (Bhatt et al, 2009). 
We also plan to use the verb frames in a Hindi 
dependency parser (Bharati et al, 2009) to im-
prove its performance. 
 
127
References 
Agnihotri, Rama K. 2007. Hindi, An Essential 
Grammar. Routledge, London and New York, pp. 
121-126. 
Balachandran, Lakshmi B. 1973.  A Case Grammar 
of Hindi. Central Institute of India, Agra. 
Begum, Rafiya, Samar Husain, Arun Dhwaj, Dipti 
M. Sharma, Lakshmi Bai and Rajeev Sangal. 
2008. Dependency Annotation Scheme for Indian 
Languages. Proceedings of The Third Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language 
Processing (IJCNLP), Hyderabad, India.  
Begum, Rafiya, Samar Husain, Dipti M. Sharma and 
Lakshmi Bai. 2008. Developing Verb Frames in 
Hindi. In Proceedings of The Sixth International 
Conference on Language Resources and Evalua-
tion (LREC). Marrakech, Morocco.  
Bharati, Akshar, Vineet Chaitanya, and Rajeev San-
gal. 1995. Natural Language Processing: A Pani-
nian Perspective, Prentice-Hall of India, New 
Delhi, pp. 65-106.  
Bharati, Akshar, Samar Husain, Dipti Misra Sharma 
and Rajeev Sangal. 2009. Two stage constraint 
based hybrid approach to free word order lan-
guage dependency parsing. In Proceedings of the 
11th International Conference on Parsing Tech-
nologies (IWPT09). Paris.  
Bhatt, Rajesh, Bhuvana Narasimhan, Martha Palmer, 
Owen Rambow, Dipti Misra Sharma, Fei Xia. 
2009. A Multi-Representational and Multi-
Layered Treebank for Hindi/Urdu. In the Third 
Linguistic Annotation Workshop (The LAW III) in 
conjunction with ACL/IJCNLP 2009. Singapore.  
Comrie, Bernard. 1981. Language Universals and 
Linguistic typology: Syntax and Morphology. The 
University of Chicago Press. 
Greaves, Edwin. 1983. Hindi Grammar. Asian Edu-
cational Services, New Delhi, pp. 301-313  
Kachru, Yamuna. 1966. Introduction To Hindi Syn-
tax. University of Illinois, Illionois, pp. 62-81  
Kachru, Yamuna. 1980. Aspects of Hindi Grammar. 
Manohar Publications.  
Kachru, Yamuna. 2006. Hindi. London Oriental and 
African Language Libtary. 
Kale, M.R. 1960. A Higher Sanskrit Grammar. Mo-
tilal Banarasidass, Delhi. 
Kellogg, S. H. 1972. A Grammar of the Hindi Lan-
guage. Munshiram Manoharlal, New Delhi, pp. 
253-257.   
McGregor, R. S. 1995. Outline of Hindi Grammar. 
Oxford University Press, pp. 118-125.  
Nedyalkov, Vladmir P., Georgij G. Silnitsky. 1973. 
The typology of Morphological and Lexical 
Causatives, in: F. Kiefer, (ed.), Trends in Soviet 
Theoretical Linguistics, Foundations of Language, 
Supplementary Series 18, Dordrecht, 1-32. 
Reinhart, Tanya. 2005. Causativization and Decau-
sativization: Unpublished technical report. LSA 
2005.  
Sahaay, Chaturbhuj. 2004. Hindi ke Muul Vaakya 
Saanche, Kumar Prakaashan, Agra, pp. 91-100. 
Sahaay, Chaturbhuj. 2007. Hindi Padvigyaan, Ku-
mar Prakaashan, Agra. 
Shastri, Charu D. 1990. Panini: Re-Interpreted. Mo-
tilal Banarasidass, Delhi. 
Singh, Rajendra and Rama K. Agnihotri. 1997. Hindi 
Morphology: A Word-based Description. Motilal 
Banarasidass, Delhi. 
Tripathi, Acharya R. 1986. Hindi Bhashaanushasan. 
Bihar Granth Academy, Patna.  
 
128
