Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Workshop on Language Technologies for African Languages ? AfLaT 2009, pages 96?103,
Athens, Greece, 31 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Exploiting Cross-linguistic Similarities in Zulu and Xhosa            
Computational Morphology 
Laurette Pretorius 
School of Computing  
University of South Africa & 
Meraka Institute, CSIR 
Pretoria, South Africa 
pretol@unisa.ac.za 
Sonja Bosch 
Department of African Languages 
University of South Africa 
Pretoria, South Africa 
boschse@unisa.ac.za 
 
Abstract 
This paper investigates the possibilities that 
cross-linguistic similarities and dissimilarities 
between related languages offer in terms of 
bootstrapping a morphological analyser. In 
this case an existing Zulu morphological ana-
lyser prototype (ZulMorph) serves as basis 
for a Xhosa analyser. The investigation is 
structured around the morphotactics and the 
morphophonological alternations of the lan-
guages involved. Special attention is given to 
the so-called ?open? class, which represents 
the word root lexicons for specifically nouns 
and verbs. The acquisition and coverage of 
these lexicons prove to be crucial for the suc-
cess of the analysers under development.  
The bootstrapped morphological analyser is 
applied to parallel test corpora and the results 
are discussed. A variety of cross-linguistic ef-
fects is illustrated with examples from the 
corpora. It is found that bootstrapping mor-
phological analysers for languages that ex-
hibit significant structural and lexical simi-
larities may be fruitfully exploited for devel-
oping analysers for lesser-resourced lan-
guages. 
1  Introduction 
Zulu and Xhosa belong to the Nguni languages, a 
group of languages from the South-eastern Bantu 
zone and, as two of the eleven official languages 
of South Africa, are spoken by approximately 9 
and 8 million mother-tongue speakers, respec-
tively. In terms of natural language processing, 
particularly computational morphology, the 
Bantu languages including Zulu and Xhosa cer-
tainly belong to the lesser-studied languages of 
the world.  
One of the few Bantu languages for which 
computational morphological analysers have 
been fully developed so far is Swahili (Hur-
skainen, 1992; De Pauw and De Schryver, 2008). 
A computational morphological analyser proto-
type for Zulu (ZulMorph) is in an advanced 
stage of development, the results of which have 
already been used in other applications. Prelimi-
nary experiments and results towards obtaining 
morphological analysers for Xhosa, Swati and 
Ndebele by bootstrapping ZulMorph were par-
ticularly encouraging (Bosch et al, 2008). This 
bootstrapping process may be briefly summa-
rised as a sequence of steps in which the baseline 
analyser, ZulMorph, is applied to the new lan-
guage (in this case Xhosa) and then systemati-
cally extended to include the morphology of the 
other language. The extensions concern the word 
root lexicon, followed by the grammatical mor-
pheme lexicons and finally by the appropriate 
morphophonological rules. The guiding principle 
in this process is as follows: Use the Zulu mor-
phological structure wherever applicable and 
only extend the analyser to accommodate differ-
ences between the source language (Zulu) and 
the target language (in this case Xhosa). So far 
the question as to whether the bootstrapped ana-
lyser, extended to include Xhosa morphology, 
could also improve the coverage of the Zulu ana-
lyser was not specifically addressed in Bosch et 
al. (2008). 
Cross-linguistic similarity and its exploitation 
is a rather wide concept. In its broadest sense it 
aims at investigating and developing resources 
and technologies that can be compared and 
linked, used and analysed with common ap-
proaches, and that contain linguistic information 
for the same or comparable phenomena. In this 
paper the focus is on the morphological similari-
ties and dissimilarities between Zulu and Xhosa 
and how these cross-linguistic similarities and 
dissimilarities inform the bootstrapping of a 
morphological analyser for Zulu and Xhosa. In 
particular, issues such as open versus closed 
classes, and language specific morphotactics and 
alternation rules are discussed. Special attention 
96
is given to the word root lexicons. In addition, 
the procedure for bootstrapping is broadened to 
include a guesser variant of the morphological 
analyser. 
The structure of the paper is as follows: Sec-
tion 2 gives a general overview of the morpho-
logical structure of the languages concerned. The 
modelling and implementation approach is also 
discussed. This is followed in sections 3 and 4 by 
a systematic exposition of the cross-linguistic 
dissimilarities pertaining to morphotactics and 
morphophonological alternations.  Section 5 fo-
cuses on the so-called ?open? class, which repre-
sents the word root lexicons for specifically 
nouns and verbs. The acquisition and coverage of 
these lexicons prove to be crucial for the success 
of the analysers under development. Section 6 
addresses the use of the guesser variant of the 
morphological analyser as well as the application 
of the bootstrapped morphological analyser to 
parallel test corpora. A variety of cross-linguistic 
effects is illustrated with examples from the cor-
pora. This provides novel insights into the inves-
tigation and exploitation of cross-linguistic simi-
larities and their significance for bootstrapping 
purposes.  Section 7 concerns future work and a 
conclusion. 
2 General overview 
2.1 Morphological structure 
Bantu languages are characterised by a rich ag-
glutinating morphological structure, based on 
two principles, namely the nominal classification 
system, and the concordial agreement system. 
According to the nominal classification system, 
nouns are categorised by prefixal morphemes. 
These noun prefixes have, for ease of analysis, 
been assigned numbers by scholars who have 
worked within the field of Bantu linguistics, In 
Zulu a noun such as umuntu 'person' for instance, 
consists of a noun prefix umu- followed by the 
noun stem -ntu and is classified as a class 1 
noun, while the noun isitha 'rival' consists of a 
noun prefix isi- and the noun stem -tha and is 
classified as a class 7 noun. Noun prefixes gen-
erally indicate number, with the uneven class 
numbers designating singular and the corre-
sponding even class numbers designating plural. 
The plural forms of the above examples would 
therefore respectively be the class 2 noun abantu 
'persons' and the class 8 noun izitha 'rivals'. We 
follow Meinhof's (1932:48) numbering system 
which distinguishes between 23 noun prefixes 
altogether in the various Bantu languages. 
     The concordial agreement system is signifi-
cant in the Bantu languages because it forms the 
backbone of the whole sentence structure. Con-
cordial agreement is brought about by the vari-
ous noun classes in the sense that their prefixes 
link the noun to other words in the sentence. This 
linking is manifested by a concordial morpheme 
that is derived from the noun prefix, and usually 
bears a close resemblance to the noun prefix, as 
illustrated in the following example: 
Izitsha lezi ezine zephukile 
?These four plates are broken? 
This concordial agreement system governs 
grammatical correlation in verbs, adjectives, pos-
sessives, pronouns, and so forth. Bantu lan-
guages are predominantly agglutinating and po-
lymorphematic in nature, with affixes attached to 
the root or core of the word.  
The morphological make-up of the verb is 
considerably more complex than that of the 
noun. A number of slots, both preceding and fol-
lowing the verb root may contain numerous 
morphemes with functions such as derivations, 
inflection for tense-aspect and marking of nomi-
nal arguments. Examples are cross-reference of 
the subject and object by means of class- (or per-
son-/number-)specific object markers, locative 
affixes, morphemes distinguishing verb forms in 
clause-final and non-final position, negation etc. 
Despite the complexities of these domains, 
they are comparable across language boundaries, 
specifically Nguni language boundaries, with a 
degree of formal similarity that lends itself to 
exploitation for bootstrapping purposes. 
2.2 Modelling and Implementation 
In the modelling and implementation of the mor-
phological structure a finite-state approach is 
followed. The suitability of finite-state ap-
proaches to computational morphology is well 
known and has resulted in numerous software 
toolkits and development environments for this 
purpose (cf. Koskenniemi, 1997 and Karttunen, 
2001). Yli-Jyr? (2005) discusses the importance 
of a finite-state morphology toolkit for lesser-
studies languages. He maintains that ?[a]lthough 
some lexicons and morphological grammars can 
be learned automatically from texts ... fully 
automatic or unsupervised methods are not suffi-
cient. This is due to two reasons. First, the 
amount of freely available corpora is limited for 
many of the less studied languages. Second, 
many of the less studied languages have rich 
morphologies that are difficult to learn accurately 
with unsupervised methods?. 
97
The Xerox finite-state tools (Beesley and 
Karttunen, 2003) as one of the preferred toolkits 
for modelling and implementing natural lan-
guage morphology, is used in this work. 
The morphological challenges in computa-
tional morphological analysis comprise the mod-
elling of two general linguistic components, 
namely morphotactics (word formation rules) as 
well as morphophonological alternations.  
Ideally, the morphotactics component should 
include all and only word roots in the language, 
all and only the affixes for all parts-of-speech 
(word categories) as well as a complete descrip-
tion of the valid combinations and orders of these 
morphemes for forming all and only the words of 
the language concerned. Moreover, the morpho-
phonological alternations rules should constitute 
all known sound changes that occur at morpheme 
boundaries. The combination of these two com-
ponents constitutes an accurate model of the 
morphology of the language(s) under considera-
tion.  
The Xerox lexicon compiler, lexc, is well-
suited to capturing the morphotactics of Zulu. A 
lexc script, consisting of cascades of so-called 
continuation classes (of morpheme lexicons) rep-
resenting the (concatenative) morpheme se-
quencing, is compiled into a finite-state network. 
The Xerox regular expression language, xfst, 
provides an extended regular expression calculus 
with sophisticated Replace Rules for describing 
the morphophonological alternations rules of 
Zulu. The xfst script is also compiled into a fi-
nite-state network. These networks are finally 
combined by means of the operation of composi-
tion into a so-called Lexical Transducer that con-
stitutes the morphological analyser and contains 
all the morphological information of Zulu, in-
cluding derivation, inflection, alternation and 
compounding. Pretorius and Bosch (2002) ad-
dress the suitability of this approach to Zulu 
morphology and illustrate it by means of exam-
ples of lexc and xfst scripts for modelling the 
Zulu noun.  
A detailed exposition of the design and im-
plementation of ZulMorph may be found in Pre-
torius and Bosch (2003). In addition to consider-
ing both the accurate modelling of the morpho-
tactics and the morphophonological alternation 
rules, they also address implementation and other 
issues that need to be resolved in order to pro-
duce a useful software artefact for automated 
morphological analysis. Issues of implementa-
tion include a justification for the finite-state ap-
proach followed, designing for accuracy and cor-
rectness and decisions regarding the analyser's 
interface with its environment and its usage.  
Particular attention is paid to the handling of 
exceptions; the modelling of separated depend-
encies by means of so-called flag-diacritics; the 
specification of lexical forms (analyses) in terms 
of morphological granularity and feature infor-
mation; the choice of an associated and appropri-
ate morphological tag set and also the position-
ing of these tags in relation to the morphemes 
they are associated with in the morphological 
analyses (lexical forms) that are rendered. 
The components of ZulMorph, including its 
scope in terms of word categories and their mor-
phological structure, are summarised in Table 1 
while its lexical coverage as reflected by the 
number of different noun stems, verb roots etc. is 
discussed in section 5.  
The bootstrapping of ZulMorph to provide 
for Xhosa as well requires a careful investigation 
of the cross-linguistic similarities and dissimi-
larities and how they are best modelled and im-
plemented. This aspect will be discussed in more 
detail in the following section. 
 
Morphotactics 
(lexc)  
Affixes for 
all parts-of-
speech (e.g. 
subject & 
object con-
cords, noun 
class pre-
fixes, verb 
extensions 
etc.)  
Word roots 
(e.g. nouns, 
verbs, rela-
tives, ideo-
phones)  
Rules for 
legal combi-
nations and 
orders of 
morphemes 
(e.g. u-ya-
ngi-thand-a 
and not *ya-
u-a-thand-
ngi)  
Morpho-
phonological 
alternations    
(xfst)  
Rules that determine the form of each mor-
pheme  
(e.g. ku-lob-w-a > ku-lotsh-w-a, u-mu-lomo > 
u-m-lomo)  
Table 1: Zulu Morphological Analyser Compo-
nents 
3 Morphotactics 
In word formation we distinguish between so-
called closed and open classes. The open class 
accepts the addition of new items by means of 
processes such as borrowing, coining, com-
pounding and derivation. In the context of this 
paper, the open class represents word roots in-
cluding verb roots and noun stems. The closed 
class represents affixes that model the fixed 
morphological structure of words, as well as 
items such as conjunctions, pronouns etc. Typi-
cally no new items can be added to the closed 
class (Fromkin et al, 2003:74).  
Since our point of departure is ZulMorph, we 
focus on Xhosa affixes that differ from their Zulu 
98
counterparts. A few examples are given in Table 
2. 
Certain areas in the Xhosa grammar need to be 
modelled independently and then built into the
Morpheme Zulu Xhosa 
Noun Class Prefixes 
Class 1 and 3 um(u)- 
 
 
full form umu- with monosyllabic noun stems, 
shortened form with polysyllabic noun stems: 
umu-ntu, um-fana 
um- with all noun stems: um-ntu, um-fana 
Class 2a o-: o-baba oo-: oo-bawo 
Class 9 
 
in- with all noun stems: 
in-nyama  
i- with noun stems beginning with h, i, m, n, 
ny: i-hambo  
 
Class 10 izin- with monosyllabic and polysyllabic stems.  
izin-ja;  izin-dlebe 
iin- with polysyllabic stems: 
 iin-dlebe 
Contracted subject concords (future tense). Examples: 
1ps 
2ps, Class 1 & 3 
Class 4 & 9 
ngo- 
wo- 
yo- 
ndo- 
uyo- 
iyo- 
Object concords 
1ps ngi- ndi- 
 
Absolute pronouns 
1ps 
Class 15 
mina  
khona  
mna 
kona 
Demonstrative Pronouns: Three positional types of the demonstrative pronouns are listed separately for each language. Examples: 
 
Class 1 
Class 5 
Pos. 1 lo; Pos. 2 lowo; Pos. 3 lowaya 
Pos. 1 leli; Pos. 2 lelo; Pos. 3 leliya 
Pos. 1 lo; Pos. 2 lowo/loo; Pos. 3 lowa 
Pos. 1 eli; Pos. 2 elo; Pos. 3 eliya 
Adjective basic prefixes 
1ps 
2ps 
Class1& 3 
Class 8 
ngim(u-) 
umu- 
mu- 
zin- 
nim- 
um- 
m- 
zi- 
Locative demonstrative copulatives : Three positional types of the so-called locative demonstrative copulatives differ considerably for 
Zulu and Xhosa and are therefore listed separately for each language. Examples: 
Class 1 
Class 5 
 
Pos. 1 nangu; Pos. 2 nango; Pos. 3 nanguya 
Pos. 1 nanti; Pos. 2 nanto; Pos. 3 nantiya 
 
Pos. 1 nanku; Pos. 2 nanko; Pos. 3 nankuya 
Pos. 1 nali; Pos. 2 nalo; Pos. 3 naliya 
 
Copulatives : Formation of copulatives derived from Xhosa nouns differs considerably from Zulu. This construction is class dependent 
in Xhosa and is modelled differently to its Zulu counterpart. Examples: 
 yi- combines with noun prefixes i-:  
yi-indoda > yindoda 
ngu- combines with noun prefixes u-, o-, a:  
ngu-umuntu > ngumuntu 
ngu-obaba > ngobaba 
ngu-amakati > ngamakati 
wu combines with noun prefixes u-, o-:   
wu-muntu > wumuntu, 
wu-obaba > wobaba 
 
ngu- combines with classes 1, 1a, 2, 2a, 3 & 
6, e.g. ngu-umntu > ngumntu 
yi- combines with classes 4 imi- and 9 in-, 
e.g. 
yi-imithi > yimithi 
li- combines with class 5 i(li)-:  
li-ihashe > lihashe 
si- combines with class 7 isi-:  
si-isitya > sisitya 
etc. 
 
Table 2. Examples of variations in Zulu and Xhosa ?closed? morpheme information 
 
analyser, for instance the formation of the so-
called temporal form that does not occur in Zulu. 
The temporal form is an indication of when an 
action takes place or when a process is carried 
out, and has a present or past tense form (Louw, 
et al, 1984:163). The simple form consists of a 
subject concord plus -a- followed by the verb 
stem in the infinitive, the preprefix of which has 
been elided, for example si-a-uku-buya > sa-
kubuya ?when we return?. In terms of the word 
formation rules this means that an additional 
Xhosa specific morpheme lexicon (continuation 
class) needs to be included. To facilitate accurate 
modelling appropriate constraints also need to be 
formulated. 
The bootstrapping process is iterative and new 
information regarding dissimilar morphological 
constructions is incorporated systematically in 
99
the morphotactics component. Similarly, rules 
are adapted in a systematic manner. The process 
also inherently relies on similarities between the 
languages, and therefore the challenge is to 
model the dissimilarities accurately. The care-
fully conceptualised and appropriately structured 
(lexc) continuation classes embodying the Zulu 
morphotactics provide a suitable framework for 
including all the closed class dissimilarities dis-
cussed above.  
4 Morphophonological alternations 
Differences in morphophonological alternations 
between Zulu and Xhosa are exemplified in Ta-
ble 3. Some occur in noun class prefixes of class 
10 and associated constructions, such as prefix-
ing of adverbial morphemes (na-, nga-, etc.). 
Others are found in instances of palatalisation, ?a 
sound change whereby a bilabial sound in pas-
sive formation, locativisation and diminutive 
formation is replaced by a palatal sound? (Poulos 
and Msimang, 1998:531).  
 
Zulu Xhosa 
Class 10 class prefix izin- occurs before monosyllabic as well 
as polysyllabic stems, e.g. izinja, izindlebe 
Adverb prefix na + i > ne, e.g. nezindlebe (na-izin-ndlebe) 
Class 10 class prefix izin- changes to iin- before polysyllabic stems, 
e.g. izinja, iindlebe 
Adverb prefix na + ii > nee; e.g. neendlebe (na-iin-ndlebe) 
Palatalisation with passive, diminutive & locative formation: 
 b   > tsh   
-hlab-w-a > -hlatsh-w-a, intaba-ana > intatsh-ana,  
indaba > entdatsheni 
ph > sh   
-boph-w-a > -bosh-w-a, iphaphu-ana > iphash-ana 
iphaphu > ephasheni 
Palatalisation with passive, diminutive & locative formation: 
b > ty                    
-hlab-w-a > -hlaty-w-a, intaba-ana > intaty-a na 
ihlobo > ehlotyeni 
ph > tsh   
?boph-w-a  > -botsh-w-a, iphaphu-ana > iphatsh-ana, 
usapho > elusatsheni 
Table 3. Examples of variations in Zulu and Xhosa morphophonology 
As before, the Zulu alternations are assumed 
to apply to Xhosa unless otherwise modelled. 
Regarding language-specific alternations special 
care is taken to ensure that the rules fire only in 
the desired contexts and order. For example, 
Xhosa-specific sound changes should not fire 
between Zulu-specific morphemes, and vice 
versa. This applies, for instance, to the vowel 
combination ii, which does not occur in Zulu. 
While the general rule ii > i holds for Zulu, the 
vowel combination ii needs to be preserved in 
Xhosa.  
5 The word root lexicons 
Compiling sufficiently extensive and complete 
word root lexicons (i.e. populating the ?open? 
word classes) is a major challenge, particularly 
for lesser-resourced languages (Yli-Jyr?, 
2005:2). A pragmatic approach of harvesting 
roots from all readily available sources is fol-
lowed. The Zulu lexicon is based on an extensive 
word list dating back to the mid 1950s (cf. Doke 
and Vilakazi, 1964), but significant improve-
ments and additions are regularly made. At pre-
sent the Zulu word roots include noun stems with 
class information (15 759), verb roots (7 567), 
relative stems (406), adjective stems (48), ideo-
phones (1 360), conjunctions (176). Noun stems 
with class information (4 959) and verb roots (5 
984) for the Xhosa lexicon were extracted from 
various recent prototype paper dictionaries 
whereas relative stems (27), adjective stems (17), 
ideophones (30) and conjunctions (28) were only 
included as representative samples at this stage.  
The most obvious difference between the two 
word root lexicons is the sparse coverage of 
nouns for Xhosa. A typical shortcoming in the 
current Xhosa lexicon is limited class informa-
tion for noun stems.  
Observations are firstly occurrences of shared 
noun stems (mainly loan words) but different 
class information, typically class 5/6 for Zulu 
versus class 9/10 for Xhosa, for example  
?box? -bhokisi (Xhosa 9/10; Zulu 5/6) 
?duster?  -dasta (Xhosa 9/10; Zulu 5/6) 
?pinafore?  -fasikoti (Xhosa 9/10; Zulu 5/6). 
It should be noted that although a Xhosa noun 
stem may be identical to its Zulu counterpart, 
analysis is not possible if the class prefix differs 
from the specified Zulu class prefix + noun stem 
combination in the morphotactics component of 
the analyser.  
A second observation is identical noun stems 
with correct class information, valid for both 
languages, but so far only appearing in the Xhosa 
lexicon, for example 
?number? -namba (Xhosa and Zulu 9/10) 
?dice?-dayisi (Xhosa and Zulu 5/6). 
100
This phenomenon occurs mainly with bor-
rowed nouns that are more prevalent in the 
Xhosa lexicon than in the more outdated Zulu 
lexicon.  
A closer look at the contents of the lexicons 
reveals that the two languages have the following 
in common: 1027 noun stems with corresponding 
class information, 1722 verb roots, 20 relative 
stems, 11 adjective stems, 10 ideophones and 9 
conjunctions.  
6 A computational approach to cross-
linguistic similarity 
This section discusses the extension of the boot-
strapping procedure of the morphological ana-
lyser to include the use of the guesser variant of 
the morphological analyser. In addition the ap-
plication of the bootstrapped morphological ana-
lyser to parallel test corpora is addressed. A vari-
ety of cross-linguistic effects is illustrated with 
examples from the corpora.  
Even in languages where extensive word root 
lexicons are available, new word roots may occur 
from time to time. The Xerox toolkit makes pro-
vision for a guesser variant of the morphologi-
cal analyser that uses typical word root patterns 
for identifying potential new word roots (Beesley 
and Karttunen, 2003:444). By exploiting the 
morphotactics and morphophonological alterna-
tions of the analyser prototype, the guesser is 
able to analyse morphologically valid words of 
which the roots match the specified pattern.  
Therefore, in cases where both the Zulu and 
Xhosa word root lexicons do not contain a root, 
the guesser may facilitate the bootstrapping 
process.  
The extended bootstrapping procedure is 
schematically represented in Figure 1.  
Since the available Zulu word list represents a 
rather outdated vocabulary, it is to be expected 
that the coverage of word roots/stems from a re-
cent corpus of running Zulu text may be unsatis-
factory, due to the dynamic nature of language. 
For example the word list contains no entry of 
the loan word utoliki ?interpreter? since ?inter-
preter? is rendered only as i(li)humusha ?transla-
tor?, the traditional term derived from the verb 
stem ?humusha ?to translate, interpret?.    Provi-
sion therefore needs to be made for the constant 
inclusion of new roots/stems, be they newly 
coined, compounds or as yet unlisted foreign 
roots/stems.  
Updating and refining the lexicon requires the 
availability of current and contemporary  
Figure 1. Bootstrapping procedure 
 
language resources in the form of text cor-
pora as well as human intervention in the form 
of  expert lexicographers or linguists to deter-
mine the eligibility of such words. 
The language resources chosen to illustrate 
this point are parallel corpora in the form of the 
South African Constitution (The Constitution, 
(sa). The reason for the choice of these corpora is 
that they are easily accessible on-line, and it is 
assumed that the nature of the contents ensures 
accurate translations. 
The results of the application of the boot-
strapped morphological analyser to this corpus 
are as follows: 
Zulu Statistics 
Corpus size:   7057 types 
Analysed:    5748 types (81.45 %) 
Failures:  1309 types (18.55%) 
Failures analysed by guesser: 1239 types 
Failures not analysed by guesser: 70 types 
Xhosa Statistics 
Corpus size:  7423 types.  
Analysed:   5380 types (72.48 %) 
Failures:  2043 types (27.52%) 
Failures analysed by guesser: 1772 types 
Failures not analysed by guesser: 271 types 
The output of the combined morphological 
analyser enables a detailed investigation into 
cross-linguistic features pertaining to the mor-
phology of Zulu and Xhosa. The outcome of this 
investigation is illustrated by means of typical 
examples from the corpora. This provides novel 
nsights into the investigation and exploitation of 
101
cross-linguistic similarities and their significance 
for bootstrapping purposes, as shown in Figure 1. 
 Notational conventions include [Xh] for Xho-
sa specific morphemes, numbers indicate noun 
class information, e.g. [NPrePre9] tags the 
noun preprefix of a class 9 noun while [Rel-
Conc8] tags the relative concord of a class 8 
noun. 
Examples from the Zulu corpus: 
The analysis of the Zulu word ifomu ?form? uses 
the Xhosa noun stem ?fomu (9/10) in the Xhosa 
lexicon in the absence of the Zulu stem: 
ifomu i[NPrePre9]fomu[Xh][NStem] 
 
The analysis of the Zulu word ukutolikwa ?to 
interpret? uses the Xhosa verb root  
-tolik- in the Xhosa lexicon: 
ukutolikwa 
u[NPrePre15]ku[BPre15] 
tolik[Xh][VRoot]w[PassExt]a[VerbTerm] 
 
Examples from the Xhosa corpus: 
The analysis of the Xhosa words bephondo ?of 
the province? and esikhundleni ?in the office? use 
the Zulu noun stems ?phondo (5/6) and 
-khundleni (7/8) respectively in the Zulu lexicon: 
bephondo 
ba[PossConc14]i[NPrePre5]li[BPre5] 
phondo[NStem] 
 
bephondo 
ba[PossConc2]i[NPrePre5]li[BPre5] 
phondo[NStem] 
 
esikhundleni 
e[LocPre]i[NPrePre7]si[BPre7] 
khundla[NStem]ini[LocSuf] 
 
The analysis of the Xhosa words ekukhethweni 
?in the election? and esihlonyelweyo ?amended? 
use the Zulu verb roots ?kheth- and ?hlom- 
respectively in the Xhosa lexicon: 
ekukhethweni 
e[LocPre]u[NPrePre15]ku[BPre15] 
kheth[VRoot]w[PassExt]a[VerbTerm] 
ini[LocSuf] 
 
esihlonyelweyo 
esi[RelConc7]hlom[VRoot]el[ApplExt] 
w[PassExt]e[VerbTermPerf]yo[RelSuf] 
 
Ideophones used from the Zulu lexicon are: 
ga[Ideoph]  qho[Ideoph] 
sa[Ideoph]  tu[Ideoph] 
ya[Ideoph] 
 
Relative stems used from the Zulu lexicon are: 
mandla[RelStem] 
mdaka[RelStem] 
njalo[RelStem] 
mcimbi[RelStem] 
 
Conjunctions used from the Zulu lexicon are: 
futhi[Conj] 
ukuthi[Conj] 
 
Examples of the guesser output from the Zulu 
corpus: 
The compound noun -shayamthetho (7/8) ?legis-
lature? is not listed in the Zulu lexicon, but was 
guessed correctly:  
isishayamthetho 
i[NPrePre7]si[BPre7] 
shayamthetho-Guess[NStem] 
 
The following are two examples of borrowed 
nouns (amabhajethi ?budgets? and amakhemikali 
?chemicals?) not in the Zulu lexicon, but guessed 
correctly:  
amabhajethi 
a[NPrePre6]ma[BPre6] 
bhajethi-Guess[NStem] 
 
amakhemikali 
a[NPrePre6]ma[BPre6] 
khemikali-Guess[NStem] 
 
The borrowed verb root -rejest- ?register? is not 
listed in the Zulu lexicon, but was guessed cor-
rectly:  
ezirejestiwe 
ezi[RelConc8]rejest-Guess[VRoot] 
iw[PassExt]e[VerbTermPerf] 
 
ezi[RelConc10]rejest-Guess[VRoot] 
iw[PassExt]e[VerbTermPerf] 
 
The relatively small number of failures that 
are not analysed by the guesser and for which no 
guessed verb roots or noun stems are offered, 
simply do not match the word root patterns as 
specified for Zulu and Xhosa in the analyser pro-
totype, namely  
[C (C (C)) V]+ C (C (C)) 
for verb roots and 
[C (C (C)) V]+ C (C (C)) V 
for noun stems. The majority of such failures is 
caused by spelling errors and foreign words in 
the test corpus.  
7 Conclusion and Future Work 
In this paper we focused on two aspects of 
cross-linguistic similarity between Zulu and 
Xhosa, namely the morphological structure 
(morphotactics and alternation rules) and the 
word root lexicons.  
Regarding the morphological structure only 
differences between Zulu and Xhosa were added.  
102
Therefore, Zulu informed Xhosa in the sense that 
the systematically developed grammar for Zul-
Morph was directly available for the Xhosa ana-
lyser development, which significantly reduced 
the development time for the Xhosa prototype 
compared to that for ZulMorph. 
Special attention was also given to the so-
called ?open? class, which represents the word 
root lexicons for specifically nouns and verbs. 
The acquisition and coverage of these lexicons 
proved to be crucial for the success of the ana-
lysers under development. Since we were fortu-
nate in having access to word root lexicons for 
both Zulu and Xhosa we included what was 
available in such a way that word roots could be 
shared between the languages. Here, although to 
a lesser extent, Xhosa also informed Zulu by 
providing a current (more up to date) Xhosa lexi-
con. In addition, the guesser variant was em-
ployed in identifying possible new roots in the 
test corpora, both for Zulu and for Xhosa. 
In general it is concluded that bootstrapping 
morphological analysers for languages that ex-
hibit significant structural and lexical similarities 
may be fruitfully exploited for developing ana-
lysers for lesser-resourced languages.  
Future work includes the application of the 
approach followed in this work to the other 
Nguni languages, namely Swati and Ndebele 
(Southern and Zimbabwe); the application to lar-
ger corpora, and the subsequent construction of 
stand-alone versions. Finally, the combined ana-
lyser could also be used for (corpus-based) quan-
titative studies in cross-linguistic similarity.  
Acknowledgements 
This material is based upon work supported by 
the South African National Research Foundation 
under grant number 2053403. Any opinion, find-
ings and conclusions or recommendations ex-
pressed in this material are those of the authors 
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
National Research Foundation. 
References 
Beesley, K.R. and Karttunen, L. 2003. Finite State 
Morphology. CSLI Publications, Stanford, CA. 
Bosch, S., Pretorius, L., Podile, K. and Fleisch, A. 
2008. Experimental fast-tracking of morphological 
analysers for Nguni languages. Proceedings of the 
6th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, Marrakech, Morocco. 
ISBN 2-9517408-4-0. 
De Pauw, G. and de Schryver, G-M. 2008. Improving 
the computational morphological analysis of a 
Swahili corpus for lexicographic purposes. Lexikos 
18 (AFRILEX-reeks/series 18: 2008): 303?318. 
Doke, C.M. and Vilakazi, B.W. 1964. Zulu?English 
Dictionary. Witwatersrand University Press, Jo-
hannesburg. 
Fromkin, V., Rodman, R. and Hyams, N. 2007. An 
Introduction to Language. Thomson Heinle, Mas-
sachusetts, USA. 
Hurskainen, A. 1992. A two-level formalism for the 
analysis of Bantu morphology: an application to 
Swahili. Nordic Journal of African Studies, 
1(1):87-122. 
Koskenniemi, K. 1997. Representations and finite-
state components in natural language, in Finite-
State Language Processing E. Roche and Y. Scha-
bes (eds.), pp. 99?116. MIT Press, Boston. 
Karttunen, L. 2001. Applications of finite-state 
trransducers in natural language processing, in Im-
plementation and application of automata, S. Yu 
and A. Paun (eds.). Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, 2088:34-46. Springer, Heidelberg. 
Louw, J.A., Finlayson, R. and Satyo, S.C. 1984. 
Xhosa Guide 3 for XHA100-F. University of South 
Africa, Pretoria. 
Meinhof, C. 1932. Introduction to the phonology of 
the Bantu languages. Dietrich Reimer/Ernst 
Vohsen, Berlin. 
Poulos, G. and Msimang, C.T. 1998. A linguistic 
analysis of Zulu. Via Afrika, Pretoria. 
Pretorius, L. and Bosch, S.E. 2002. Finite state com-
putational morphology: Treatment of the Zulu 
noun. South African Computer Journal, 28:30-38.  
Pretorius, L. and Bosch, S.E. 2003.  Finite state com-
putational morphology: An analyzer prototype for 
Zulu. Machine Translation ? Special issue on fi-
nite-state language resources and language proc-
essing, 18:195-216. 
The Constitution. (sa). [O]. Available: 
http://www.concourt.gov.za/site/theconstitution/the
text.htm. Accessed on 31 January 2008. 
Yli-Jyr?, A. 2005. Toward a widely usable finite-state 
morphology workbench for less studied languages 
? Part I: Desiderata. Nordic Journal of African 
Studies, 14(4): 479 ? 491.
 
103
