Formal Semantics Of Verbs For Knowledge Inference 
 
Igor Boyko, Ph.D. 
Logical Properties Inc., Montreal, Canada 
igor_m_boyko@hotmail.com 
 
Abstract 
This short paper is focused on the formal semantic model: Universal Semantic Code 
(USC), which acquires a semantic lexicon from thesauruses and pairs it with formal 
meaning representation.  The USC model postulates: Knowledge Inference (KI) is effec-
tive only on the basis of Semantic Knowledge Representation (SKR). The USC model 
represents formalized meanings of verbs and phrasal verbs as a main component of its 
semantic classification. USC algebra defines a formula for the verb, limited set of ele-
ments, relations between them, and a natural language interpretation of the formula. 
1 Introduction 
Knowledge Inference applications development depends on natural language processing (NLP) 
components including lexical classifiers for word sense disambiguation. Word meaning classifi-
cation and word sense disambiguation techniques facilitate understanding of the terms from dif-
ferent domains.  
Numerous approaches of the lexical classification exist. A regular thesaurus defines the mean-
ing of the world but not provides its formal classification what excludes the possibility of KR 
and KI from such source. Unfortunately in this short paper we are not able to make deep analysis 
of known methods of knowledge inference in comparison with USC and therefore will talk about 
main features of the USC model. 
Functional classification of verbs based on Universal Semantic Code (Martynov, 1996, 2001) 
covers the idea of combining the thesaurus and formal representation. In the core the USC model 
considers verbs as actions and provides inference of the consequences of actions. 
2 Formalization of the Verb Classes 
The USC model has algebraic and logic roots and declares that knowledge can be represented 
and stored with semantic code, and knowledge inference can be implemented on the basis of the 
theorems and axioms operating with the semantic code.  
Every verb represents an action and every natural language statement comprises an action. 
Even a statement ?the desk? means the action: ?the desk exists?. Since USC does not make a dif-
ference between ?action? and ?verb? we consider ?verb? or ?action? as a main component of the 
world description. Every action should be surrounded with some elements. 
Potentially any action is a reaction on some stimulus where stimulus is an action too. Three-
component USC notation (X!Y) !Z means stimulus: X by means of Y affects on Z. 
The first element of the reaction is always equal to the last element of the stimulus, because 
some action was implemented with the object Z. An example of the complete USC formula is  
((X!Y)!Z)!((Z!Y)!W) or shortly ((XY)Z)((ZY)W). On the abstract level the interpreta-
tion of the formula is: ?X by means of Y affects on Z (stimulus) in a result Z by means of Y af-
fects on W (reaction)?. 
In USC the reaction part of the formula can be ?active? or ?passive?:  
((XY)Z)((ZY)W) ? ?active? formula 
((XY)Z)(Z(YW)) ? ?passive? formula with the interpretation: X by means of Y affects on Z in 
a result Z holds Y in W. 
The difference is in changing the position of the parenthesis in the right part of the formula.  
The active reaction represents an active action like: create, destroy, compress, etc. and the pas-
sive reaction represents a passive action like: exist, absent, etc.  
Each USC formula represents a class of similar actions or similar verbs. The action assigned as 
a name to the class represents all of those similar actions. The class action (CA) defines a name 
of the class and has one or minimal number of meanings. For example, the class ?fill? comprises 
a list of actions-analogues in Fig.1. Fig.2 demonstrates actions-analogues for the class ?pay?. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 1. Class ?Fill? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 2. Class ?Pay? 
 
We would like to emphasize that the action ?charge? is displaced in the both examples accord-
ing to the meaning. 
3 Interpretation of the CA 
Since each CA represents the class of the actions, we are able to formulate its interpretation for 
extracting the hidden members of the action. 
The action ?fill? has th  by means of Y fills Z into W?. T  
act  of the act  substitute tential su f 
the nstance: 
subject - w
Th
E
me
(ph
F
Th
as 
tion
Action verb: 
 Fill 
Actions-analogues: 
  Charge 
  Inflate 
  Load up 
 
Action verb:
 Pay 
Actions-analogues: 
  Charge 
  Disburse 
  Pay back 
 ive members
 action. For i
? X = 
? Y = instrumen
? Z = first objec
? W = second ob
e complete phrase is: ?
ach action of the clas
mber of the class ?fill
rasal verb) ?load up? h
or the action ?pay? the
? X = subject - c
? Y = tool - cred
? Z = object - m
e complete phrase is: ?
a member of the class
 ?pay back? has the ine interpretation ?X
ion, their roles and
orker 
t - loading arm 
t - oil 
ject - tanker 
Worker by means of the loadin
s ?fill? has the same interpr
?, the interpretation is: ?X by
as the interpretation: ?X by m
 interpretation is: ?X by mean
ustomer 
it card 
oney 
Customer by means of credit 
 ?pay? has the interpretation: 
terpretation: ?X by means of Ythem with pog arm fills oil into the
etation. So for the ac
 means of Y charges Z
eans of Y loads up Z i
s of Y pays Z?, where:
card pays money?. So 
?X by means of Y cha
 pays back Z?. hen we extract the
bject and objects o tanker?.  
tion ?charge?, as a 
 in W? and action 
n W?. 
 
the action ?charge? 
rges Z? and the ac-
4 Formal Representation of the CA 
So far we have CAs: ?fill? and ?pay? and determined their sets of variables: 
? Fill ? X
? Pay ? X
Complete fo
and the second
eral steps. For
?A worker by
or ?A worker
The operat
The left pa
the right parts
standard logic
ence of one ele
So for the 
   
?A customer 
of the credit c
Those formu
The operatio
and considered
USC is a kin
be in, to be on
?inside?, ?not i
For example a
 
  
  
 
  
 
Now we can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  considered two 
YZW 
YZ rmula of the class consists of two parts. The first part of the formula is a stimulus 
 part is a reaction on the stimulus. A procedure of reading of the formula has sev-
 instance, the formula and interpretation for the action ?fill?: 
 ((X!Y)!Z)!(Z!(Y!W)) 
 means of the loading arm affects oil in a result oil being kept within the tanker? 
 fills oil into the tanker by the loading arm?. 
ion of implication [!] demonstrates the direction of the action.  
rt of all USC formula: ((X!Y)!Z) is identical as a stimulus for all actions, but 
 are different. The operation of implication between two parts of the formula is a 
al implication. But implication inside of the parts of the formula is a directed influ-
ment onto another. 
CA ?pay? the formula and interpretation are: 
((X!Y)!Z)!(Z!(Z!Y?)) 
by means of the credit card affects the money in a result the money being kept out 
ard? or ?A customer pays the money by the credit card?. 
las for ?fill? and ?pay? differ in the right part. 
n [ ? ] is a pointer on the location of one object with respect to another in space 
 as a negation to the location. 
d of a spatial geometry. All objects in the world can have one of three locations: to 
 the cover, to be out of the cover and notations like: W, W?, W?? mean accordingly  
nside? that is equal to ?superficially?, ?not superficially? that is equal to ?outside?. 
ctions: ?compress? is in, ?join? is on, ?disperse? is out and they are active.  
    W = inside   
    W?= not in ! superficially 
     W?? = not superficially ! outside  
 
Fig.3 Location of the objects in space 
 
 represent action as four-element structure (Fig.4): 
Fig.4. Structure of the action 
Class action: 
  Fill 
     Interpretation: 
X by means of Y fills Z 
into W 
Actions-analogs: 
Charge 
Inflate 
Load up 
        Formula: 
((X!Y)!Z)!(Z!(Y!W)) 
5 USC Axioms 
KI with the USC model is based on the axioms of the USC algebra. Relations between USC 
formulas can be represented as an oriented graph of the axioms. The nodes of the graph are rep-
resented by the USC formulas and the arcs are the USC axioms. Since a solution of an intellec-
tual problem is a kind of inference the solution can be obtained as a route of arcs. The algorithm 
of the problem solving is based on the successive drawing of the route from the target situation 
to the initial one or vice versa. 
The axioms of the USC algebra determine the rules of conversion from one formula into an-
other. For example, the axiom of transposition determines changing of parenthesis in the right 
part of the formula: 
 
((XY)Z)((ZW)Z??) " ((XY)Z)(Z(WZ??)) == if ?create? " then ?exist? 
 
In the axiom of diffusion the right part of the formula can be converted by replacing the vari-
able in the first or second position into the second or third position (Fig.5). With CAs in the posi-
tions of the formulas we receive the consequences of the actions in Fig.6. 
 
((ZW)Y)             ((ZY)W)) 
 
 
 
((ZW)W) (ZW)Z)       ((ZY)Z)    ((ZY)Y)) 
 
   
 
((ZZ)W)               ((ZZ)Z)) (ZZ)Y)) 
 
 
Fig 5. Axiom of diffusion 
 
 
embed     extract  
 
 
 
connect      prevent implement     disconnect  
 
   
 
   fill         move            withdraw 
 
 
Fig 6. Substitution with CAs 
 
The arrows between formulas determine the direction of the inference from the action to the 
action. The nodes of the both graphs show antonymic dependence of the class names, like: ?em-
bed? ? ?extract? or ?connect? ? ?disconnect?. 
A set of the USC axioms consists of two parts (Martynov, 2001): 
a) Four axioms of generation defining sets of variables and their positions in the formula 
b) Four axioms of transformation defining rules of converting one formula into another 
The axioms define the consequence of the actions cannot be arbitrary. 
So, the formal part of the USC algebra has been determined as A = < M, !, ? >, where M is a 
set of elements, ! is a binary-non-commutative and non-associative operation on the given set 
(the operation of implication), [?] is a unary operation on the given set (the operation of nega-
tion). It strictly corresponds to Lukasiewicz variant of algebra  (Lukasiewicz, 1958). 
6 Semantic Knowledge Inference with USC 
To start knowledge inference with USC we should ask: What are we going to infer? Since USC 
operates with the actions we will calculate the consequences of the actions because each action 
has a precedent action or a cause and each action is a cause for a consequent action: 
 (precedent  action ! current action! consequent action) == (precedent  verb ! current verb! 
consequent verb). 
As an example we will consider a process of cooking liquid according to the description (Bon-
nisone, 1985): ?The coffee machine?s container comprises cold water and heating elements. The 
heating elements heat the water in a result the water steam is lifting to the top of the container 
where grain coffee is displaced. The steam is condensing in the top cold part of the container 
then percolates through grain coffee and drops into the cap?. 
According to the goal the final result is ?cooked coffee?. Extraction of the actions from the de-
scription gives us a consequence of the actions: heat ! lift ! condense ! percolate ! drop?.  
Substitution of the actions with the USC formulas gives a consequence of the formulas: 
(ZY)Y? ! (ZY)Y?? ! (ZW)Y? ! (ZY)W?? ! Z(YZ??). 
Using the graph of the USC axiomatic action relations we are able to verify correctness of the 
formulas order. We will start the analysis from the last formula Z(YZ). According to the axioms 
this formula cannot be derived from the (ZY)W. To derive it one intermediate formula should be 
introduced: (ZY)W?? ! Z(YW??) ! Z(YZ??). This inference extends the final stage of the proc-
ess and corresponds to the USC thesaurus: percolate ! cook ! drop. Such inference looks logi-
cally correct because cooked coffee is a result of percolation and only then cooked coffee drops 
down. 
On the next step we consider a relation between (ZW)Y? and (ZY)W??. According to the axi-
oms the next inference between two formulas should be implemented:  
     (ZW)Y? ! (ZY)W?  ! (ZY)W?? 
or   condense !   liquefy ! percolate. 
If we combine two steps of the inference together then receive the consequence:  
    (ZW)Y?  ! (ZY)W?  ! (ZY)W?? ! Z(YW??) ! Z(YZ??)  
or   condense ! liquefy    ! percolate !   cook     !    drop. 
The next step of verification for (ZY)Y?? ! (ZW)Y? shows a necessity to introduce an inter-
mediate formula: 
   (ZY)Y??! (ZW)Y?? ! (ZW)Y?  
or      lift     !     cool     ! condense. 
The final step of verification shows explicit axiomatic relation (ZY)Y? ! (ZY)Y??.  
In a result we have the consequence of the actions:  
  (ZY)Y? ! (ZY)Y??! (ZW)Y?? ! (ZW)Y? ! (ZY)W?  ! (ZY)W?? ! Z(YW??) ! Z(YZ??) 
or   heat     !      lift     !   cool      ! condense ! liquefy    ! percolate !   cook     !    drop. 
Now we are able to reconstruct the description of the whole process in the extended and cor-
rected form: ?The coffee machine?s container comprises cold water and heating elements. The 
heating elements heat the water in a result the water steam is lifting to the top of the container 
where grain coffee is displaced. Oh the top the steam is cooling and condensing on the grain cof-
fee. As a result the grain coffee is liquefying and liquid is percolating through. Percolated liquid 
is a liquid coffee which drops into the cap?. 
The example includes the inference with axioms presented and not presented in this short arti-
cle but all set of rules, axioms and an example of the USC thesaurus could be seen in the book of 
Martynov V., 2001. 
The model was successfully applied for the inventive problems solving (Boyko, 2001) where 
an inventive solution is a consequence of the actions (technological operations) related through 
the USC axioms. Besides, the USC inference using the USC thesaurus and axioms can be ap-
plied not only for the technical domain but also for SKI in physical, chemical, biological, infor-
mational, and other domains with a condition of having specialized dictionaries coordinated with 
the USC thesaurus. 
7 Conclusion 
The USC model unites several components including: formal representation of the actions, 
natural language interpretation, visualization of location of the elements in space, and axioms of 
inference. The latest published version of the USC action classifier comprises 96 classes divided 
on two main parts: 48 physical and 48 informational classes (Martynov, 2001). In the article we 
were able to analyze only the part with physical classes. 
Informational classes include actions like ?forget?, ?understand?, ?offend?, ?order? etc. Axio-
matic relations between them are similar to axiomatic relations for physical actions represented 
in the article with some restrictions. 
All classes relatively paired by the opposite or antonymic principle: create/destroy, lift/low, 
push/pull, remember/forget, love/hate, etc. ?Relatively paired? means the opposite actions can be 
deduced by axioms and they are located on the same level in the classification table. The whole 
set of actions comprises 5200 entities. Since 2001 year the number of the classes has not been 
changed but the names of the classes in some positions has been verified and reconsidered. 
Axiomatic structure has been changed slightly. 
Formal representation of the actions as an intermediate code in ?human-computer? interface is 
the essential property of USC. The USC formulas have been used to represent not only verbs and 
phrasal verbs, but also to represent deverbal nouns and adjectives for development of the univer-
sal principles of machine translation (Boyko, 2002). The USC model can be adjusted to any 
natural language. 
In general the models of formal semantic coding for knowledge inference is a new area of ma-
chine learning that has been applied almost exclusively to classification tasks. Most experiments 
in corpus-based natural language processing present results for some subtasks and there are few 
results that can be successfully integrated to build a complete NLP system.  
References 
 
Boyko, I. 2001. Computer Semantic Search of Inventive Solutions. TRIZ Journal. USA. March. 
 http://www.triz-journal.com/archives/2001/03/d/ 
Boyko I. 2002. Terminological Abstractions for Terminology Classification. 6th International 
Conference Terminology and Knowledge Engineering. Nancy, France.  http://www.sempl.net  
Bonnisone P.P., Valavanis K.P., A Comparative Study of Different Approaches to Qualitative 
Physics Theories. Proceedings of the Second Conference Artificial Intelligence Applications 
(CAIA-85), Miami Beach, 1985. 
Lukasiewicz J. 1958. Elementy Logiki Matematysznej. Warszawa. 
Martynov V. 1996. USC Calculus of Class Word and Class Ideas. Invention Machine Pro-
ject?96. Cambridge, MA. http://www.sempl.net 
Martynov V. 2001. Foundations of semantic coding. Summary. European Humanity University. 
Minsk. http://www.sempl.net 
