Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Building and Using Comparable Corpora, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 64?67,
Suntec, Singapore, 6 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Toward Categorization of Sign Language Corpora 
 
J?r?mie Segouat 
LIMSI-CNRS / Orsay, France  
WebSourd / Toulouse, France 
jeremie.segouat@limsi.fr 
Annelies Braffort 
LIMSI-CNRS / Orsay, France 
 
annelies.braffort@limsi.fr 
 
  
 
Abstract 
This paper addresses the notion of parallel, 
noisy parallel and comparable corpora in the 
sign language research field. As it is quite a 
new field, the categorization of sign language 
corpora is not well established, and does not 
rely on a straightforward basis. Nevertheless, 
several kinds of corpora are now available 
and could raise interesting issues, provided 
that adapted tools and techniques are devel-
oped.  
1 Introduction 
Sign Language (SL) is a visual-gestural lan-
guage, using the whole upper body articulators 
(chest, arms, hands, head, face, and gaze) in a 
simultaneous way. Signs (in some way, equiva-
lent to words in vocal languages) are articulated 
in the signing space located in front of the signer. 
This is a natural language, with its own linguistic 
structures and specificities, used by deaf people 
to communicate in everyday life. It can be consi-
dered that there is one SL for each country, as for 
vocal languages. One particularity is that there is 
no written form of SL (Garcia, 2006): corpora 
take the form of videos, thus specific design and 
analysis methods have to be used. Therefore, 
NLP and corpus linguistics definitions may have 
to be adapted to this research field. 
1.1 Brief History of Sign Language Corpo-
ra 
Research in SL has begun with the creation of 
notation systems. These systems aim to describe 
in a written form how SL could be performed. 
B?bian (1825), a French teacher, wrote a book 
where he proposed a description of the French 
Sign Language (LSF) using drawings. This de-
scription took into account facial expressions and 
manual gestures. A major study was conducted 
by Stokoe (1960) on American SL. The aim was 
also to describe SL, but this time only focused on 
manual gestures. These studies were based upon 
live analyses: no video corpus was created. The 
researchers had to watch how signers were per-
forming SL, and then write down or draw what 
they were observing. 
In the 1980s, Cuxac (1996) created one of the 
first video SL corpora for linguistic studies. 
From the 1990s until now, video SL corpora 
have been created both to be used in linguistic 
studies, as listed by Brugman (2003), and for 
gathering lexicons to create dictionaries1. A few 
years ago, some video SL corpora were designed 
to serve as the basis for NLP and Image 
Processing (Neidle, 2000).  
1.2 Definitions 
Fung (2004) distinguishes four kinds of corpora: 
parallel (?a sentence-aligned corpus containing 
bilingual translations of the same document?), 
noisy parallel (?contain non-aligned sentences 
that are nevertheless mostly bilingual translations 
of the same document?), comparable (?contain 
non-sentence-aligned, non-translated bilingual 
documents that are topic-aligned?), and very-
non-parallel (?contains far more disparate, very-
non-parallel bilingual documents that could ei-
ther be on the same topic (in-topic) or not (off-
topic)?). If these definitions are still under dis-
cussion in the NLP community, there is no such 
discussion in the community which studies SLs. 
Would it be possible to apply such definitions to 
Sign Languages corpora? 
Many corpora are mere dictionaries2, i.e. they 
only contain isolated signs and no utterances, just 
signs, but could be considered as very basic pa-
rallel SL corpora. As far as we know, there exists 
very few noisy parallel SL corpora (see section 
2.2), and very few comparable SL corpora (Bun-
geroth 2008, ECHO project3).  
                                                 
1
 http://www.spreadthesign.com/country/gb/ 
2
 http://www.limsi.fr/Scientifique/iles/Theme5/corpus 
3
 http://www.let.ru.nl/sign-lang/echo/ 
64
Because not enough data can be found on the 
way these corpora have been built and the way 
they are used, it seems difficult to discuss wheth-
er Fung?s definitions apply to them. Thus, we 
present in this paper the corpora we have built 
(section 2) and explain why they could be consi-
dered as parallel, noisy parallel or comparable. 
Section 3 discusses the use of NLP processes for 
SL corpora analysis, and section 4 presents pros-
pects on existing or possible SL corpora. 
2 LIMSI?s Sign Language Corpora 
2.1 Parallel Corpora 
We are currently building a French Sign Lan-
guage (LSF)-French dictionary (Segouat 2008) 
that will be available on the Web. We will pro-
vide not only French and LSF translations, but 
also linguistic descriptions of signs, and a func-
tionality to search for signs from their visual as-
pects or their linguistic descriptions. This is a 
mere parallel corpus that will be using to analyze 
the variety of LSF in France (according to where 
people live, where they have grown, where they 
learned LSF, etc.). 
We have recently built a corpus related to the 
railway information domain (Segouat, 2009). 
The starting point is written French sentences 
that exactly correspond to the vocal announce-
ments made in railways stations. The goal is to 
provide information in LSF as it is provided vo-
cally: by coarticulating pieces of utterances. 
Written French sentences were translated into 
LSF and filmed, in order to study coarticulation 
in LSF. We use this corpus to analyze how signs 
are modified according to their context. 
We participate in the DictaSign European 
project (Efthimiou, 2009) that aims at gathering 
parallel SL corpora from four countries (Greece, 
England, Germany, and France). One of its pur-
poses is to study translations between different 
sign languages (SLs) of these four countries. The 
welcome page of the website4 includes presenta-
tions of the project in the four different SLs that 
are each direct translations of the corresponding 
written texts. As it is a starting project, this cor-
pus has not yet been studied nor considered from 
a comparability point of view. 
2.2 Noisy Parallel Corpora 
We have taken part in the creation of the LS-
COLIN corpus (Cuxac, 2001). The aim of this 
project was to design a corpus that could be used 
                                                 
4
 http://www.dictasign.eu 
by linguists and computer scientists. The metho-
dology was the following: each deaf signer (i.e. a 
person who performs SL) was explained the pro-
tocol. The person had to perform several kinds of 
stories, on several given themes or elicited by 
using pictures. For the picture based story, the 
deaf signer was shown six pictures that draw a 
line for the story, and then expressed the story in 
LSF. This corpus could be considered as a noisy 
parallel one, because the LSF version is a trans-
lation of the pictures with addition of details. The 
linguists have created a noisy parallel version of 
some parts of LS-COLIN, by providing a tran-
scription with glosses (sign to word translation, 
without taking into consideration the grammati-
cal structure involved: thus there is a lack of in-
formation). All the annotations were made in 
French text, and were used to analyze the gram-
matical structure of LSF. 
We have participated to the WebSi project 
(Martin, 2009), which aims at evaluating whether 
common representations could be designed for 
gestures performed by speaking and signing per-
sons, allowing bilingual applications to be devel-
oped. The first step was a study dedicated to the 
comparison of deictic gestures, both with multi-
modal-French and LSF utterances. The corpus 
consists of answers, by a deaf and a hearing per-
son, to eleven questions eliciting responses with 
deictic gestures of various kinds. A French/LSF 
interpreter formulated the questions so that both 
subjects were in the closest possible interaction 
conditions. The observed productions were in-
deed very different. In the deaf person?s answers, 
a more complex structure was observed in deic-
tics, because the deictic function is incorporated 
into the lexical signs, forming what is called in-
dicating signs. However, common global aspects 
were observed in both types of productions, 
which are all constituted by pointing using gaze 
and manual gestures organized with a given tem-
poral structure. 
2.3 Comparable corpora 
In the LS-COLIN corpus, each deaf signer had to 
perform a story on several given themes, for ex-
ample September 11 tragic events. This can be 
considered as a synchronous comparable corpus 
because each signer expressed his own version of 
the same event. The picture-based stories may 
also be considered as comparable corpora, be-
cause deaf signers were asked to perform the sto-
ry twice: at the beginning and at the end of the 
recording. Thus it is the same topic, and the two 
versions are not translations of one another; but 
65
we are not certain that it can be considered as 
?non-sentence-aligned? because they both follow 
picture order. Computer scientists have used LS-
COLIN from a comparability point of view, to 
analyze the visual modality in LSF: they studied 
torso (Segouat, 2006) and facial (Ch?telat-Pel?, 
2008) movements. These studies were made on 
same-topic stories performed by different deaf 
signers. While these studies did consider the 
comparability of the corpus, they were not fo-
cused on that aspect. Thanks to these studies, we 
may observe differences in sign performances 
among deaf signers, from crossed linguistics and 
computer science perspectives. 
3 Computations on Sign Language 
Corpora 
The computations in use for written data cannot 
be used directly for video SL corpora. Nowadays 
though, a way to study SL corpora is to annotate 
them. Annotations are mainly in written form, 
thus one might think of applying existing NLP 
methods to the resulting ?texts?. But would the 
conclusions be relevant enough? A bias is that 
annotations do not exactly represent SL utter-
ances. Annotations can be made with glosses or 
complete translations but these written data can-
not describe in an efficient way typical SL prop-
erties such as simultaneity, spatial organization, 
non-manual features, etc. 
In our opinion, it would thus be difficult to 
apply the computations used on written compa-
rable corpora (Fung, 2004; Morin, 2006; 
Del?ger, 2008) or on parallel corpora to compa-
rable or parallel SL corpora. 
Some studies currently focus on graphical an-
notations, or use image processing to analyze 
video SL corpora (Bungeroth, 2008). It is a first 
step towards an analysis without any written text 
processing. Suitable tools to deal with this kind 
of annotations still have to be set up. 
4 Promising Sign Language Corpora 
4.1 Existing Corpora 
The Dicta-Sign project already provides a qua-
drilingual corpus: the website contains four ver-
sions of the same presentation in four different 
sign languages. An analysis of this corpus would 
be interesting, because all SL videos were made 
from the English text. The British SL, and also 
the other texts in French, Greek, and German 
were obtained from the English written source. 
Then the corresponding SL videos in LSF, Greek 
SL, and German SL were translated from the 
texts in written French, Greek, and German. This 
corpus is therefore parallel, although probably 
noisy because of the double written-to-written 
then written-to-SL translation process. Compar-
ing these videos would allow us to notice 
changes in the translations between SLs, using 
knowledge from the written-text translation field 
of research. 
The corpus dealing with information in French 
railway stations is a bilingual parallel corpus. 
Other corpora are going to be designed and used 
in projects related to bus stations, airports, etc. 
Therefore we will have interesting parallel 
(French-LSF) and comparable (same topic) about 
transportation systems, to study.  
4.2 Other Possible Corpora 
The WebSourd Company?s website 5  provides 
everyday news translations in LSF, displaying 
both the text that has been translated and the vid-
eo in LSF. Each year, all videos are archived on 
a DVD. WebSourd is, as far as we know, the on-
ly company that provides everyday information 
in LSF. Collecting other sources for the same 
types of information would yield an interesting 
synchronous comparable corpus. 
In SL we distinguish ?translation? from ?inter-
pretation?. Both could be performed either by 
hearing persons from vocal languages to SLs, 
and vice and versa, or by deaf persons from SLs 
to SLs. A translation is done with significant 
time taken for preparing the work. It looks more 
like a ?written? form of language, thus such 
translations can create parallel corpora. Interpre-
tation is done live, and often without any prepa-
ration of what is going to be interpreted. It is 
more like ?oral? expression, with discourse cor-
rections, repetitions, etc., thus it is likely to pro-
duce noisy corpora. SL interpretation corpora are 
available (e.g. every live interpretation on TV), 
but as far as we know they haven?t yet been ana-
lyzed, although such study looks interesting.  
There are in France6 and in Great Britain7 two 
TV programs presented in SL and made accessi-
ble with oral and written translations. These con-
stitute a huge amount of parallel corpora (vocal 
language-sign language translations) that have 
not yet been used in any research field. 
                                                 
5
 http://www.websourd.org 
6
 http://www.france5.fr/oeil-et-la-main/index-
fr.php?page=accueil 
7
 http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/seehear/ 
66
5 Conclusion 
Until now very few parallel or comparable 
sign language corpora of SL have been built, and 
the few which exist were not studied from these 
points of view. Studying these parallel and com-
parable SL corpora for linguistics, computer 
science analysis, and for translation is therefore a 
new, yet to investigate area. What we should 
consider now is to set up a methodology to create 
those corpora with the aim to study them as what 
they are: parallel orcomparable. Moreover, we 
have to develop new tools, and adapt existing 
ones, that will fit this goal. 
Reference 
Roch-A. B?bian. 1825. Mimographie, ou essai 
d??criture mimique, propre ? r?gulariser le 
langage des sourds-muets. Paris. L. Colas eds.  
Annelies Braffort, Christian Cuxac, Annick Choisier, 
Christophe Collet, Patrice Dalle, Ivani Fusellier, 
Rachid Gherbi, Guillemette Jausions, Gwenaelle 
Jirou, Fanch Lejeune, Boris Lenseigne, Nathalie 
Monteillard, Annie Risler, Marie-Anne Sallandre. 
2001. Projet LS-COLIN. Quel outil de notation 
pour quelle analyse de la LS ? Colloque Re-
cherches sur les langues des signes. Toulouse UTM 
eds. 71-86.  
Hennie Brugman, Daan Broeder, and Gunter Senft. 
2003. Documentation of Languages and Archiving 
of Language Data at the Max Planck Insitute for 
Psycholinguistics in Nijmegen. Ringvorlesung Be-
drohte Sprachen. Bielefeld University, Germany.  
Jan Bungeroth, Daniel Stein, Philippe Dreuw, Her-
mann Ney, Sara Morrissey, Andy Way and Lynette 
van Zijl. 2008. The ATIS Sign Language Corpus. 
6th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation. Marrakech. Morocco. 
?milie Ch?telat-Pel?, Annelies Braffort. 2008. Sign 
Language Corpus Annotation: Toward a New Me-
thodology. 6th International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation. Marrakech. Mo-
rocco. 
Christian Cuxac. 1996. Fonctions et Structures de 
l'iconicit? dans les langues des signes; analyse 
d'un idiolecte parisien de la Langues des Signes 
Fran?aise. Doctoral Thesis, Paris V University, 
France.  
Louise Del?ger and Pierre Zweigenbaum. 2008. Pa-
raphrase acquisition from comparable medical 
corpora of specialized and lay texts. AMIA. An-
nual Fall Symposium. Washington, DC. 146-150. 
Eleni Efthimiou, Stavroula-Evita Fotinea, Christian 
Vogler, Thomas Hanke, John Glauert, Richard 
Bowden, Annelies Braffort, Christophe Collet, Pe-
tros Maragos, and J?r?mie Segouat. 2009. Sign 
Language Recognition, Generation and Modelling: 
A Research Effort with Applications in Deaf Com-
munication. 13th Internation Conference on Hu-
man-Computer Interaction. San Diego, CA. USA.  
Pascale Fung, Percy Cheung. 2004. Mining very-non-
parallel corpora: Parallel sentence and lexicon ex-
traction via bootstrapping and EM. 12th Confe-
rence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing. Barcelona. Spain. 57-63. 
Brigitte Garcia, 2006. The methodological, linguistic 
and semiological bases for the elaboration of a 
written form of LSF (French Sign Language). 5th 
International Conference on Language Resources 
and Evaluation. Genoa. Italy.  
Jean-Claude Martin, Jean-Paul Sansonnet, Annelies 
Braffort, and Cyril Verrecchia. 2009. Informing the 
Design of Deictic Behaviors of a Web Agent with 
Spoken and Sign Language Video Data. 8th Inter-
national Gesture Workshop. Bielefeld, Germany.  
Emmanuel Morin and B?atrice Daille. 2006. Compa-
rabilit? de corpus et fouille terminologique multi-
lingue. Traitement Automatique des Langues. Vol 
47. 113-136.  
Carol Neidle. 2000. SignStream(TM): A Database 
Tool for Research on Visual-Gestural Language. 
American Sign Language Linguistic Research 
Project, Report No. 10. Boston University. USA.  
Marie-Anne Sallandre. 2006. Iconicity and Space in 
French Sign Language. Space in languages: lin-
guistic systems and cognitive categories. Collec-
tion Typological Studies in Language 66. John 
Benjamins. 239-255.  
J?r?mie Segouat, Annelies Braffort, and ?milie Mar-
tin. 2006. Sign Language corpus analysis: Syn-
chronisation of linguistic annotation and numeri-
cal data. 5th International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation - LREC, Genova, Italia. 
J?r?mie Segouat, Annelies Braffort, Laurence Bolot, 
Annick Choisier, Michael Filhol, and Cyril Verrec-
chia. 2008. Building 3D French Sign Language 
lexicon. 6th International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation ? LREC. Marrakech, 
Morocco.  
J?r?mie Segouat. 2009. A Study of Sign Language 
Coarticulation. Accessibility and Computing. SI-
GACCESS Newsletter. Issue 93. 31-38. 
William C Stokoe, Dorothy C Casterline, and Carl G 
Croneberg. 1965. A Dictionary of American Sign 
Language on Linguistic Principles. Washington 
DC. Gallaudet College Press. 
67
