Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 514?522,
Honolulu, October 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
HTM: A Topic Model for Hypertexts
Congkai Sun?
Department of Computer Science
Shanghai Jiaotong University
Shanghai, P. R. China
martinsck@hotmail.com
Bin Gao
Microsoft Research Asia
No.49 Zhichun Road
Beijing, P. R. China
bingao@microsoft.com
Zhenfu Cao
Department of Computer Science
Shanghai Jiaotong University
Shanghai, P. R. China
zfcao@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
Hang Li
Microsoft Research Asia
No.49 Zhichun Road
Beijing, P. R. China
hangli@microsoft.com
Abstract
Previously topic models such as PLSI (Prob-
abilistic Latent Semantic Indexing) and LDA
(Latent Dirichlet Allocation) were developed
for modeling the contents of plain texts. Re-
cently, topic models for processing hyper-
texts such as web pages were also proposed.
The proposed hypertext models are generative
models giving rise to both words and hyper-
links. This paper points out that to better rep-
resent the contents of hypertexts it is more es-
sential to assume that the hyperlinks are fixed
and to define the topic model as that of gen-
erating words only. The paper then proposes
a new topic model for hypertext processing,
referred to as Hypertext Topic Model (HTM).
HTM defines the distribution of words in a
document (i.e., the content of the document)
as a mixture over latent topics in the document
itself and latent topics in the documents which
the document cites. The topics are further
characterized as distributions of words, as in
the conventional topic models. This paper fur-
ther proposes a method for learning the HTM
model. Experimental results show that HTM
outperforms the baselines on topic discovery
and document classification in three datasets.
1 Introduction
Topic models are probabilistic and generative mod-
els representing contents of documents. Examples
of topic models include PLSI (Hofmann, 1999) and
LDA (Blei et al, 2003). The key idea in topic mod-
eling is to represent topics as distributions of words
* This work was conducted when the first author visited
Microsoft Research Asia as an intern.
and define the distribution of words in document
(i.e., the content of document) as a mixture over hid-
den topics. Topic modeling technologies have been
applied to natural language processing, text min-
ing, and information retrieval, and their effective-
ness have been verified.
In this paper, we study the problem of topic mod-
eling for hypertexts. There is no doubt that this is
an important research issue, given the fact that more
and more documents are available as hypertexts cur-
rently (such as web pages). Traditional work mainly
focused on development of topic models for plain
texts. It is only recently several topic models for pro-
cessing hypertexts were proposed, including Link-
LDA and Link-PLSA-LDA (Cohn and Hofmann,
2001; Erosheva et al, 2004; Nallapati and Cohen,
2008).
We point out that existing models for hypertexts
may not be suitable for characterizing contents of
hypertext documents. This is because all the models
are assumed to generate both words and hyperlinks
(outlinks) of documents. The generation of the latter
type of data, however, may not be necessary for the
tasks related to contents of documents.
In this paper, we propose a new topic model for
hypertexts called HTM (Hypertext Topic Model),
within the Bayesian learning approach (it is simi-
lar to LDA in that sense). In HTM, the hyperlinks
of hypertext documents are supposed to be given.
Each document is associated with one topic distribu-
tion. The word distribution of a document is defined
as a mixture of latent topics of the document itself
and latent topics of documents which the document
cites. The topics are further defined as distributions
514
of words. That means the content (topic distribu-
tions for words) of a hypertext document is not only
determined by the topics of itself but also the top-
ics of documents it cites. It is easy to see that HTM
contains LDA as a special case. Although the idea of
HTM is simple and straightforward, it appears that
this is the first work which studies the model.
We further provide methods for learning and in-
ference of HTM. Our experimental results on three
web datasets show that HTM outperforms the base-
line models of LDA, Link-LDA, and Link-PLSA-
LDA, in the tasks of topic discovery and document
classification.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 introduces related work. Section 3 describes
the proposed HTM model and its learning and infer-
ence methods. Experimental results are presented in
Section 4. Conclusions are made in the last section.
2 Related Work
There has been much work on topic modeling. Many
models have been proposed including PLSI (Hof-
mann, 1999), LDA (Blei et al, 2003), and their
extensions (Griffiths et al, 2005; Blei and Lafferty,
2006; Chemudugunta et al, 2007). Inference and
learning methods have been developed, such as vari-
ational inference (Jordan et al, 1999; Wainwright
and Jordan, 2003), expectation propagation (Minka
and Lafferty, 2002), and Gibbs sampling (Griffiths
and Steyvers, 2004). Topic models have been uti-
lized in topic discovery (Blei et al, 2003), document
retrieval (Xing Wei and Bruce Croft, 2006), docu-
ment classification (Blei et al, 2003), citation analy-
sis (Dietz et al, 2007), social network analysis (Mei
et al, 2008), and so on. Most of the existing models
are for processing plain texts. There are also models
for processing hypertexts, for example, (Cohn and
Hofmann, 2001; Nallapati and Cohen, 2008; Gru-
ber et al, 2008; Dietz et al, 2007), which are most
relevant to our work.
Cohn and Hofmann (2001) introduced a topic
model for hypertexts within the framework of PLSI.
The model, which is a combination of PLSI and
PHITS (Cohn and Chang, 2000), gives rise to both
the words and hyperlinks (outlinks) of the document
in the generative process. The model is useful when
the goal is to understand the distribution of links
as well as the distribution of words. Erosheva et
al (2004) modified the model by replacing PLSI with
LDA. We refer to the modified mode as Link-LDA
and take it as a baseline in this paper. Note that the
above two models do not directly associate the top-
ics of the citing document with the topics of the cited
documents.
Nallapati and Cohn (2008) proposed an extension
of Link-LDA called Link-PLSA-LDA, which is an-
other baseline in this paper. Assuming that the cit-
ing and cited documents share similar topics, they
explicitly model the information flow from the cit-
ing documents to the cited documents. In Link-
PLSA-LDA, the link graph is converted into a bi-
partite graph in which links are connected from cit-
ing documents to cited documents. If a document
has both inlinks and outlinks, it will be duplicated
on both sides of the bipartite graph. The generative
process for the citing documents is similar to that of
Link-LDA, while the cited documents have a differ-
ent generative process.
Dietz et al(2007) proposed a topic model for ci-
tation analysis. Their goal is to find topical influ-
ence of publications in research communities. They
convert the citation graph (created from the publica-
tions) into a bipartite graph as in Link-PLSA-LDA.
The content of a citing document is assumed to be
generated by a mixture over the topic distribution
of the citing document and the topic distributions of
the cited documents. The differences between the
topic distributions of citing and cited documents are
measured, and the cited documents which have the
strongest influence on the citing document are iden-
tified.
Note that in most existing models described above
the hyperlinks are assumed to be generated and link
prediction is an important task, while in the HTM
model in this paper, the hyperlinks are assumed to
be given in advance, and the key task is topic iden-
tification. In the existing models for hypertexts, the
content of a document (the word distribution of the
document) are not decided by the other documents.
In contrast, in HTM, the content of a document is
determined by itself as well as its cited documents.
Furthermore, HTM is a generative model which can
generate the contents of all the hypertexts in a col-
lection, given the link structure of the collection.
Therefore, if the goal is to accurately learn and pre-
515
Table 1: Notations and explanations.
T Number of topics
D Documents in corpus
D Number of documents
?? , ?? Hyperparameters for ? and ?
? Hyperparameter to control the weight between
the citing document and the cited documents
? Topic distributions for all documents
? Word distribution for topic
b, c, z Hidden variables for generating word
d document (index)
wd Word sequence in document d
Nd Number of words in document d
Ld Number of documents cited by document d
Id Set of cited documents for document d
idl Index of lth cited document of document d
?d Distribution on cited documents of document d
?d Topic distribution associated with document d
bdn Decision on way of generating nth word in doc-
ument d
cdn Cited document that generates nth word in doc-
ument d
zdn Topic of nth word in document d
dict contents of documents, the use of HTM seems
more reasonable.
3 Hypertext Topic Model
3.1 Model
In topic modeling, a probability distribution of
words is employed for a given document. Specifi-
cally, the probability distribution is defined as a mix-
ture over latent topics, while each topic is future
characterized by a distribution of words (Hofmann,
1999; Blei et al, 2003). In this paper, we introduce
an extension of LDA model for hypertexts. Table 1
gives the major notations and their explanations.
The graphic representation of conventional LDA
is given in Figure 1(a). The generative process of
LDA has three steps. Specifically, in each document
a topic distribution is sampled from a prior distribu-
tion defined as Dirichlet distribution. Next, a topic is
sampled from the topic distribution of the document,
which is a multinominal distribution. Finally, a word
is sampled according to the word distribution of the
topic, which also forms a multinormal distribution.
The graphic representation of HTM is given in
Figure 1(b). The generative process of HTM is de-
scribed in Algorithm 1. First, a topic distribution
is sampled for each document according to Dirich-
let distribution. Next, for generating a word in a
document, it is decided whether to use the current
Algorithm 1 Generative Process of HTM
for each document d do
Draw ?d ? Dir(??).
end for
for each word wdn do
if Ld > 0 then
Draw bdn ? Ber(?)
Draw cdn ? Uni(?d)
if bdn = 1 then
Draw zdn ? Multi(?d)
else
Draw zdn ? Multi(?Idcdn )end if
else
Draw a topic zdn ? Multi(?d)
end if
Draw a word wdn ? P (wdn | zdn, ?)
end for
document or documents which the document cites.
(The weight between the citing document and cited
documents is controlled by an adjustable hyper-
parameter ?.) It is also determined which cited doc-
ument to use (if it is to use cited documents). Then, a
topic is sampled from the topic distribution of the se-
lected document. Finally, a word is sampled accord-
ing to the word distribution of the topic. HTM natu-
rally mimics the process of writing a hypertext docu-
ment by humans (repeating the processes of writing
native texts and anchor texts).
The formal definition of HTM is given be-
low. Hypertext document d has Nd words
wd = wd1 ? ? ?wdNd and Ld cited documents Id =
{id1, . . . , idLd}. The topic distribution of d is ?d
and topic distributions of the cited documents are
?i, i ? Id. Given ?, ?, and ?, the conditional proba-
bility distribution of wd is defined as:
p(wd|?, ?, ?) =
Nd?
n=1
?
bdn
p(bdn|?)
?
cdn
p(cdn|?d)
?
zdn
p(zdn|?d)bdnp(zdn|?idcdn )
1?bdnp(wdn|zdn, ?).
Here ?d, bdn, cdn, and zdn are hidden vari-
ables. When generating a word wdn, bdn determines
whether it is from the citing document or the cited
documents. cdn determines which cited document it
516
is when bdn = 0. In this paper, for simplicity we as-
sume that the cited documents are equally likely to
be selected, i.e., ?di = 1Ld .Note that ? represents the topic distributions of
all the documents. For any d, its word distribution
is affected by both ?d and ?i, i ? Id. There is a
propagation of topics from the cited documents to
the citing document through the use of ?i, i ? Id.
For a hypertext document d that does not have
cited documents. The conditional probability dis-
tribution degenerates to LDA:
p(wd|?d, ?) =
Nd?
n=1
?
zdn
p(zdn|?d)p(wdn|zdn, ?).
By taking the product of the marginal probabil-
ities of hypertext documents, we obtain the condi-
tional probability of the corpus D given the hyper-
parameters ?, ??, ?,
p(D|?, ??, ?) =
? D?
d=1
p(?d|??)
Nd?
n=1
?
bdn
p(bdn|?)
?
cdn
p(cdn|?d)
?
zdn
p(zdn|?d)bdnp(zdn|?Idcdn )
1?bdn
p(wdn|zdn, ?)d?. (1)
Note that the probability function (1) also covers the
special cases in which documents do not have cited
documents.
In HTM, the content of a document is decided by
the topics of the document as well as the topics of
the documents which the document cites. As a result
contents of documents can be ?propagated? along the
hyperlinks. For example, suppose web page A cites
page B and page B cites page C, then the content of
page A is influenced by that of page B, and the con-
tent of page B is further influenced by the content
of page C. Therefore, HTM is able to more accu-
rately represent the contents of hypertexts, and thus
is more useful for text processing such as topic dis-
covery and document classification.
3.2 Inference and Learning
An exact inference of the posterior probability of
HTM may be intractable, we employ the mean field
variational inference method (Wainwright and Jor-
dan, 2003; Jordan et al, 1999) to conduct approxi-
mation. Let I[?] be an indicator function. We first
define the following factorized variational posterior
distribution q with respect to the corpus:
q =
D?
d=1
q(?d|?d)
Nd?
n=1
(
q(xdn|?dn)(q(cdn|?dn)
)I[Ld>0]
q(zdn|?dn) ,
where ?, ?, ?, and ? denote free variational parame-
ters. Parameter ? is the posterior Dirichlet parameter
corresponding to the representations of documents
in the topic simplex. Parameters ?, ?, and ? cor-
respond to the posterior distributions of their asso-
ciated random variables. We then minimize the KL
divergence between q and the true posterior proba-
bility of the corpus by taking derivatives of the loss
function with respect to variational parameters. The
solution is listed as below.
Let ?iv be p(wvdn = 1|zi = 1) for the word v. If
Ld > 0, we have
E-step:
?di = ??i +
Nd?
n=1
?dn?dni +
D?
d?=1
Ld??
l=1
I [id?l = d]
Nd??
n=1
(1? ?d?n)?d?nl?d?ni .
?dni ? ?iv exp
{?dnEq [log (?di) |?d]
+ (1? ?dn)
Ld?
l=1
?dnlEq [log (?Idli) |?Idl ]
} .
?dn =
(
1 +
(
exp{
k?
i=1
((?dniEq[log(?di)|?d]
?
Ld?
l=1
?dnl?dniEq[log(?Idli)|?Idl ]
)
+ log ?? log (1? ?)}
)?1)?1
.
517
zw?
???
??
T Nd D
(a) LDA
w
??
?? ??
D T
d
z
D
Nd
?
c
?
b
Id
(b) HTM
z
w?
?
??
??
T Nd
D
z
d? ?
Ld
(c) Link-LDA
z
w
?
?
??
??
T
Nd
z
?
Ld
pi
z
wd?
N M
Cited Documents Citing Documents
d
(d) Link-PLSA-LDA
Figure 1: Graphical model representations
?dnl ? ?dl exp{(1? ?dn)
k?
i=1
?dniEq[log(?Idli)|?Idl ]}.
Otherwise,
?di = ??i +
Nd?
n=1
?dni +
D?
d?=1
Ld??
l=1
I [id?l = d]
Nd??
n=1
(1? ?d?n)?d?nl?d?ni .
?dni ? ?iv exp
{Eq [log (?di) |?d]
}.
From the first two equations we can see that the
cited documents and the citing document jointly af-
fect the distribution of the words in the citing docu-
ment.
M-step:
?ij ?
D?
d=1
Nd?
n=1
?dniwjdn.
In order to cope with the data sparseness problem
due to large vocabulary, we employ the same tech-
nique as that in (Blei et al, 2003). To be specific,
we treat ? as a K ?V random matrix, with each row
being independently drawn from a Dirichlet distri-
bution ?i ? Dir(??) . Variational inference is
modified appropriately.
4 Experimental Results
We compared the performances of HTM and three
baseline models: LDA, Link-LDA, and Link-PLSA-
LDA in topic discovery and document classification.
Note that LDA does not consider the use of link in-
formation; we included it here for reference.
4.1 Datasets
We made use of three datasets. The documents in the
datasets were processed by using the Lemur Took
kit (http://www.lemurproject.org), and the low fre-
quency words in the datasets were removed.
The first dataset WebKB (available at
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/?webkb) contains six
subjects (categories). There are 3,921 documents
and 7,359 links. The vocabulary size is 5,019.
518
The second dataset Wikipedia (available at
http://www.mpi-inf.mpg.de/?angelova) contains
four subjects (categories): Biology, Physics, Chem-
istry, and Mathematics. There are 2,970 documents
and 45,818 links. The vocabulary size is 3,287.
The third dataset is ODP composed of homepages
of researchers and their first level outlinked pages
(cited documents). We randomly selected five sub-
jects from the ODP archive. They are Cognitive
Science (CogSci), Theory, NeuralNetwork (NN),
Robotics, and Statistics. There are 3,679 pages and
2,872 links. The vocabulary size is 3,529.
WebKB and Wikipedia are public datasets widely
used in topic model studies. ODP was collected by
us in this work.
4.2 Topic Discovery
We created four topic models HTM, LDA, Link-
LDA, and Link-PLSA-LDA using all the data in
each of the three datasets, and evaluated the top-
ics obtained in the models. We heuristically set the
numbers of topics as 10 for ODP, 12 for WebKB,
and 8 for Wikipedia (i.e., two times of the number
of true subjects). We found that overall HTM can
construct more understandable topics than the other
models. Figure 2 shows the topics related to the
subjects created by the four models from the ODP
dataset. HTM model can more accurately extract
the three topics: Theory, Statistic, and NN than the
other models. Both LDA and Link-LDA had mixed
topics, labeled as ?Mixed? in Figure 2. Link-PLSA-
LDA missed the topic of Statistics. Interestingly, all
the four models split Cognitive Science into two top-
ics (showed as CogSci-1 and CogSci-2), probably
because the topic itself is diverse.
4.3 Document Classification
We applied the four models in the three datasets to
document classification. Specifically, we used the
word distributions of documents created by the mod-
els as feature vectors of the documents and used the
subjects in the datasets as categories. We further
randomly divided each dataset into three parts (train-
ing, validation, and test) and conducted 3-fold cross-
validation experiments. In each trial, we trained an
SVM classifier with the training data, chose param-
eters with the validation data, and conducted evalu-
ation on classification with the test data. For HTM,
Table 2: Classification accuracies in 3-fold cross-
validation.
LDA HTM Link-LDA Link-PLSA-LDA
ODP 0.640 0.698 0.535 0.581
WebKB 0.786 0.795 0.775 0.774
Wikipedia 0.845 0.866 0.853 0.855
Table 3: Sign-test results between HTM and the three
baseline models.
LDA Link-LDA Link-PLSA-LDA
ODP 0.0237 2.15e-05 0.000287
WebKB 0.0235 0.0114 0.00903
Wikipedia 1.79e-05 0.00341 0.00424
we chose the best ? value with the validation set in
each trial. Table 2 shows the classification accura-
cies. We can see that HTM performs better than the
other models in all three datasets.
We conducted sign-tests on all the results of the
datasets. In most cases HTM performs statistically
significantly better than LDA, Link-LDA, and Link-
PLSA-LDA (p-value < 0.05). The test results are
shown in Table 3.
4.4 Discussion
We conducted analysis on the results to see why
HTM can work better. Figure 3 shows an example
homepage from the ODP dataset, where superscripts
denote the indexes of outlinked pages. The home-
page contains several topics, including Theory, Neu-
ral network, Statistics, and others, while the cited
pages contain detailed information about the topics.
Table 4 shows the topics identified by the four mod-
els for the homepage. We can see that HTM can
really more accurately identify topics than the other
models.
The major reason for the better performance by
HTM seems to be that it can fully leverage the infor-
Table 4: Comparison of topics identified by the four mod-
els for the example homepage. Only topics with proba-
bilities > 0.1 and related to the subjects are shown.
Model Topics Probabilities
LDA Mixed 0.537
HTM Theory 0.229
NN 0.278
Statistics 0.241
Link-LDA Statistics 0.281
Link-PLSA-LDA Theory 0.527
CogSci-2 0.175
519
(a) LDA
Mixed NN Robot CogSci-1 CogSci-2
statistic learn robot visual conscious
compute conference project model psychology
algorithm system file experiment language
theory neural software change cognitive
complex network code function experience
mathematics model program response brain
model international data process theory
science compute motor data philosophy
computation ieee read move science
problem proceedings start observe online
random process build perception mind
analysis computation comment effect concept
paper machine post figure physical
method science line temporal problem
journal artificial include sensory content
(b) HTM
Theory Statistics NN Robot CogSci-1 CogSci-2
compute model learn robot conscious memory
science statistic system project visual psychology
algorithm data network software experience language
theory experiment neural motor change science
complex sample conference sensor perception cognitive
computation process model code move brain
mathematics method compute program theory human
paper analysis ieee build online neuroscience
problem response international line physical journal
lecture figure proceedings board concept society
random result machine read problem trauma
journal temporal process power philosophy press
bound probable computation type object learn
graph observe artificial comment content abuse
proceedings test intelligence post view associate
(c) Link-LDA
Statistics Mixed Robot CogSci-1 CogSci-2
statistic compute robot visual conscious
model conference project model psychology
data system software experiment cognitive
analysis learn file change language
method network motor function brain
learn computation robotics vision science
sample proceedings informatik process memory
algorithm neural program perception theory
process ieee build move philosophy
bayesian algorithm board response press
application international sensor temporal online
random science power object neuroscience
distribution complex code observe journal
simulate theory format sensory human
mathematics journal control figure mind
(d) Link-PLSA-LDA
Theory NN Robot CogSci-1 CogSci-2
compute conference robot conscious model
algorithm learn code experience process
computation science project language visual
theory international typeof book data
complex system motor change experiment
science compute control make function
mathematics network system problem learn
network artificial serve brain neural
paper ieee power world system
journal intelligence program read perception
proceedings robot software case represent
random technology file than vision
system proceedings build mind response
problem machine pagetracker theory object
lecture neural robotics content abstract
Figure 2: Topics identified by four models
Radford M.Neal
Professor, Dept. of Statistics and Dept. of Computer Science, University of Toronto
I?m currently highlighting the following :
? A new R function for performing univariate slice sampling.1
? A workshop paper on Computing Likelihood Functions for High-Energy Physics
Experiments when Distributions are Defined by Simulators with Nuisance Parameters.2
? Slides from a talk at the Third Workshop on Monte Carlo Methods on
?Short-Cut MCMC: An Alternative to Adaptation?, May 2007: Postscript, PDF.
Courses I?m teaching in Fall 2008 :
? STA 437: Methods for Multivariate Data3
? STA 3000: Advanced Theory of Statistics4
You can also find information on courses I?ve taught in the past.5
You can also get to information on :
? Research interests6 (with pointers to publications)
? Current and former graduate students7
? Current and former postdocs8
? Curriculum Vitae: PostScript, or PDF.
? Full publications list9
? How to contact me10
? Links to various places11
If you know what you want already,you may wish to go directly to :
? Software available on-line12
? Papers available on-line13
? Slides from talks14
? Miscellaneous other stuff15
Information in this hierarchy was last updated 2008-06-20.
Figure 3: An example homepage: http://www.cs.utoronto.ca/? radford/
520
Table 5: Word assignment in the example homepage.
Word bdn cdn Topic Probability
mcmc 0.544 2 Stat 0.949
experiment 0.546 2 Stat 0.956
neal 0.547 8 NN 0.985
likelihood 0.550 2 Stat 0.905
sample 0.557 2 Stat 0.946
statistic 0.559 2 Stat 0.888
parameter 0.563 2 Stat 0.917
perform 0.565 2 Stat 0.908
carlo 0.568 2 Stat 0.813
monte 0.570 2 Stat 0.802
toronto 0.572 8 NN 0.969
distribution 0.578 2 Stat 0.888
slice 0.581 2 Stat 0.957
energy 0.581 13 NN 0.866
adaptation 0.591 7 Stat 0.541
teach 0.999 11 Other 0.612
current 0.999 11 Other 0.646
curriculum 0.999 11 Other 0.698
want 0.999 11 Other 0.706
highlight 0.999 10 Other 0.786
professor 0.999 11 Other 0.764
academic 0.999 11 Other 0.810
student 0.999 11 Other 0.817
contact 0.999 11 Other 0.887
graduate 0.999 11 Other 0.901
Table 6: Most salient topics in cited pages.
URL Topic Probability
2 Stat 0.690
7 Stat 0.467
8 NN 0.786
13 NN 0.776
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95 0.9 0.85 0.8 0.75 0.7 0.65 0.6 0.55 0.5
ODP
Webkb
Wiki
A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
?
Figure 4: Classification accuracies on three datasets with
different ? values. The cross marks on the curves cor-
respond to the average values of ? in the 3-fold cross-
validation experiments.
mation from the cited documents. We can see that
the content of the example homepage is diverse and
not very rich. It might be hard for the other base-
line models to identify topics accurately. In con-
trast, HTM can accurately learn topics by the help
of the cited documents. Specifically, if the content of
a document is diverse, then words in the document
are likely to be assigned into wrong topics by the
existing approaches. In contrast, in HTM with prop-
agation of topic distributions from cited documents,
the words of a document can be more accurately as-
signed into topics. Table 5 shows the first 15 words
and the last 10 words for the homepage given by
HTM, in ascending order of bdn, which measures
the degree of influence from the cited documents on
the words (the smaller the stronger). The table also
gives the values of cdn, indicating which cited docu-
ments have the strongest influence. Furthermore, the
topics having the largest posterior probabilities for
the words are also shown. We can see that the words
?experiment?, ?sample?, ?parameter?, ?perform?, and
?energy? are accurately classified. Table 6 gives the
most salient topics of cited documents. It also shows
the probabilities of the topics given by HTM. We can
see that there is a large agreement between the most
salient topics in the cited documents and the topics
which are affected the most in the citing document.
Parameter ? is the only parameter in HTM which
needs to be tuned. We found that the performance of
HTM is not very sensitive to the values of ?, which
reflects the degree of influence from the cited doc-
uments to the citing document. HTM can perform
well with different ? values. Figure 4 shows the clas-
sification accuracies of HTM with respect to differ-
ent ? values for the three datasets. We can see that
HTM works better than the other models in most of
the cases (cf., Table 2).
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we have proposed a novel topic
model for hypertexts called HTM. Existing models
for processing hypertexts were developed based on
the assumption that both words and hyperlinks are
stochastically generated by the model. The gener-
ation of latter type of data is actually unnecessary
for representing contents of hypertexts. In the HTM
model, it is assumed that the hyperlinks of hyper-
521
texts are given and only the words of the hypertexts
are stochastically generated. Furthermore, the word
distribution of a document is determined not only
by the topics of the document in question but also
from the topics of the documents which the doc-
ument cites. It can be regarded as ?propagation?
of topics reversely along hyperlinks in hypertexts,
which can lead to more accurate representations than
the existing models. HTM can naturally mimic hu-
man?s process of creating a document (i.e., by con-
sidering using the topics of the document and at the
same time the topics of the documents it cites). We
also developed methods for learning and inferring
an HTM model within the same framework as LDA
(Latent Dirichlet Allocation). Experimental results
show that the proposed HTM model outperforms
the existing models of LDA, Link-LDA, and Link-
PLSA-LDA on three datasets for topic discovery and
document classification.
As future work, we plan to compare the HTM
model with other existing models, to develop learn-
ing and inference methods for handling extremely
large-scale data sets, and to combine the current
method with a keyphrase extraction method for ex-
tracting keyphrases from web pages.
6 Acknowledgement
We thank Eric Xing for his valuable comments on
this work.
References
Ricardo Baeza-Yates and Berthier Ribeiro-Neto. 1999.
Modern Information Retrieval. ACM Press / Addison-
Wesley.
David Blei, Andrew Ng, and Michael Jordan. 2003. La-
tent Dirichlet alocation. Journal of machine Learning
Research, 3:993?1022.
David Blei and John Lafferty. 2005. Correlated Topic
Models. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems 12.
David Blei and John Lafferty. 2006. Dynamic topic
models. In Proceedings of the 23rd international con-
ference on Machine learning.
Chaitanya Chemudugunta, Padhraic Smyth, and Mark
Steyvers. 2007. Modeling General and Specific As-
pects of Documents with a Probabilistic Topic Model.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems 19.
David Cohn and Huan Chang. 2000. Learning to Proba-
bilistically Identify Authoritative Documents. In Pro-
ceedings of the 17rd international conference on Ma-
chine learning.
David Cohn and Thomas Hofmann. 2001. The missing
link - a probabilistic model of document content and
hypertext connectivity. In Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 13.
Laura Dietz, Steffen Bickel and Tobias Scheffer. 2007.
Unsupervised prediction of citation influences. In Pro-
ceedings of the 24th international conference on Ma-
chine learning.
Elena Erosheva, Stephen Fienberg, and John Lafferty.
2004. Mixed-membership models of scientific pub-
lications. In Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 101:5220?5227.
Thomas Griffiths and Mark Steyvers. 2004. Finding
Scientific Topics. In Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 101 (suppl. 1) .
Thomas Griffiths, Mark Steyvers, David Blei, and Joshua
Tenenbaum. 2005. Integrating Topics and Syntax. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
17.
Amit Gruber, Michal Rosen-Zvi, and Yair Weiss. 2008.
Latent Topic Models for Hypertext. In Proceedings of
the 24th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intel-
ligence.
Thomas Hofmann. 1999. Probabilistic Latent Semantic
Analysis. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference on
Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence.
Michael Jordan, Zoubin Ghahramani, Tommy Jaakkola,
and Lawrence Saul. 1999. An Introduction to Varia-
tional Methods for Graphical Models. Machine Learn-
ing, 37(2):183?233.
QiaoZhu Mei, Deng Cai, Duo Zhang, and ChengXiang
Zhai. 2008. Topic Modeling with Network Regular-
ization. In Proceeding of the 17th international con-
ference on World Wide Web.
Thomas Minka and John Lafferty. 2002. Expectation-
Propagation for the Generative Aspect Model. In Pro-
ceedings of the 18th Conference in Uncertainty in Ar-
tificial Intelligence.
Ramesh Nallapati and William Cohen. 2008. Link-
PLSA-LDA: A new unsupervised model for topics and
influence of blogs. In International Conference for
Webblogs and Social Media.
Martin Wainwright, and Michael Jordan. 2003. Graph-
ical models, exponential families, and variational in-
ference. In UC Berkeley, Dept. of Statistics, Technical
Report, 2003.
Xing Wei and Bruce Croft. 2006. LDA-based document
models for ad-hoc retrieval. In Proceedings of the 29th
annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Re-
search and development in information retrieval.
522
