BioNLP 2008: Current Trends in Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages 108?109,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
CBR-Tagger: a case-based reasoning approach to the 
gene/protein mention problem 
 
Mariana Neves Monica Chagoyen 
Biocomputing Unit Biocomputing Unit 
Centro Nacional de Biotecnolog?a - CSIC Centro Nacional de Biotecnolog?a - CSIC 
Madrid, 28049, Spain Madrid, 28049, Spain 
mlara@cnb.csic.es monica.chagoyen@cnb.csic.es 
 
Jos? M. Carazo Alberto Pascual-Montano 
Biocomputing Unit Departamento de Arquitectura de Computadores 
Centro Nacional de Biotecnolog?a - CSIC Facultad de Ciencias F?sicas, UCM 
Madrid, 28049, Spain Madrid, 28040, Spain 
carazo@cnb.csic.es pascual@fis.ucm.es 
 
Abstract 
This work proposes a case-based classifier to tackle 
the gene/protein mention problem in biomedical lit-
erature. The so called gene mention problem con-
sists of the recognition of gene and protein entities in 
scientific texts. A classification process aiming at 
deciding if a term is a gene mention or not is carried 
out for each word in the text. It is based on the selec-
tion of the best or most similar case in a base of 
known and unknown cases. The approach was 
evaluated on several datasets for different organisms 
and results show the suitability of this approach for 
the gene mention problem. 
1 Introduction 
This paper proposes a new method to the gene 
mention problem by using a case-based reasoning 
approach that performs a binary classification 
(gene mention or not) for each word in a text. In a 
first step cases are stored in two bases (known and 
unknown cases), followed by a search in these 
bases for the case most similar to the problem. The 
classification decision is given by the class of the 
case selected. The system was developed using 
Java and MySQL technologies and is available for 
download as part of the Moara project1.  
2 Proposed method 
The method here proposed identifies gene men-
tions in a text by means of classifying each token 
                                                          
1 http://biocomp.cnb.csic.es/~mlara/moara/index.html 
into two possible classes: gene mention or not. The 
system consists of two main steps: the construction 
of the case bases, and the testing phase, when the 
test dataset is presented to the system to identify 
the possible mentions. The words extracted from 
the training documents were the tokens used to 
construct the two case bases, one for known cases 
and the other for unknown cases, as proposed for 
the part-of-speech tagging problem in (Daelemans, 
Zavrel, Berck, & Gillis, 1996). 
The known cases are the ones used by the sys-
tem to classify those words that are not new, i.e. 
those that have were present in the training dataset. 
The attributes used to represent a known case are 
the word itself, the class of the word (if it is a gene 
mention or not), and the class of the preceding 
word (if it is a gene mention or not). 
The system uses a second case base to decide 
about words that are unknown to the system, i.e. 
those that are not present in the training set. The 
attributes of the unknown cases were the shape of 
the word, the class of the word (if it is a gene men-
tion or not), and the class of the preceding word (if 
it is a gene mention or not). Note that instead of 
saving the word itself, a shape of the word is kept 
in order to allow the system to be able to classify 
unknown words by means of looking for cases 
with similar shape. The shape of the word is given 
by its transformation in a set of symbols according 
to the type of character found.  
In the construction of cases, each word repre-
sents a single case, and in order to account for 
repetitions, the frequency of the case is incre-
mented to indicate the number of times that it ap-
pears in the training dataset. The training 
108
documents are read twice, one in the forward (from 
left to right), and one in the backward (from right 
to left) directions, in order to allow a more variety 
of cases.  This is important as the classification of 
a token may be influenced by its preceding and 
following words.  
CBR-Tagger has also been trained with addi-
tional corpora in order to better extract mentions 
from different organisms. These extra corpora are 
the datasets for gene normalization of the BioCrea-
tive task 1B (Hirschman, Colosimo, Morgan, & 
Yeh, 2005) for to yeast, mouse and fly and the 
BioCreative 2 Gene Normalization task (Morgan & 
Hirschman, 2007) for human.  
In the classification procedure, the text is token-
ized and a sliding window is applied first in the 
forward and then in the backward direction. In 
each case, the system keeps track of the class of 
the preceding token (false at the beginning), gets 
the shape of the token and tries to find in the bases 
a case most similar to it. The search procedure is 
divided in two parts, for the known and unknown 
cases. Priority is always given to the known cases 
since it saves the word exactly as they appeared in 
the training documents and the classification may 
be more precise than using the unknown cases.  
A token already classified as positive by the 
forward reading may be used for the backward 
reading as preceding class and might help recog-
nizing mentions composed by many tokens that 
would not have been totally recognized by one of 
the reading procedures only. After the identifica-
tion of the best case for each token, some post-
processing procedures are executed to check 
boundaries (for mentions composed of more than 
one token) as well as abbreviations and corre-
sponding full names. 
3 Results 
The results obtained with the BioCreative 2 gene 
mention task for the CBR-Tagger are shown in 
Table 1 along with the best result of the competi-
tion. Results are showed according to the datasets 
used for the training of the CBR-tagger: BioCrea-
tive 2 Gene Mention task (Wilbur, Smith, & Ta-
nabe, 2007) corpus only (CbrBC2), and the 
combination of it with the BioCreative task 1B 
gene normalization corpus (Hirschman et al, 2005) 
for the yeast (CbrBC2y), mouse (CbrBC2m), fly 
(CbrBC2f) and the three of them (CbrBC2ymf). 
 
Taggers P R FM 
CbrBC2 77.8 75.9 76.9 
CbrBC2y 82.7 52.6 64.7 
CbrBC2m 83.1 47.1 60.1 
CbrBC2f 82.0 65.9 73.0 
CbrBC2ymf 82.5 39.7 53.6 
Best BC2 result 88.5 86.0 87.2 
Table 1: Results for the BC2 gene mention task. 
 
CBR-Tagger has also been applied to the gene 
normalization problem in conjunction with two 
other available taggers: Abner2 and Banner3. Table 
2 summarizes the best mix of taggers configuration 
for each organism. Detailed results may be found 
at the author?s research page4. 
 
Organism Best configuration 
Yeast Abner+CbrBC2 
Mouse Abner+CbrBC2m 
Fly CbrBC2f 
Human Banner+CbrBC2ymf 
Table 2: Best taggers for each organism. 
Acknowledgments 
This work has been partially funded by the Spanish 
grants BIO2007-67150-C03-02, S-Gen-0166/2006, 
TIN2005-5619. APM acknowledges the support of 
the Spanish Ram?n y Cajal program. The authors 
acknowledge support from Integromics, S.L. 
References  
Daelemans, W., Zavrel, J., Berck, P., & Gillis, S. 
(1996). MBT: A Memory-Based Part of Speech Tag-
ger-Generator. Paper presented at the Fourth Work-
shop on Very Large Corpora, Copenhagen, Denmark. 
Hirschman, L., Colosimo, M., Morgan, A., & Yeh, A. 
(2005). Overview of BioCreAtIvE task 1B: normal-
ized gene lists. BMC Bioinformatics, 6 Suppl 1, S11. 
Morgan, A., & Hirschman, L. (2007). Overview of Bio-
Creative II Gene Normalization. Paper presented at 
the Second BioCreative Challenge Evaluation Work-
shop, Madrid-Spain. 
Wilbur, J., Smith, L., & Tanabe, L. (2007). BioCreative 
2. Gene Mention Task. Paper presented at the Second 
BioCreative Challenge Evaluation Workshop, Madrid, 
Spain. 
                                                          
2 http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~bsettles/abner/ 
3 http://banner.sourceforge.net/ 
4 http://biocomp.cnb.csic.es/~mlara/mention.html 
109
