Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, Short Papers (Companion Volume), pages 21?24,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Dialect Classification for online podcasts fusing Acoustic and Language based Structural and Semantic Information   Rahul Chitturi, John. H.L. Hansen1 Center for Robust Speech Systems(CRSS) Erik Jonsson School of Engineering and Computer Science University of Texas at Dallas Richardson, Texas 75080, U.S.A {rahul.ch@student, john.hansen@}utdallas.edu Abstract 
The variation in speech due to dialect is a factor which significantly impacts speech system per-formance. In this study, we investigate effective methods of combining acoustic and language in-formation to take advantage of (i) speaker based acoustic traits as well as (ii) content based word selection across the text sequence. For acoustics, a GMM based system is employed and for text based dialect classification, we proposed n-gram language models combined with Latent Seman-tic Analysis (LSA) based dialect classifiers. The performance of the individual classifiers is es-tablished for the three dialect family case (DC rates vary from 69.1%-72.4%). The final com-bined system achieved a DC accuracy of 79.5% and significantly outperforms the baseline acoustic classifier with a relative improvement of 30%, confirming that an integrated dialect classification system is effective for American, British and Australian dialects. 1 Introduction Automatic Dialect Classification has recently gained substantial interest in the speech processing commu-nity (Gray and Hansen, 2005; Hansen et al, 2004; NIST LRE 2005). Dialect classification systems have been employed to improve the performance for Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) by employing dialect dependent acoustic and language models (Di-akoloukas et al, 1997) and for Rich Indexing of Spo-ken Document Retrieval Systems(Gray and Hansen 2005). (Huang and Hansen, 2005; 2006) focused on identifying pronunciation differences for dialect clas-sification. In this study, unsupervised MFCC based GMM classifiers are employed for pronunciation modeling. However, English dialects differ in many ways other than pronunciation like Word Selection and Grammar, which cannot be modeled using frame based GMM acoustic information. For example,   1This project was funded by AFRL under a subcontract to RADC Inc. under FA8750-05-C-0029 
 word selection differences between UK and US dia-lects such as - ?lorry? vs. ?truck?, ?lift?, vs. ?eleva-tor?, etc. Australian English has its own lexical terms such as tucker (food), outback (wilderness), etc (John Laver, 1994). N-gram language models are employed to address these problems. One additional factor in which dialects differ is in Semantics. For example, momentarily which means for a moments duration (UK) vs. in a minute or any minute now (US). The sentence ?This flight will be leaving momentarily? could represent different time duration in US vs. UK dialects (John Laver, 1994). Latent Semantic Analy-sis is a technique that can distinguish these differ-ences (Landauer et al,1998). LSA has been shown to be effective for NLP based problems but has yet to be applied for dialect classification. Therefore, we de-velop an approach that uses a combination with n-gram language modeling and LSA processing to achieve effective language based dialect classifica-tion accuracy. Sec 4 explains the baseline acoustic classifier. Language classifiers are described in Sec 5 and the results which are presented in Sec 6 affirm that combining various sources of information sig-nificantly outperforms the traditional (or individual) techniques used for dialect classification. 2 Online Podcast Database  The speech community has no formal corpus of audio and text across dialects of common languages that could address the problems discussed in Sec.1. It was suggested in (Huang and Hansen, 2007) that it is more probable to observe semantic differences in the spontaneous text and speech rather than formal newspapers or prepared speeches since they must transcend dialects of a language (Hasegawa-Johnson and Levinson, 2006; Antoine 1996). Therefore, we collected a database from web based online podcasts of interviews where people talk spontaneously. All these are already been transcribed in order to separate text and audio structure and to temporarily set aside automatic speech recognition (ASR) error. These podcasts are not transcribed with an exact word to 
21
word match but they match the audio to an extent that include what the speakers intended to say. The lan-guage and Acoustic statistics of this database are de-scribed in Sec 2.1, and 2.2.  2.1 Language Statistics Huang and Hansen observed that the best dialect classification accuracy for N-gram classification re-quires at least 300 text words to obtain reasonable performance (Huang and Hansen, 2007). So, these interviews are segmented into blocks of text with an average text of 300 words. Table 1 summarizes the text material for three family-tree branches of Eng-lish, containing 474k words and 1325 documents.  No. of Documents Dialect No.of words Train Test US English 200k 383 158 UK English 154k 288 122 AU English 120k 233 141 Table 1: Language Statistics 2.2 Acoustic Statistics We note that the data collected from online podcasts is not well structured. The audio data is segmented into smaller audio segment files since we are inter-ested in 300 word blocks. Since the collection of dia-lect podcasts are collected from a wide range of online sources, we assume that channel effects and recording conditions are normalized across these three dialects. We also note that there is no speaker overlap between the test and train data. Therefore, there are no additional acoustic clues other than dia-lect. Table 2 summarizes the acoustic content of the corpus with 231 speakers and 13.5 hrs of audio.  No. of Hours Dialect Males Females Train Test US English 48 37 3.2 1.7 UK English 40 32 2.3 1 AU English 36 38 3.3 2 Table 2: Acoustic Statistics 3 System Architecture  The system architecture is shown in Fig 1, which consists of two main system phases for acoustic and language classifiers. MFCC based classifiers are used for acoustic modeling, while for language modeling, we use a combination of n-gram language modes and LSA classifiers. In the final phase, we combine the acoustic and language classifiers into our final dialect classifier. To construct the overall system, we first train the individual classifiers, and then set the 
weights of the hybrid classifiers using a greedy strat-egy to form the overall decision. 4 Baseline Acoustic Dialect Classification GMM based acoustic classification is a popular method for text-independent dialect classification (Huang and Hansen, 2006) and therefore it is used as a baseline for our system. Fig. 2 shows the block dia-gram of the baseline gender-independent MFCC based GMM training system with 600 mixtures for each dialect. While testing, the incoming audio is classified as a particular dialect based on the maxi-mum posterior probability measure over all the Gaus-sian Mixture Models. Mixture and frame selection based techniques as well as SVM-GMM hybrid tech-niques have been considered for dialect classification (Chitturi and Hansen, 2007). In order to assess the improvement by leveraging audio and text, we did not include these audio classification improvements in this study. 5 Dialect Classification using Language As shown in Fig 1, the language based dialect classi-fication module has two distinct classifiers. We de-scribe in detail the n-gram and LSA based classifiers in the sections 5.1 and 5.2 5.1 N-gram based dialect classification It is assumed that the text document is composed of many sentences. Each sentence can be regarded as a sequence of words W. The probability of generating W is given by . Assum-ing the probability depends on the previous n words is  where m is the number of words in W, wi is the word and D? {UK, US, AU) is the dialect specific language model. The n-gram probabilities are calculated from occur-rence counting. The final classification decision is given by C= , where ? is a set of sentences in a document and D ? {UK, US, AU}. In this study, we use the derivative measure of the cross en-tropy known as the test set perplexity for dialect clas-sification. If the word sequence is sufficiently long, the cross entropy of the word sequence W is ap-proximated as . The per-plexity of the test word sequence W as it relates to the language model D is  .The perplexity of the test word se-quence is the generalization capability of the lan-guage model. The smaller the perplexity, the better 
22
the language model generalizes to the test word se-quence. The final classification decision is, C=  , where  is the set of sentences in a document, D  ?  {UK, US, AU}. 
 Figure 1: Proposed architecture      Figure 2: Baseline GMM based dialect classification 5.2 Latent Semantic Analysis for Dialect ID One approach used to address topic classification problems has been latent semantic analysis (LSA), which was first explored for document indexing in (Deerwester et al, 1990). This addresses the issues of synonymy - many ways to refer to the same idea and polysemy ? words having more than one distinct meaning. These two issues present problems for dia-lect classification as two conversations about a topic need not contain the same words and conversely two conversations about different topics may contain the same words but with different intended meanings. In order to find a different feature space which avoids these problems, singular value decomposition (SVD) is performed to derive orthogonal vector representa-tions of the documents. SVD uses eigen-analysis to derive linearly independent directions of the original term by document matrix A whose columns corre-spond to the number of dialects, while the rows cor-respond to the words/terms in the entire text database. SVD decomposes this original term document matrix A, into three other matrices: A=U*S*VT, where the 
columns of U are the eigenvectors of AAT (left ei-genvectors), S is a diagonal matrix, whose diagonal elements are the singular values of A, and the col-umns of V are the eigenvectors of ATA(called right eigenvectors). The new dialect vector coordinates in this reduced 3 dimensional space are the rows of V. The coordinates of the test utterance is given by q1=qT*U*S-1. The test utterance is then classified as a particular dialect based on the scores, given by the cosine similarity measure as  , where di is one of the three dialects.  6 Results and Discussion All evaluations presented in this section were con-ducted on the online podcast database described in the section 2. The first row of Table 3 shows the per-formance of the N-gram LM based dialect classifica-tion (69.1% avg. performance). From this we observe that this approach is good for US and UK, but not as effective for AU family dialect classification, with AU being confused with UK. The performance of the LSA based dialect classification is shown in the sec-ond row of Table 3. This classifier is consistent over all the dialects with better performance than the N-gram LM approach. There is more semantic similar-ity of US with AU than UK (24% vs 5% - false posi-tives), while UK has a balanced semantic error with US and AU. This implies that there is more semantic information in these dialects than text sequence struc-ture.   Next, the N-gram and the LSA classifiers are com-bined using optimal weights based on a greedy ap-proach. Fig. 3 shows the performance of this hybrid classifier with respect to the weights of the individual classifiers (N-gram vs LSA: 0?all N-gram, 50?0.5 N-gram and 0.5 LSA, 100? all LSA). After setting the optimal weights 0.18 to LSA and 0.82 to N-gram classifier, the hybrid classifier is seen to be consistent and better than the individual classifiers (Table 3: row 3 vs row2/row1). Performance of the hybrid classifier is not as good as the LSA classifier for AU classification, but significantly better for classifica-tion of US and UK. The hybrid classifier is better in all cases when compared to the N-gram classifier, with an overall average improvement of 7.3% abso-lute. The fourth row in Table 3 shows the perform-ance of acoustic based dialect classification which is as good as the language based dialect classification, but it is noted that performance is poor for UK classi-fication. It is expected that the type of errors made by text (word selection), semantics and acoustic space 
MFCC based Acoustic GMM Classifier 
Text Audio 
N-Gram Classifier LSA Classifier  
Language Classifier 
Online  Podcasts 
Final Hybrid Acoustic & Language Classifier 
GMM1 Choose Maximum Likelihood GMM2  0 0 0 0 Silence Remover Feature Extraction  
Input Audio 
GMM n 
23
will have differences and therefore we combine these acoustical and language classifiers as shown in Fig1. The overall performance of the proposed approach, combining the acoustic and language information, is better than the individual classifiers (Row 3 and Row 4 vs. Row 5 of Table 3). Even though the perform-ance for US is reduced from 87.2% to 86.38%, the classification of UK is improved significantly from 54% to 74%. This shows that this approach is more consistent with accuracy that outperforms traditional acoustic classifiers with a relative improvement of 30%. With respect to a language only classifier, this hybrid classifier is better in all the cases. 7 Conclusions In this study, we have developed a dialect classifica-tion (DC) algorithm that addresses family branch DC for English (US, UK, AU), by combining GMM based acoustic, and text based N-gram LM and LSA language information. In this paper, we employed LSA in combination with N-gram language models and GMM acoustic models to improve DC accuracy. The performance of the individual classifiers were shown to vary from 69.1%-72.4%. The final com-bined system achieves a DC accuracy of 79.5% and significantly outperformed the baseline acoustic clas-sifier with a relative improvement of 30%, confirm-ing that an integrated dialect classification system employing GMM based acoustic and N-gram LM, LSA based language information is effective for dia-lect classification. 
 Figure 3: Language classifier  References  Diakoloukas, V.; Neumeyer, L.; Kaja, J.; 1997. ?Develop-ment of dialect-specific speech recognizers using adap-tation methods? IEEE- ICASSP  John Laver; 1994. ?Principles of Phonetics?. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.  
FFigure 4: Acoustic + Language classifier        Accuracy? Methods?    US UK  AU Overall N-Gram LM Classifier 75.2% 71.2% 60.7% 69.1% Latent Semantic (LSA) Classifier 70.2% 68.5% 78.7% 72.47% N-Gram+ LSA (Based on Text) 79.3% 74.6% 75.4% 76.4% Acoustic GMM Classifier 87.2% 54.0% 73.3% 71.6% Acoustic GMM  + N-gram+ LSA 86.4% 74.6% 77.0% 79.5% Table 3: Performance of classifiers on Dialect-ID  Gray, S.; Hansen, J.H.L; 2005. ?An integrated approach to the detection and classification of /dialects for a spoken document retrieval system? IEEE- ASRU Huang R; Hansen J.H.L.; 2005. "Dialect/Accent Classifica-tion via Boosted Word Modeling," IEEE-ICASSP Landauer,T.K., Foltz,P.W., & Laham,D; 1998. " Introduc-tion to Latent Semantic Analysis " Discourse Processes, 25, 259-284. Huang R; Hansen J.H.L.2007 "Dialect Classification on Printed Text using Perplexity Measure and Conditional Random Fields," IEEE- ICASSP  Hasegawa-Johnson M, Levinson S.E, 2006 "Extraction of pragmatic and semantic salience from spontaneous spoken English " Speech Comm. Vol. 48(3-4) Antoine, J.-Y 1996 " Spontaneous speech and natural lan-guage processing. ALPES: a robust semantic-led parser " ICSLP  Deerwester.S. et al1990." Indexing by latent semantic anlysis " Journal of American Society of Information Science, 391?407. Chitturi. R, Hansen J.H.L, 2007." Multi stream based Dia-lect classification using SVM-GMM hybrids" IEEE-ASRU Huang. R, Hansen J.L.H.; 2006. ?Gaussian Mixture Selec-tion and Data Selection for Unsupervised Spanish Dia-lect Classification? ICSLP Hansen J.H.L., Yapanel.U, Huang.R., Ikeno.A..; 2004. ?Dialect Anal'ysis and Modeling for Automatic Classi-fication? ICSLP NIST- LRE 2005,? Language Recognition Evaluation?  
24
