Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 533?542,
Honolulu, October 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Online Word Games for Semantic Data Collection
David Vickrey Aaron Bronzan William Choi Aman Kumar
Jason Turner-Maier Arthur Wang Daphne Koller
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-9010
{dvickrey,abronzan,aman,arthurex,koller}@cs.stanford.edu
{wchoi25,jasonptm}@stanford.edu
Abstract
Obtaining labeled data is a significant obstacle
for many NLP tasks. Recently, online games
have been proposed as a new way of obtain-
ing labeled data; games attract users by be-
ing fun to play. In this paper, we consider the
application of this idea to collecting seman-
tic relations between words, such as hyper-
nym/hyponym relationships. We built three
online games, inspired by the real-life games
of ScattergoriesTM and TabooTM. As of June
2008, players have entered nearly 800,000
data instances, in two categories. The first
type of data consists of category/answer pairs
(?Types of vehicle?,?car?), while the second
is essentially free association data (?subma-
rine?,?underwater?). We analyze both types
of data in detail and discuss potential uses of
the data. We show that we can extract from
our data set a significant number of new hy-
pernym/hyponym pairs not already found in
WordNet.
1 Introduction
One of the main difficulties in natural language pro-
cessing is the lack of labeled data. Typically, obtain-
ing labeled data requires hiring human annotators.
Recently, building online games has been suggested
an alternative to hiring annotators. For example, von
Ahn and Dabbish (2004) built the ESP Game1, an
online game in which players tag images with words
that describe them. It is well known that there are
large numbers of web users who will play online
games. If a game is fun, there is a good chance that
sufficiently many online users will play.
We have several objectives in this paper. The
first is to discuss design decisions in building word
games for collecting data, and the effects of these
decisions. The second is to describe the word games
1www.gwap.com/gwap/gamesPreview/espgame
that we implemented and the kinds of data they are
designed to collect. As of June 2008, our games
have been online for nearly a year, and have col-
lected nearly 800,000 data instances. The third goal
is to analyze the resulting data and demonstrate that
the data collected from our games is potentially use-
ful in linguistic applications. As an example appli-
cation, we show that the data we have collected can
be used to augment WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) with
a significant number of new hypernyms.
2 General Design Guidelines
Our primary goal is to produce a large amount of
clean, useful data. Each of these three objectives
(?large?, ?clean?, and ?useful?) has important im-
plications for the design of our games.
First, in order to collect large amounts of data,
the game must be attractive to users. If the game
is not fun, people will not play it. This requirement
is perhaps the most significant factor to take into ac-
count when designing a game. For one thing, it tends
to discourage extremely complicated labeling tasks,
since these are more likely to be viewed as work. It
would certainly be a challenge (although not neces-
sarily impossible) to design a game that yields la-
beled parse data, for example.
In this paper, we assume that if people play a
game in real life, there is a good chance they will
play it online as well. To this end, we built on-
line versions of two popular ?real-world? games:
ScattergoriesTM and TabooTM. Not only are these
games fun, but there is also a preexisting demand
for online versions of these games, driving search
traffic to our site. We will go into more detail about
these games in the next section.
An important characteristic of these games is that
they involve more than one player. Interacting with
another player increases the sense of fun. Another
important feature these games share is that they are
533
timed. Timing has several advantages. First, tim-
ing helps make the games feel more ?game-like?, by
adding a sense of urgency. Without timing, it risks
feeling more like a labeling task than a game.
The next requirement is that the data be clean.
First, the players must be capable of producing high-
quality annotations. Second, the game should en-
courage users to enter relevant data. We award
points as a motivating factor, but this can lead play-
ers to enter irrelevant data, or collude with other
players, in order to get a higher score. In particu-
lar, collusion is more likely when players can freely
communicate. An excellent technique for producing
good data, used effectively in the ESP game, is to
require the players to match on their inputs. Requir-
ing players to match their partner?s hidden answers
discourages off-topic answers and makes it quite dif-
ficult to collude (requiring outside communication).
We use this technique in all of our games.
Finally, the data must be useful. Ideally, it would
be directly applicable to an NLP task. This require-
ment can come into conflict with the other goals.
There are certainly many kinds of data that would
be useful for NLP tasks (such as labeled parses), but
designing a game to collect this data that people will
play and that produces clean data is difficult.
In this paper, we focus on a particular kind of lin-
guistic data: semantic relationships between pairs of
words and/or phrases. We do this for several rea-
sons. First, this kind of data is relatively simple,
leading to fun games which produce relatively clean
data. Second, the real-world games we chose to
emulate naturally produce this kind of data. Third,
there are a number of recent works which focus on
extracting these kinds of relationships, e.g. (Snow
et al, 2006; Nakov & Hearst, 2008). Our work
presents an interesting new way of extracting this
type of data. Finally, at least one of these kinds of
relationships, the hypernym, or ?X is a Y? relation,
has proven to be useful for a variety of NLP tasks.
3 Description of Our Games
We now describe our three games in detail.
3.1 Categorilla
Categorilla, inspired by ScattergoriesTM, asks play-
ers to supply words or phrases which fit specific cat-
egories, such as ?Things that fly? or ?Types of fish?.
In addition, each game has a specific letter which all
answers must begin with. Thus, if the current game
has letter ?b?, reasonable answers would be ?bird?
and ?barracuda?, respectively. In each game, a ran-
domly matched pair of players are given the same
10 categories; they receive points when they match
with the other player for a particular category. Play-
ers are allowed to type as may answers for a given
category as they wish (until a match is made for that
category). After a match is made, the players get
to see what word they matched on for that category.
Each answer is supposed to fit into a specific cate-
gory, so the data is automatically structured.
Our system contains 8 types of categories, many
of which were designed to correspond to linguistic
resources used in NLP applications. Table 1 de-
scribes the category types.
The purpose of the first three types of categories is
to extract hypernym/hyponym pairs like those found
in WordNet (e.g., ?food? is a hypernym of ?pizza?).
In fact, the categories were automatically generated
from WordNet, as follows. First, we assigned counts
Cs to each synset s in WordNet using the Sem-
Cor2 labeled data set of word senses. Let desc(s)
be the set of descendants of s in the hypernym hi-
erarchy. Then for each pair of synsets s, d, where
d ? desc(s), we computed a conditional distribu-
tion P (d|s) = CdP
d??desc(s) Cd?
, the probability that
we choose node d from among the descendants of
s. Finally, we computed the entropy of each node s
in WordNet,
?
d?desc(s) P (d|s)logP (d|s). Synsets
with many different descendants occurring in Sem-
Cor will have higher entropies. Each node with a
sufficiently high entropy was chosen as a category.
We then turned each synset into a category by tak-
ing the first word in that synset and plugging it into
one of several set phrases. For nouns, we tried two
variants (?Types of food? and ?Foods?). Depend-
ing on the noun, either of these may be more natu-
ral (consider ?Cities? vs. ?Types of city?). ?Types
of food? tends to produce more adjectival answers
than ?Foods?. We tried only one variation for verbs
(?Methods of paying?). This phrasing is not per-
fect; in particular, it encourages non-verb answers
like ?credit card?.
The second group of categories tries to capture se-
lectional preferences of verbs ? for example, ?ba-
2Available at www.cs.unt.edu/ rada/downloads.html
534
Name # Description Example Good Answer
NHyp 269 Members of a class of nouns ?Vehicles? ?car?
NType 269 Members of a class of nouns ?Types of vehicle? ?car?
VHyp 70 Members of a class of verbs ?Methods of cutting? ?trimming?
VS 1380 Subjects of a verb ?Things that eat? ?cats?
VO 909 Direct objects of a verb ?Things that are abandoned? ?family?
VPP 77 Preposition arguments of a verb ?Things that are accused of? ?crime?
Adj 219 Things described by an adjective ?Things that are recycled? ?cans?
O 105 Other; mostly ?Things found at/in ...? ?Things found in a school? ?teachers?
Table 1: Summary of category types. # indicates the number of categories of that type.
nana? makes sense as the object of ?eat? but not as
the subject. Our goal with these categories was to
produce data useful for automatically labeling se-
mantic roles (Gildea & Jurafsky, 2002), where selec-
tional preferences play an important role. We tried
three different types of categories, corresponding to
subjects, objects, and prepositional objects. Exam-
ples are ?Things that eat?, ?Things that are eaten?,
and ?Things that are eaten with?, to which good
answers would be ?animals?, ?food?, and ?forks?.
These categories were automatically generated us-
ing the labeled parses in Penn Treebank (Marcus
et al, 1993) and the labeled semantic roles of Prop-
Bank (Kingsbury et al, 2002). To generate the
object categories, for example, for each verb we
then counted the number of times a core argument
(ARG0-ARG5) appeared as the direct object of that
verb (according to the gold-standard parses), and
used all verbs with count at least 5. This guaran-
teed that all generated categories were grammati-
cally correct and captured information about core
arguments for that verb. Most of the prepositional
object categories proved to be quite confusing (e.g.,
?Things that are acted as?), so we manually removed
all but the most clear. Not surprisingly, the use of
the Wall Street Journal had a noticeable effect on the
types of categories extracted; they have a definite fi-
nancial bias.
The third group of categories only has one
type, which consists of adjective categories such as
?Things that are large?. While we did not have any
specific task in mind for this category type, having a
database of attributes/noun pairs seems potentially
useful for various NLP tasks. To generate these
categories, we simply took the most common ad-
jectives in the SemCor data set. Again, the result-
ing set of adjectives reflect the corpus; for example,
?Things that are green? was not generated as a cate-
gory, while ?Things that are corporate? was.
The final group of categories were hand-written.
This group was added to make sure that a sufficient
number of ?fun? categories were included, since
some of the category types, particularly the verb
categories, are somewhat confusing and difficult.
Most of the hand-written categories are of the form
?Things found at/in X?, where X is a location, such
as ?Japan? or ?the ocean?.
The starting letter requirement also has important
consequences for data collection. It was designed
to increase the variety of obtained data; without this
restriction, players might produce a smaller set of
?obvious? answers. As we will see in the results,
this restriction did indeed lead to a great diversity of
answers, but at a severe cost to data quality.
3.2 Categodzilla
Categodzilla is a slightly modified version of Cat-
egorilla, with the starting letter constraint relaxed.
The combination of difficult categories and rare let-
ters often leads to bad answers in Categorilla. To in-
crease data quality, in Categodzilla for each category
there are three boxes. In the first box you can type
any word you want. Answers in the second box must
start with a given ?easy? letter such as ?c?. Answers
in the third box must start with a given ?hard? letter,
such as ?k?. The boxes much be matched in order;
guesses typed in the first box which match either of
the other two boxes are automatically propagated.
3.3 Free Association
Free Association, inspired by TabooTM, simply asks
players to type words related to a given ?seed? word.
Players are not allowed to type any of several words
on a ?taboo? list, specific to the current seed word.
535
As soon as a match is achieved, players move on to
a new seed word.
The seed words came from two sources. The first
was the most common words in SemCor. The sec-
ond was the Google unigram data, which lists the
most common words on the web. In both cases, we
filtered out stop words (including all prepositions).
Unlike Categorilla, we found that nearly all col-
lected Free Association data was of good quality,
due to the considerably easier nature of the task. Of
course, we do lose the structure present in Catego-
rilla. As the name suggests, the collected data is es-
sentially free word association pairs. We analyze the
data in depth to see what kinds of relations we got.
4 Existing Word Games
Two notable word games already exist for collecting
linguistic data. The first is the Open Mind Common
Sense system3 (Chklovski, 2003). The second is
Verbosity4 (von Ahn et al, 2006). Both these games
are designed to extract common sense facts, and thus
have a different focus than our games.
5 Bots
There may not always be enough players available
online to match a human player with another human
player. Therefore, one important part of designing
an online game is building a bot which can func-
tion in the place of a player. The bots for all of our
games are similar. Each has a simple random model
which determines how long to wait between guesses.
The bot?s guesses are drawn from past guesses made
by human players for that category/seed word (plus
starting letter in the case of Categorilla). Just as with
a human player, as soon as one of the bot?s guesses
matches one of the player?s, a match is made.
If there are no past guesses, the bot instead makes
?imaginary? guesses. For example, in Categorilla,
we make the (obviously false) assumption that for
every category and every starting letter there are ex-
actly 20 possible answers, and that both the player?s
guesses and the bot?s imaginary guesses are drawn
from those 20 answers. Then, given the number
of guesses made by the player and the number of
imaginary guesses made by the bot, the probabil-
ity of a match can be computed (assuming that all
3http://commons.media.mit.edu/en
4www.gwap.com/gwap/gamesPreview/verbosity
Grla Gdza Free
Game Length 3min 3min 2min
Games Played 19656 2999 15660
Human-Human Games 428 45 401
Categories 3298 3298 9488
Guesses Collected 391804 78653 307963
Guesses/Categories 119 24 32
Unique Guesses 340433 56142 221874
Guesses: All/Unique 1.15 1.40 1.39
Guesses/Games 19.9 26.2 19.7
Guesses per minute 6.6 8.7 9.9
Table 2: Statistics for Categorilla, Categodzilla, and Free
Association.
guesses are made independently). Once this proba-
bility passes a certain threshold, randomly generated
for each category at the start of each game, the bot
matches one of the player?s guesses, chosen at ran-
dom. The Free Association bot works similarly.
For Free Association, the bot rarely has to resort
to generating these imaginary guesses. In Catego-
rilla, due to the starting letter requirement, the bot
has to make imaginary guesses much more often.
Imaginary guessing can encourage poor behavior on
the part of players, since they see that matches can
occur for obviously bad answers. They may also re-
alize that they are playing against a bot.
An additional complication for Categorilla and
Categodzilla is that the bot has to decide which cat-
egories to make guesses for, and in what order. Our
current guessing model takes into account past diffi-
culty of the category and the current guessing of the
human player to determine where to guess next.
6 Users and Usage
Table 2 shows statistics of each of the games, as
of late June 2008. While we have collected nearly
800,000 data instances, nearly all of the games were
between a human and the bot. Over the course of
a year, our site received between 40 and 100 vis-
its a day; this was not enough to make it likely for
human-human games to occur. The fact that we still
collected this amount of data suggests that our bot is
a satisfactory substitue for a human teammate. We
have anecdotally found that most players do not re-
alize they are playing against a bot. While most of
the data comes from games between a human and a
bot, our data set consists only of input by the human
players.
536
110
100
1000
1 2 3-5 6-1
0
11-
20
21-
50
51-
100
101
-
200
201
-
500
501
-
100
0
100
1-2
000
Games Played
Nu
mb
er
 
of 
Us
er
s
Categorilla
Categodzilla
Free Association
Figure 1: Users are grouped by number of games played.
Note that this graph is on a double-log scale.
Our main tool for attracting traffic to our site was
Google. First, we obtained $1 a day in AdWords,
which pays for between 7 to 10 clicks on our ad
a day. Second, our site is in the top 10 results for
many relevant searches, such as ?free online scatter-
gories?.
Categorilla was the most popular of the games,
with about 25% more games played than Free As-
sociation. Taking the longer length of Categorilla
games into account (see Table 2), this corresponds
to almost 90% more play time. This is despite the
fact that Free Association is the first game listed on
our home page. We hypothesize that this is because
ScattergoriesTM is a more popular game in real life,
and so many people come to our site specifically
looking for an online ScattergoriesTM game. Cat-
egodzilla has been played signficantly less; it has
been available for less time and is listed third on the
site. Even for Categodzilla, the least played game,
we have collected on average 24 guesses per cate-
gory.
Several of our design decisions for the games
were based on trying to increase the diversity of an-
swers. Categorilla has the highest answer diversity.
For a given category, each answer occurred on aver-
age only 1.15 times. In general, this average should
increase with the amount of collected data. How-
ever, Categodzilla and Free Association have col-
lected significantly fewer answers per category than
Categorilla, but still have a higher average, around
1.4. The high answer diversity of Categorilla is a
direct result of the initial letter constraint. For all
three games, the majority of category/answer pairs
occurred only once.
Figure 1 shows the distribution over users of the
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z *
Fra
ctio
n o
f An
sw
ers
Categorilla
Categodzilla
Free Assocation
Figure 2: Fraction of answers with given initial letter. *
denotes everything nonalphabetical.
number of games played. Not surprisingly, it follows
the standard Zipfian curve; there are a large number
of users who have played only a few games, and a
few users who have played a lot of games. The mid-
dle of the curve is quite thick; for both Categorilla
and Free Association there are more than 100 play-
ers who have played between 21 and 50 games.
Figure 2 shows the distribution of initial letters
of collected answers for each game. Categorilla
is nearly flat over all letters besides ?q?, ?x?, and
?z? which are never chosen as the inital letter con-
straint. This means players make a similar number
of guesses even for difficult initial letters. In con-
trast, the distribution of initial letters for Free Asso-
ciation data reflects the relatively frequency of initial
letters in English. Even though Categodzilla does
have letter constraints in the 2nd and 3rd columns,
its statistics over initial letter are very similar to Free
Association.
7 Categorilla and Categodzilla Data
In our analyses, we take ALL guesses made at any
time, whether or not they actually produced a match.
This greatly increases the amount of usable data, but
also increases the amount of noise in the data.
The biggest question about the data collected
from Categorilla and Categodzilla is the quality of
the data. Many categories can be difficult or some-
what confusing, and the initial letter constraint fur-
ther increases the difficulty.
To evaluate the quality of the data, we asked
three volunteer labelers to label 1000 total cate-
gory/answer pairs. Each labeler labeled every pair
with one of three labels, ?y?, ?n?, or ?k?. ?y? means
that the answer fit the category. ?n? means that it
537
Annotator y k n
#1 72 13 115
#2 77 27 96
#3 88 42 70
Majority 76 29 95
Table 3: Comparison of annotators
Data Set y k n
Control 30 14 156
Categorilla 76 29 95
Categodzilla 144 23 33
Table 4: Overall answer accuracy
does not fit. ?k? means that it ?kind of? fits. This was
mostly left up to the labelers; the only suggestion
was that one use of ?k? could be if the category was
?Things that eat? and the answer was ?sandwich.?
Here, the answer is clearly related to the category,
but doesn?t actually fit.
The inter-annotator agreement was reasonable,
with a Fleiss? kappa score of .49. The main differ-
ence between annotators was how permissive they
were; the percentage of answers labeled ?n? ranged
from 58% for the first annotator to 35% for the third.
The labeled pairs were divided into 5 subgroups of
200 pairs each (described below); Table 3 shows the
number of each label for the Categorilla-Random
subset. We aggregated the different annotations by
taking a majority vote; if all three answers were dif-
ferent, the item was labeled ?k?. Table 3 also shows
the statistics of the majority vote on the same subset.
Overall Data Quality. We compared results
for three random subsets of answers, Control-
Random, Categorilla-Random, and Categodzilla-
Random. Categorilla-Random was built by select-
ing 200 random category/answer pairs from the Cat-
egorilla data. Note that category/answer pairs that
occurred more than once were more likely to be se-
lected. Categodzilla-Random was built similarly.
Control-Random was built by randomly selecting
two sets of 200 category/answer pairs each (includ-
ing data from both Categorilla and Categodzilla),
and then combining the categories from the first set
with the answers from the second to generate a set
of random category/answer pairs.
Table 4 shows results for these three subsets. The
chance for a control answer to be labeled ?y? was
15%. Categorilla produces data that is significantly
Category Results -- Categorilla
0
5
10
15
20
25
NHyp NType VHyp VS VO VPP Adj O
Category Type
n
k
y
Figure 3: Categorilla accuracy by category type
better than control, with 38% of answers labeled ?y?.
Categodzilla, which is more relaxed about initial let-
ter restrictions, is significantly better than Catego-
rilla, with 72% of answers labeled ?y?. This relax-
ation has an enormous impact on the quality of the
data. Note however that these statistics are not ad-
justed for accuracy of individual players; it may be
that only more accurate players play Categodzilla.
Effect of Category Type on Data Quality.
Within each type of category (see Table 1), cer-
tain categories appear much more often than oth-
ers due to the way categories are selected (at least
two ?easy? categories are guaranteed every game).
To adjust for this, we built a subset of 200 cat-
egory/answer pairs by selecting 25 different cate-
gories randomly from each type of category. We
then selected an answer at random from among the
answers submitted for that category. In addition, we
built a control set using the same 200 categories but
instead using answers selected at random from the
entire Categorilla data set. Results for Categorilla
data are shown in Figure 3; we omit the correspond-
ing graph for control for lack of space. For most
categories, the Categorilla data is significantly bet-
ter than the control. The hand-written category type,
O, has the best data quality, which is not surpris-
ing because these categories allow the most possible
answers, and thus are easiest of think of answers for.
These categories also have the highest number of ?y?
labels for the control. Next best are the hypernym
categories, NType. NType is much higher than the
other noun hypernym category NHyp because the
?Type of? phrasing is generally more natural and al-
lows for adjectival answers. The VPP category type,
which tries to extract prepositional objects, contains
538
Data Set Letters Size y k n
Control Easy 127 .14 .08 .78
Control Hard 72 .15 .06 .79
Categorilla Easy 106 .45 .14 .41
Categorilla Hard 94 .30 .15 .55
Table 5: Accuracy of easy letters vs. hard letters. Size is
the number of answers for that row.
the most number of ?k? annotations; this is because
players often put answers that are subjects or ob-
jects of the verb, such as ?pizza? for ?Things that
are eaten with?. The adjective category type, Adj,
has the lowest increase over the control; this is likely
due to the nature of the extracted adjectives.
Effect of Initial Letter on Data Quality. In
general, we would expect common initial letters to
yield better data since there are more possible an-
swers to choose from. We did not have enough la-
beled data to do letter by letter statistics. Instead, we
broke the letters into two groups, based on the em-
pirical difficulty of obtaining matches when given
that initial letter. The easy letters were ?abcfhlmn-
prst?, while the hard letters were ?degijkouvwy?. Ta-
ble 5 shows the results on Categorilla-Random and
Control-Random on these two subsets. First, note
that the results on Control-Random are the same for
hard letters and easy letters. This means that words
starting with common letters are not more likely to
fit in a category. For both hard letters and easy let-
ters, the accuracy is considerably better on the Cat-
egorilla data. However, the increase in the number
of ?y? labels for easy letters is twice that for hard
letters. The quality of data for hard letters is consid-
erably worse than that for easy letters.
8 Free Association Data
In contrast to Categorilla and even Categodzilla, we
found that the Free Association data was quite clean.
However, it is also not structured; we simply get
pairs of related words. Thus, the essential question
for this game is what kind of data we get.
To analyze the types of relationships between
words, the authors labeled 500 randomly extracted
unique pairs with a rich set of word-word relations,
described in Table 6. This set of relations was de-
signed to capture the observed relationships encoun-
tered in the Free Association data. Unlike our Cat-
egorilla labeled set, pairs that occurred more than
once were NOT more likely to be selected than pairs
that occurred once (i.e., the category/answer pairs
were aggregated prior to sampling). Sampling in this
way led to more diversity in the pairs extracted.
To label each pair, the authors found a sequence
of relationships which connected the two words. In
many cases, this was a single link. For example,
?dragon? and ?wing? are connected by a single link,
?wing? IS PART OF ?dragon?. In others, multiple
links were required. For the seed word ?dispute? and
answer ?arbitrator?, we can connect using two links:
?dispute? IS OBJECT OF ?resolve?, ?arbitrator? IS
SUBJECT OF ?resolve?. There were two other pos-
sible ways to label a pair. First, they might be totally
unrelated (i.e., a bad answer). Second, they might
be related, but not connectable using our set of basic
relations. For example, ?echo? is clearly related to
?valley?, but in a complicated way.
The quality of the data is considerably higher than
Categorilla and Categodzilla; under 10% of words
are unrelated. Slightly over 20% of the pairs are la-
beled Misc, i.e., the words are related but in a com-
plicated way. 3% of the pairs can be linked with a
chain of two simple relations. The remaining 67%
of all pairs were linked with a single simple relation.
The category Desc deserves some discussion.
This category included both simple adjective de-
scriptions, such as ?creek? and ?noisy?, and also
qualifiers, such as ?epidemic? and ?typhoid?, where
one word specifies what kind of thing the other is.
The distinction between Desc and Phrase was sim-
ply based on to what extent the combination of the
two words was a set phrase (such as ?east? and ?Ger-
many?).
Schulte im Walde et al (2008) address very sim-
ilar issues to those discussed in this section. They
built a free association data set containing about
200,000 German word pairs using a combination of
online and offline volunteers (but not a game). They
then analyze the resulting associations by comparing
the resulting pairs to a large-scale lexical resource,
GermaNet (the German counterpart of WordNet).
Our data analysis was by hand, making it compar-
atively small scale but more detailed. It would be
interesting to compare the data sets to see whether
the use of a game affects the resulting data.
9 Filtering Bad Data
In this section, we consider a simple heuristic for
filtering bad data: only retaining answers that were
539
Name # Description Example
Misc 103 Words related, but in a complicated way ?echo?, ?valley?
Desc 76 One of the words describes the other ?cards?, ?business?
None 47 Words are not related ?congress?,?store?
Syn 46 The words are synonyms ?downturn?, ?dip?
Obj 33 One word is the object of the other ?exhale?,?emission?
Hyp 30 One word is an example of the other ?cabinet?,?furniture?
?Syn 29 The words are ?approximate? synonyms ?maverick?,?outcast?
Cousin 21 The words share a common hypernym (is-a) relation ?meter?,?foot?
Has 18 One word ?has? the other ?supermarket?,?carrots?
2-Chain 15 Words are linked by a chain of two simple relations ?arbitrator?,?dispute?
Phrase 13 Words make a phrase; similar to Desc ?East?, ?Germany?
Part 11 One is a part of the other ?dragon?,?wings?
At 10 One is found at the other ?harbor?, ?lake?
Subj 8 One is the subject of the other ?actor?, ?pretend?
Form 7 One is a form of the other ?revere?,?reverence?
Def 7 One defines the other ?blind?,?unable to see?
Opp 7 The two are opposites ?positive?,?negative?
Sound 6 The two words sound similar ?boutique?,?antique?
Sub 5 One is a subword of the other ?outlet?, ?out?
Unit 2 One is a unit of the other ?reel?,?film?
Made 2 One is made of the other ?knee?,?bone?
Table 6: Relation types for 500 hand-labeled examples. # indicates the number of pairs with that label.
guessed some minimum number of times. Note that
in this section all answers were stemmed in order to
combine counts across plurals and verb tenses.
For the Categorilla data, filtering out cate-
gory/answer pairs that only occurred once from
Categorilla-Random left a total of 64 answers (from
an original 200), of which 36 were labeled ?y? and 8
were labeled ?k?. The fraction of ?y? labels in the
reduced set is 56%, up from 38% in the original
set. This gain in quality comes at the cost of losing
slightly over two-thirds of the data.
For Categodzilla-Random, a similar filter left 88
(out of 200), with 79 labeled ?y? and 7 labeled ?k?.
For the hand-labeled Free Association data, apply-
ing this filter yielded a total of 123 pairs (out of an
original 500), with only 2 having no relation5. In
these two games, this filter eliminates nearly all bad
data while keeping a reasonable fraction of the data.
Clearly, this filter is less effective for Catego-
rilla than the other two games. One of the main
reasons for this is that the letter constraints cause
5The higher fraction of lost pairs for Free Association is pri-
marily due to the method of sampling pairs for evaluation, as
discussed in Section 8.
people to try to fit words starting with that letter
into all categories that they even vaguely relate to,
rather than thinking of words that really fit that cat-
egory. Examples include {?Art supplies?,?jacket?},
{?Things found in Chicago?,?king?} and {?Things
that are African?,?yak?}. Of course, we can further
increase the quality of the data by making the fil-
ter more restrictive, at the cost of losing more data.
For example, removing answers occuring fewer than
5 times from Categorilla-Random leaves only 8 an-
swers (out of 200), 7 labeled ?y? and 1 labeled ?n?.
There are other ways we could filter the data. For
example, suppose we are given an outside database
of pairs of words which are known to be semanti-
cally related. We could apply the following heuris-
tic: if an answer to a particular category is similar to
many other answers for that category, then that an-
swer is likely to be a good one. Preliminary experi-
ments using distributional similarity of words as the
similarity metric suggest that this heuristic captures
complimentary information to the guess frequency
heuristic. We leave as future work a full integration
of the two heuristics into a single improved filter.
540
Classified Type # Example
Real hypernyms 96 ?equipment?,?racquet?
Compound hypernyms 32 ?arrangement?,?flower?
Adjectives 25 ?building?,?old?
Sort-of hypernyms 14 ?vegetable?,?salad?
Not hypernyms 33 ?profession?,?money?
Table 7: Breakdown of potential hypernym pairs
10 Using the Data
Categorilla and Categodzilla produce structured data
which is already in a usable or nearly usable form.
For example, the NHyp and NType categories pro-
duce lists of hypernyms, which could be used to aug-
ment WordNet. We looked at this particular applica-
tion in some detail.
First, in order to remove noisy data, we used
only Categodzilla data and removed answers which
occurred only once. We took all category/answer
pairs where the category was of type either NHyp or
NType, and where the answer was a noun. This re-
sulted in 1604 potential hypernym/hyponym pairs.
Of these, 733 (or 46%) were already in WordNet.
The remaining 871 were not found in WordNet. We
then hand-labeled a random subset of 200 of the 871
to determine how many of them were real hyper-
nym/hyponym pairs. The results are shown in Ta-
ble 7. Counting compound hyponyms, nearly two-
thirds of the pairs are real hypernym/hyponym pairs.
These new pairs could directly augment WordNet.
For example, for the word ?crime?, WordNet has
as hyponyms ?burglary? and ?fraud?. However,
it doesn?t have ?arson?, ?homicide?, or ?murder?,
which are among the 871 new pairs. WordNet lists
?wedding? as being an ?event?, but not ?birthday?.
The verb subject, object, and prepositional object
categories were designed to collect data about the
selectional preferences of verbs. These categories
turned out to be problematic for several reasons.
First, statistics about selectional preferences of verbs
are not too difficult to extract from the web (although
in some cases they might be somewhat noisy). Thus,
the motivation for extracting this data using a game
is not as apparent. Second, providing arguments of
verbs out of the context of a sentence may be too dif-
ficult. For example, for the category ?Things that are
accumulated?, there a couple of obvious answers,
such as ?wealth? or ?money?, but beyond these it
becomes more difficult. In the context of an actual
document, quite a lot of things can accumulate, but
outside of that context it is difficult to think of them.
One solution to this problem would be to provide
context. For example, the category ?Things that ac-
cumulate in your body? is both easier to think of
answers for and probably collects more useful data.
However, automatically creating categories with the
right level of specificity is not a trivial task; our ini-
tial experiments suggested that it is easy to gener-
ate too much context, creating an uninteresting cat-
egory.
The Free Association game produces a lot of very
clean data, but does not classify the relationships be-
tween the words. While a web of relationships might
be useful by itself, classifying the pairs by relation
type would clearly be valuable. Snow et al (2006)
and Nakov and Hearst (2008), among others, look at
using a large amount of unlabeled data to classify
relations between words. One issue with extract-
ing new relations from text, for example meronyms
(part-of relationships), is that they tend to occur
fairly rarely. Thus, it is very easy to get a large num-
ber of spurious pairs. Using our data as a set of can-
didate pairs for relation extraction could greatly re-
duce the resulting noise. We believe that application
of existing techniques to the data from the Free As-
sociation game could lead to a clean, classified set of
word-word relations, but leave this as future work.
11 Discussion and Future Work
One way to extend Categorilla and Categodzilla
would be to add additional types of categories. For
example, a meronym category type (e.g. ?Parts of a
car?) would work well. Further developing the verb
categories (e.g., ?Things that accumulate in your
body?) is another challenging but interesting direc-
tion; these categories would produce phrase-word
relationships rather than word-word relationships.
Probably the most interesting direction for future
work is trying to increase the complexity of the data
collected from a game. There are two significant dif-
ficulties: keeping the game fun, and making sure the
collected data is not too noisy. One interesting ques-
tion for future research is whether different game ar-
chitectures might be better suited to certain kinds
of data. For example, a ?telephone? style game,
where players relay a phrase or sentence through
some noisy channel, might be an interesting way to
obtain paraphrase data.
541
References
Chklovski, T. (2003). Using analogy to acquire com-
monsense knowledge from human contributors.
Thesis.
Fellbaum, C. (Ed.). (1998). Wordnet: An electronic
lexical database. MIT Press.
Gildea, D., & Jurafsky, D. (2002). Automatic label-
ing of semantic roles. Computational Linguistics.
Kingsbury, P., Palmer, M., & Marcus, M. (2002).
Adding semantic annotation to the penn treebank.
Proceedings of the Human Language Technology
Conference (HLT?02).
Marcus, M., Marcinkiewicz, M., & Santorini, B.
(1993). Building a large annotated corpus of en-
glish: the penn treebank. Computational Linguis-
tics.
Nakov, P., & Hearst, M. (2008). Solving relational
similarity problems using the web as a corpus.
Proceedings of ACL.
Schulte imWalde, S., Melinger, A., Roth, M., &We-
ber, A. (2008). An empirical characterisation of
response types in german association norms. To
appear, Research on Language and Computation.
Snow, R., Jurafsky, D., & Ng, A. (2006). Semantic
taxonomy induction from heterogenous evidence.
Proceedings of COLING/ACL.
von Ahn, L., & Dabbish, L. (2004). Labeling images
with a computer game. ACM CHI.
von Ahn, L., Kedia, M., & Blum, M. (2006). Ver-
bosity: a game for collecting common-sense facts.
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human
Factors in computing systems.
542
