Proceedings of the Workshop on BioNLP: Shared Task, pages 41?49,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Markov Logic Approach to Bio-Molecular Event Extraction
Sebastian Riedel
??
Hong-Woo Chun
??
Toshihisa Takagi
??
Jun'ichi Tsujii
???
?
Database Center for Life Science, Research Organization of Information and System, Japan
?
Department of Computer Science, University of Tokyo, Japan
?
Department of Computational Biology, University of Tokyo, Japan
?
School of Informatics, University of Manchester, UK
?
National Centre for Text Mining, UK
{sebastian,chun,takagi}@dbcls.rois.ac.jp
tsujii@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract
In this paper we describe our entry to the
BioNLP 2009 Shared Task regarding bio-
molecular event extraction. Our work can
be described by three design decisions: (1)
instead of building a pipeline using local
classifier technology, we design and learn
a joint probabilistic model over events in
a sentence; (2) instead of developing spe-
cific inference and learning algorithms for
our joint model, we apply Markov Logic, a
general purpose Statistical Relation Learn-
ing language, for this task; (3) we represent
events as relational structures over the to-
kens of a sentence, as opposed to structures
that explicitly mention abstract event en-
tities. Our results are competitive: we
achieve the 4th best scores for task 1 (in
close range to the 3rd place) and the best
results for task 2 with a 13 percent point
margin.
1 Introduction
The continuing rapid development of the Inter-
net makes it very easy to quickly access large
amounts of data online. However, it is impossi-
ble for a single human to read and comprehend a
significant fraction of the available information.
Genomics is not an exception, with databases
such as MEDLINE storing a vast amount of
biomedical knowledge.
A possible way to overcome this is informa-
tion extraction (IE) based on natural language
processing (NLP) techniques. One specific IE
sub-task concerns the extraction of molecular
events that are mentioned in biomedical liter-
ature. In order to drive forward research in this
domain, the BioNLP Shared task 2009 (Kim
et al, 2009) concerned the extraction of such
events from text. In the course of the shared task
the organizers provided a training/development
set of abstracts for biomedical papers, annotated
with the mentioned events. Participants were
required to use this data in order to engineer
a event predictor which was then evaluated on
unseen test data.
The shared task covered three sub-tasks. The
first task concerned the extraction of events
along with their clue words and their main argu-
ments. Figure 1 shows a typical example. The
second task was an extension of the first one,
requiring participants to not only predict the
core arguments of each event, but also the cel-
lular locations the event is associated with in
the text. The events in this task were simi-
lar in nature to those in figure 1, but would
also contain arguments that are neither events
nor proteins but cellular location terms. In con-
trast to the protein terms, cellular location terms
were not given as input and had to be predicted,
too. Finally, for task 3 participants were asked
to extract negations and speculations regarding
events. However, in our work we only tackled
Task 1 and Task 2, and hence we omit further
details on Task 3 for brevity.
Our approach to biomedical event extraction
is inspired by recent work on Semantic Role La-
belling (Meza-Ruiz and Riedel, 2009; Riedel and
Meza-Ruiz, 2008) and can be characterized by
three decisions that we will illustrate in the fol-
lowing. First, we do not build a pipelined sys-
tem that first predicts event clues and cellular
locations, and then relations between these; in-
41
stead, we design and learn a joint discrimina-
tive model of the complete event structure for
a given sentence. This allows us to incorporate
global correlations between decisions in a prin-
cipled fashion. For example, we know that any
event that has arguments which itself are events
(such as the positive regulation event in figure
1) has to be a regulation event. This means that
when we make the decision about the type of
an event (e.g., in the first step of a classifica-
tion pipeline) independently from the decisions
about its arguments and their type, we run the
risk of violating this constraint. However, in a
joint model this can be easily avoided.
Our second design choice is the following: in-
stead of designing and implementing specific in-
ference and training methods for our structured
model, we useMarkov Logic, a Statistical Re-
lational Learning language, and define our global
model declaratively. This simplified the imple-
mentation of our system significantly, and al-
lowed us to construct a very competitive event
extractor in three person-months. For example,
the above observation is captured by the simple
formula:
eventType (e, t) ? role (e, a, r) ? event (a) ?
regType (t) (1)
Finally, we represent event structures as rela-
tional structures over tokens of a sentence,
as opposed to structures that explicitly mention
abstract event entities (compare figure 1 and 2).
The reason is as follows. Markov Logic, for now,
is tailored to link prediction problems where we
may make inferences about the existence of rela-
tions between given entities. However, when the
identity and number of objects of our domain is
unknown, things become more complicated. By
mapping to relational structure over grounded
text, we also show a direct connection to recent
formulations of Semantic Role Labelling which
may be helpful in the future.
The remainder of this paper is organized as
follows: we will first present the preprocessing
steps we perform (section 2), then the conversion
to a link prediction problem (section 3). Subse-
quently, we will describe Markov Logic (section
4) and our Markov Logic Network for event ex-
!"# !"$ !"%
&'()*
+,*-*+,*-*
+,*-*
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Figure 1: Example gold annotation for task 1 of the
shared task.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Figure 2: Link Prediction version of the events in
figure 1.
traction (section 5). Finally, we present our re-
sults (in section 6) and conclude (section 7).
2 Preprocessing
The original data format provided by the shared
task organizers consists of (a) a collection
biomedical abstracts, and (b) standoff anno-
tation that describes the proteins, events and
sites mentioned in these abstracts. The organiz-
ers also provided a set of dependency and con-
stituent parses for the abstracts. Note that these
parses are based on a different tokenisation of the
text in the abstracts.
In our first preprocessing step we convert the
standoff annotation in the original data to stand-
off annotation for the tokenisation used in the
parses. This allows us to formulate our proba-
bilistic model in terms of one consistent tokeni-
sation (and be able to speak of token instead of
character offsets). Then we we retokenise the
input text (for the parses) according the protein
boundaries that were given in the shared task
data (in order to split strings such as p50/p55).
Finally, we use this tokenisation to once again
adapt the stand-off annotation (using the previ-
ously adapted version as input).
3 Link Prediction Representation
As we have mentioned earlier, before we learn
and apply our Statistical Relational Model, we
convert the task to link prediction over a se-
quence of tokens. In the following we will present
this transformation in detail.
42
To simplify our later presentation we will first
introduce a formal representation of the events,
proteins and locations mentioned in a sentence.
Let us simply identify both proteins and cellular
location entities with their token position in the
sentence. Furthermore, let us describe an event e
as a tuple (i, t, A) where i is the token position of
the clue word of e and t is the event type of e; A
is a set of labelled arguments (a, r) where each a
is either a protein, location or event, and r is the
role a plays with respect to e. We will identify
the set of all proteins, locations and events for a
sentence with P , L and E, respectively.
For example, in figure 1 we have P =
{4, 7} , L = ? and E = {e13, e14, e15} with
e15 = (5, gene_expr, {(4,Theme)})
e14 = (2, pos_reg, {(e15,Theme) , (7,Cause)})
e13 = (1, neg_reg, {(e14,Theme)})
3.1 Events to Links
As we mentioned in section 1, Markov Logic (or
its interpreters) are not yet able to deal with
cases where the number and identity of entities is
unknown, while relations/links between known
objects can be readily modelled. In the follow-
ing we will therefore present a mapping of an
event structure E to a labelled relation over to-
kens. Essentially, we project E to a pair (L,C)
where L is a set of labelled token-to-token links
(i, j, r), and C is a set of labelled event clues
(i, t). Note that this mapping has another ben-
efit: it creates a predicate-argument structure
very similar to most recent formulations of Se-
mantic Role Labelling (Surdeanu et al, 2008).
Hence it may be possible to re-use or adapt the
successful approaches in SRL in order to improve
bio-molecular event extraction. Since our ap-
proach is inspired by the Markov Logic role la-
beller in (Riedel and Meza-Ruiz, 2008), this work
can be seen as an attempt in this direction.
For a sentence with given P , L and E, algo-
rithm 1 presents our mapping from E to (L,C).
For brevity we omit a more detailed description
of the algorithm. Note that for our running ex-
ample eventsToLinks would return
C = {(1, neg_reg) , (2, pos_reg) , (5, gene_expr)}
(2)
Algorithm 1 Event to link conversion
/* returns all clues C and links L given
by the events in E */
1 function eventsToLinks (E):
2 C ? ?, L? ?
3 for each event (i, t, A) ? E do
4 C ? C?{(i, t)}
5 for each argument (a, r) ? A do
6 if a is an event (i?, t?, A?) do
7 L? L?{(i, i?, r)} with a = (i?, t?, A?)
8 else
9 L? L ? {(i, a, r)}
10 return (C,L)
and
L = {(1, 2,Theme) , (2, 5,Theme) ,
(2, 7,Cause) , (5, 4,Theme)} . (3)
3.2 Links to Events
The link-based representation allows us to sim-
plify the design of our Markov Logic Network.
However, after we applied the MLN to our data,
we still need to transform this representation
back to an event structure (in order to use or
evaluate it). This mapping is presented in al-
gorithm 2 and discussed in the following. Note
that we expect the relational structure L to be
cycle free. We again omit a detailed discussion of
this algorithm. However, one thing to notice is
the special treatment we give to binding events.
Roughly speaking, for the binding event clue c
we create an event with all arguments of c in
L. For a non-binding event clue c we first col-
lect all roles for c, and then create one event per
assignment of argument tokens to these roles.
If we would re-convert C and L from equation
2 and 3, respectively, we could return to our orig-
inal event structure in figure 1. However, con-
verting back and forth is not loss-free in general.
For example, if we have a non-binding event in
the original E set with two arguments A and B
with the same role Theme, the round-trip con-
version would generate two events: one with A
as Theme and one with B as Theme.
4 Markov Logic
Markov Logic (Richardson and Domingos, 2006)
is a Statistical Relational Learning language
43
Algorithm 2 link to event conversion. Assume:
no cycles; tokens can only be one of protein, site
or event; binding events have only protein argu-
ments.
/* returns all events E specified
by clues C and links L */
1 function linksToEvents (C,L)
2 return S(i,t)?C resolve (i, C, L)
/* returns all events for
the given token i */
1 function resolve (i, C, L)
2 if no t with (i, t) ? C return {i}
3 t? type (i, C)
4 if t = binding return {(i, t, A)} with
5 A = {(a, r) | (i, a, r) ? L}
6 Ri ? {r?|?a : (i, a, r) ? L}
7 for each role r ? Ri do
8 Ar ? {a| (i, a, r) ? L}
9 Br ?
S
a?Ar {(resolve (a) , r)}
10 return SA?expand(Br1 ,...,Brn ) {(i, t, A)}
/* returns all possible argument
sets for Br1 , . . . , Brn */
1 function expand (Br1 , . . . , Brn )
2 if n = 1 return Brn
3 return
S
a?Br1
S
A?expand(Br2 ,...,Brn ) {(a, r1)} ?A
based on First Order Logic and Markov Net-
works. It can be seen as a formalism that ex-
tends First Order Logic to allow formulae that
can be violated with some penalty. From an al-
ternative point of view, it is an expressive tem-
plate language that uses First Order Logic for-
mulae to instantiate Markov Networks of repet-
itive structure.
Let us introduce Markov Logic by considering
the event extraction task (as relational structure
over tokens as generated by algorithm 1). In
Markov Logic we can model this task by first
introducing a set of logical predicates such as
eventType(Token,Type), role(Token,Token,Role)
and word(Token,Word). Then we specify a set of
weighted first order formulae that define a distri-
bution over sets of ground atoms of these pred-
icates (or so-called possible worlds). Note that
we will refer predicates such as word as observed
because they are known in advance. In contrast,
role is hidden because we need to infer its ground
atoms at test time.
Ideally, the distribution we define with these
weighted formulae assigns high probability to
possible worlds where events are correctly iden-
tified and a low probability to worlds where this
is not the case. For example, in our running ex-
ample a suitable set of weighted formulae would
assign a higher probability to the world
{word (1, prevented) , eventType (1, neg_reg) ,
role(1, 2,Theme), event(2), . . .}
than to the world
{word (1, prevented) , eventType (1, binding) ,
role(1, 2,Theme), event(2), . . .}
In Markov Logic a set of weighted first order for-
mulae is called a Markov Logic Network (MLN).
Formally speaking, an MLN M is a set of pairs
(?,w) where ? is a first order formula and w a
real weigh t. M assigns the probability
p (y) = 1Z exp
?
? ?
(?,w)?M
w
?
c?C?
f?c (y)
?
?
(4)
to the possible world y. Here C? is the set of all
possible bindings of the free variables in ? with
the constants of our domain. f?c is a feature
function that returns 1 if in the possible world y
the ground formula we get by replacing the free
variables in ? by the constants in the binding
c is true and 0 otherwise. Z is a normalisation
constant.
4.1 Inference and Learning
Assuming that we have an MLN, a set of weights
and a given sentence, we need to predict the
choice of event clues and roles with maximal
a posteriori probability (MAP). To this end
we apply a method that is both exact and ef-
ficient: Cutting Plane Inference Riedel (2008,
CPI) with Integer Linear Programming (ILP) as
base solver.
In order to learn the weights of the MLN
we use the 1-best MIRA Crammer and Singer
(2003) Online Learning method. As MAP infer-
ence method that is applied in the inner loop of
the online learner we apply CPI, again with ILP
as base solver. The loss function for MIRA is a
44
weighted sum FP +?FN where FP is the num-
ber of false positives, FN the number of false
negatives and ? = 0.01.
5 Markov Logic Network for Event
Extraction
We define four hidden predicates our task:
event(i) indicates that there is an event with
clue word i; eventType(i,t) denotes that at token
i there is an event with type t; site(i) denotes a
cellular location mentioned at token i; role(i,j,r)
indicates that token i has the argument j with
role r. In other words, the four hidden predicates
represent the set of sites L (via site), the set of
event clues C (via event and eventType) and the
set of links L (via role) presented in section 3.
There are numerous observed predicates we
use. Firstly, the provided information about
protein mentions is captured by the predicate
protein(i), indicating there is a protein mention
ending at token i. We also describe event types
and roles in more detail: regType( t) holds for
an event type t iff it is a regulation event type;
task1Role(r) and task2Role(r) hold for a role r
if is a role of task 1 (Theme, Cause) or task 2
(Site, CSite, etc.).
Furthermore, we use predicates that de-
scribe properties of tokens (such as the word
or stem of a token) and token pairs (such
as the dependency between two tokens); this
set is presented in table 1. Here the path
and pathNL predicates may need some fur-
ther explanation. When path(i,j,p,parser) is
true, there must be a labelled dependency
path p between i and j according to the
parser parser. For example, in figure 1 we
will observe path(1,5,dobj?prep_of?,mcclosky-
charniak). pathNL just omits the depen-
dency labels, leading to path(1,5,??,mcclosky-
charniak) for the same example.
We use two parses per sentence: the outputs
of a self-trained reranking parser Charniak and
Johnson (2005); McClosky and Charniak (2008)
and a CCG parser (Clark and Curran, 2007),
provided as part of the shared task dataset. As
dictionaries we use a collection of cellular lo-
cation terms taken from the Genia event cor-
pus (Kim et al, 2008), a small handpicked set of
event triggers and a list of English stop words.
Predicate Description
word(i,w) Token i has word w.
stem(i,s) i has (Porter) stem s.
pos(i,p) i has POS tag p.
hyphen(i,w) i has word w after last hyphen.
hyphenStem(i,s) i has stem s after last hyphen.
dict(i,d) i appears in dictionary d.
genia(i,p) i is event clue in the Genia
corpus with precision p.
dep(i,j,d,parser) i is head of token j with
dependency d according to
parser parser.
path(i,j,p,parser) Labelled Dependency path
according to parser parser
between tokens i and j is p.
pathNL(i,j,p,parser) Unlabelled dependency path
according to parser p between
tokens i and j is path.
Table 1: Observable predicates for token and token
pair properties.
5.1 Local Formulae
A formula is local if its groundings relate any
number of observed ground atoms to exactly one
hidden ground atom. For example, the ground-
ing
dep (1, 2, dobj, ccg) ? word (1, prevented) ?
eventType (2, pos_reg) (5)
of the local formula
dep(h, i, d, parser) ? word (h,+w) ?
eventType(i,+t) (6)
connects a single hidden eventType ground atom
with an observed word and dep atom. Note that
the + prefix for variables indicates that there is
a different weight for each possible pair of word
and event type (w, t).
5.1.1 Local Entity Formulae
The local formulae for the hidden event/1
predicate can be summarized as follows. First,
we add a event (i) formula that postulates the
existence of an event for each token. The weight
of this formulae serves as a general bias for or
against the existence of events.
45
Next, we add one formula
T (i,+t) ? event (i) (7)
for each simple token property predicate T in
table 1 (those in the first section of the table).
For example, when we plug in word for T we get
a formula that encourages or discourages the ex-
istence of an event token based on the word form
of the current token: word (i,+t) ? event (i).
We also add the formula
genia (i, p) ? event (i) (8)
and multiply the feature-weight product for each
of its groundings with the precision p. This is
corresponds to so-called real-valued feature func-
tions, and allows us to incorporate probabili-
ties and other numeric quantities in a principled
fashion.
Finally, we add a version of formula 6 where
we replace eventType(i,t) with event(i).
For the cellular location site predicate we
use exactly the same set of formulae but re-
place every occurrence of event(i) with site(i).
This demonstrates the ease with which we could
tackle task 2: apart from a small set of global
formulae we introduce later, we did not have to
do more than copy one file (the event model file)
and perform a search-and-replace. Likewise, in
the case of the eventType predicate we simply
replace event(i) with eventType(i,+t).
5.1.2 Local Link Formulae
The local formulae for the role/3 predicate
are different in nature because they assess two
tokens and their relation. However, the first for-
mula does look familiar: role (i, j,+r). This for-
mula captures a (role-dependent) bias for the ex-
istence of a role between any two tokens.
The next formula we add is
dict (i,+di) ? dict (j,+dj) ? role (i, j,+r) (9)
and assesses each combination of dictionaries
that the event and argument token are part of.
Furthermore, we add the formula
path (i, j,+p,+parser) ? role (i, j,+r) (10)
that relates the dependency path between two
tokens i and j with the role that j plays with
respect to i. We also add an unlabelled version
of this formula (using pathNL instead of path).
Finally, we add a formula
P (i, j,+p,+parser) ? T (i,+t) ?
role (i, j,+r) (11)
for each P in {path,pathNL} and T in
{word,stem,pos,dict,protein}. Note that for
T=protein we replace T (i,+t) with T (i).
5.2 Global Formulae
Global formulae relate two or more hidden
ground atoms. For example, the formula in
equation 1 is global. While local formulae can be
used in any conventional classifier (in the form
of feature functions conditioned only on the in-
put data) this does not hold for global ones.
We could enforce global constraints such as the
formula in equation 1 by building up structure
incrementally (e.g. start with one classifier for
events and sites, and then predict roles between
events and arguments with another). However,
this does not solve the typical chicken-and-egg
problem: evidence for possible arguments could
help us to predict the existence of event clues,
and evidence for events help us to predict argu-
ments. By contrast, global formulae can capture
this type of correlation very naturally.
Table 2 shows the global formulae we use. We
divide them into three parts. The first set of for-
mulae (CORE) ensures that event and eventType
atoms are consistent. In all our experiments we
will always include all CORE formulae; without
them we might return meaningless solutions that
have events with no event types, or types with-
out events.
The second set of formulae (VALID) consist
of CORE and formulae that ensure that the link
structure represents a valid set of events. For
example, this includes formula 12 that enforces
each event to have at least one theme.
Finally, FULL includes VALID and two con-
straints that are not strictly necessary to enforce
valid event structures. However, they do help us
to improve performance. Formula 14 forbids a
token to be argument of more than one event. In
fact, this formula does not hold all the time, but
46
# Formula Description
1 event (i)? ?t.eventType (i, t) If there is an event there should be an event type.
2 eventType (i, t)? event (i) If there is an event type there should be an event.
3 eventType (i, t) ? t 6= o? ?eventType (i, o) There cannot be more than one event type per token.
4 ?site (i) ? ?event (i) A token cannot be both be event and site.
5 role (i, j, r)? event (i) If j plays the role r for i then i has to be an event.
6 role (i, j, r1) ? r1 6= r2 ? ?role (i, j, r2) There cannot be more than one role per argument.
7 eventType (e, t) ? role (e, a, r) ? event (a)? regType (t) Only reg. type events can have event arguments.
9 role (i, j, r) ? taskOne (r)? event (j) ? protein (j) For task 1 roles arguments must be proteins or events
10 role (i, j, r) ? taskTwo (r)? site (j) Task 2 arguments must be cellular locations (site).
11 site (j)? ?i, r.role (i, j, r) ? taskTwo (r) Sites are always associated with an event.
12 event (i)? ?j.role (i, j,Theme) Every events need a theme.
13 eventType (i, t) ? ?allowed (t, r)? ?role (i, j, r) Certain events may not have certain roles.
14 role (i, j, r1) ? k 6= i? ?role (k, j, r2) A token cannot be argument of more than one event.
15 j < k ? i < j ? role (i, j, r1)? ?role (i, k, r2) No inside outside chains.
Table 2: All three sets of global formulae used: CORE (1-3), VALID (1-13), FULL (1-15).
by adding it we could improve performance. For-
mula 15 is our answer to a type of event chain
that earlier models would tend to produce.
Note that all formulae but formula 15 are de-
terministic. This amounts to giving them a very
high/infinite weight in advance (and not learn-
ing it during training).
6 Results
In table 3 we can see our results for task 1 and
2 of the shared task. The measures we present
here correspond to the approximate span, ap-
proximate recursive match criterion that counts
an event as correctly predicted if all arguments
are extracted and the event clue tokens approx-
imately match the gold clue tokens. For more
details on this metric we refer the reader to the
shared task overview paper.
To put our results into context: for task 1 we
reached the 4th place among 20 participants, are
in close range to place 2 and 3, and significantly
outperform the 5th best entry. Moreover, we
had highest scoring scores for task 2 with a 13%
margin to the runner-up. Using both training
and development set for training (as allowed by
the task organisers), our task 1 score rises to
45.1, slightly higher than the score of the current
third.
In terms of accuracy across different event
types our model performs worse for binding, reg-
ulation type and transcription events. Binding
events are inherently harder to correctly extract
because they often have multiple core arguments
while other non-regulation events have only one;
just missing one of the binding arguments will
lead to an event that is considered as error with
no partial credit given. If we would give credit
for binding with partially correct arguments our
F-score for binding events would rise to 49.8.
One reason why regulation events are difficult
to extract is the fact that they often have argu-
ments which themselves are events, too. In this
case our recall is bound by the recall for argu-
ment events because we can never find a regu-
lation event if we cannot predict the argument
event. Note that we are still unsure about tran-
scription events, in particular because we ob-
serve 49% F-score for such events in the devel-
opment set.
How does our model benefit from the global
formulae we describe in section 5 (and which
represent one of the core benefits of a Markov
Logic approach)? To evaluate this we compare
our FULL model with CORE and VALID from
table 2. Note that because the evaluation inter-
face rejects invalid event structures, we cannot
use the evaluation metrics of the shared task.
Instead we use table 4 to present an evaluation
in terms of ground atom F1-score for the hidden
predicates of our model. This amounts to a per-
47
Task 1 Task 2
R P F R P F
Loc 37.9 88.0 53.0 32.8 76.0 45.8
Bind 23.1 48.2 31.2 22.4 47.0 30.3
Expr 63.0 75.1 68.5 63.0 75.1 68.5
Trans 16.8 29.9 21.5 16.8 29.9 21.5
Cata 64.3 81.8 72.0 64.3 81.8 72.0
Phos 78.5 77.4 77.9 69.1 70.1 69.6
Total 48.3 68.9 56.8 46.8 67.0 55.1
Reg 23.7 40.8 30.0 22.3 38.5 28.2
Pos 26.8 42.8 32.9 26.7 42.3 32.7
Neg 27.2 40.2 32.4 26.1 38.6 31.2
Total 26.3 41.8 32.3 25.8 40.8 31.6
Total 36.9 55.6 44.4 35.9 54.1 43.1
Table 3: (R)ecall, (P)recision, and (F)-Score for task
1 and 2 in terms of event types.
role, per-site and per-event-clue evaluation. The
numbers here will not directly correspond to ac-
tual scores, but generally we can assume that if
we do better in our metrics, we will likely have
better scores.
In table 4 we notice that ensuring consistency
between all predicates has a significant impact
on the performance across the board (see the
VALID results). Furthermore, when adding ex-
tra formulae that are not strictly necessary for
consistency, but which encourage more likely
event structure, we again see significant improve-
ments (see FULL results). Interestingly, al-
though the extra formulae only directly consider
role atoms, they also have a significant impact
on event and particularly site extraction perfor-
mance. This reflects how in a joint model deci-
sions which would appear in the end of a tradi-
tional pipeline (e.g., extracting roles for events)
can help steps that would appear in the begin-
ning (extracting events and sites).
For the about 7500 sentences in the training
set we need about 3 hours on a MacBook Pro
with 2.8Ghz and 4Gb RAM to learn the weights
of our MLN. This allowed us to try different sets
of formulae in relatively short time.
7 Conclusion
Our approach the BioNLP Shared Task 2009 can
be characterized by three decisions: (a) jointly
CORE VALID FULL
eventType 52.8 63.2 64.3
role 44.0 53.5 55.7
site 42.0 46.0 51.5
Total 50.7 60.1 61.9
Table 4: Ground atom F-scores for global formulae.
modelling the complete event structure for a
given sentence; (b) using Markov Logic as gen-
eral purpose-framework in order to implement
our joint model; (c) framing the problem as a
link prediction problem between tokens of a sen-
tence.
Our results are competitive: we reach the 4th
place in task 1 and the 1st place for task 2 (with
a 13% margin). Furthermore, the declarative na-
ture of Markov Logic helped us to achieve these
results with a moderate amount of engineering.
In particular, we were able to tackle task 2 by
copying the local formulae for event prediction,
and adding three global formulae (4, 10 and 11
in table 2). Finally, our system was fast to train
(3 hours) . This greatly simplified the search for
good sets of formulae.
We have also shown that global formulae sig-
nificantly improve performance in terms of event
clue, site and argument prediction. While a sim-
ilar effect may be possible with reranking archi-
tectures, we believe that in terms of implemen-
tation efforts our approach is at least as simple.
In fact, our main effort lied in the conversion to
link prediction, not in learning or inference. In
future work we will therefore investigate means
to extend Markov Logic (interpreter) in order to
directly model event structure.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Chisato Yamasaki and Dr.
Tadashi Imanishi, BIRC, AIST, for their help.
This work is supported by the Integrated
Database Project (MEXT, Japan), the Grant-
in-Aid for Specially Promoted Research (MEXT,
Japan) and the Genome Network Project
(MEXT, Japan).
48
References
Charniak, Eugene and Mark Johnson. 2005.
Coarse-to-fine n-best parsing and maxent dis-
criminative reranking. In Proceedings of the
43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL' 05). pages
173180.
Clark, Stephen and James R. Curran. 2007.
Wide-coverage efficient statistical parsing
with ccg and log-linear models. Comput. Lin-
guist. 33(4):493552.
Crammer, Koby and Yoram Singer. 2003. Ultra-
conservative online algorithms for multiclass
problems. Journal of Machine Learning Re-
search 3:951991.
Kim, Jin D., Tomoko Ohta, and Jun'ichi Tsujii.
2008. Corpus annotation for mining biomedi-
cal events from literature. BMC Bioinformat-
ics 9(1).
Kim, Jin-Dong, Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo,
Yoshinobu Kano, and Jun'ichi Tsujii. 2009.
Overview of bionlp'09 shared task on event ex-
traction. In Proceedings of Natural Language
Processing in Biomedicine (BioNLP) NAACL
2009 Workshop. To appear.
McClosky, David and Eugene Charniak. 2008.
Self-training for biomedical parsing. In
Proceedings of the 46rd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL' 08).
Meza-Ruiz, Ivan and Sebastian Riedel. 2009.
Jointly identifying predicates, arguments and
senses using markov logic. In Joint Human
Language Technology Conference/Annual
Meeting of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics
(HLT-NAACL '09).
Richardson, Matt and Pedro Domingos. 2006.
Markov logic networks. Machine Learning
62:107136.
Riedel, Sebastian. 2008. Improving the accuracy
and efficiency of map inference for markov
logic. In Proceedings of the 24th Annual Con-
ference on Uncertainty in AI (UAI '08).
Riedel, Sebastian and Ivan Meza-Ruiz. 2008.
Collective semantic role labelling with markov
logic. In Proceedings of the 12th Conference
on Computational Natural Language Learning
(CoNLL' 08). pages 193197.
Surdeanu, Mihai, Richard Johansson, Adam
Meyers, Llu?s M?rquez, and Joakim Nivre.
2008. The CoNLL-2008 shared task on joint
parsing of syntactic and semantic dependen-
cies. In Proceedings of the 12th Conference
on Computational Natural Language Learning
(CoNLL-2008).
49
BioNLP 2008: Current Trends in Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages 90?91,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Prediction of Protein Sub-cellular Localization
using Information from Texts and Sequences
Hong-Woo Chun1,2,3 Chisato Yamasaki2,3 Naomi Saichi2,3 Masayuki Tanaka2,3
chun@dbcls.rois.ac.jp, {chisato-yamasaki, nao-saichi, masa-tanaka}@aist.go.jp
Teruyoshi Hishiki3 Tadashi Imanishi3,5 Takashi Gojobori3,6
{t-hishiki, t.imanishi, t-gojobori}@aist.go.jp
Jin-Dong Kim4 Jun?ichi Tsujii4,7,8 Toshihisa Takagi1,9
{jdkim, tsujii}@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp, takagi@dbcls.rois.ac.jp
1 Database Center for Life Science, Research Organization of Information and System,
Engineering 12th Bldg., University of Tokyo, 2-11-16 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0032, Japan
2 Japan Biological Information Research Center, Japan Biological Informatics Consortium
3 Biological Information Research Center,
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Japan
4 Department of Computer Science, University of Tokyo, Japan
5 Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Hokkaido University, Japan
6 Center for Information Biology and DNA Data Bank of Japan, National Institute of Genetics
7 School of Informatics, University of Manchester, UK
8 National Centre for Text Mining, UK
9 Department of Computational Biology, University of Tokyo, Japan
Abstract
This paper presents a novel prediction ap-
proach for protein sub-cellular localization. We
have incorporated text and sequence-based ap-
proaches.
1 Introduction
Natural Language Processing (NLP) has tackled and
solved a lot of prediction problems in Biology. One
practical research issue is Protein Sub-Cellular Lo-
calization (PSL) Prediction. Many previous ap-
proaches have combined information from both texts
and sequences by a machine learning (ML) technique
(Shatkay et al, 2007). All of them have not used tra-
ditional NLP techniques such as parsing. Our aim
is to develop a novel PSL prediction system using
information from texts and sequences. At the same
time, we demonstrated the effectiveness of the tra-
ditional NLP and the sequence-based features in the
viewpoint of the text-based approach.
2 Methodology
A Maximum Entropy-based ML technique has been
used to combine information from both texts and se-
quences. To develop a supervised ML-based predic-
tion system, an annotated corpus is needed to train
the system. However, there is no publicly available
corpus that contains the PSL. Therefore, we have
constructed a corpus using GENIA corpus as an ini-
tial data, because the annotation of Protein and Cel-
lular component in GENIA corpus is already done
by human experts. The new types of annotation con-
tain two tasks. The first annotation is to classify
1,117 cellular components in GENIA corpus into 11
locations, and the second annotation is to catego-
rize a relation between a protein and a location into
positive, negative, and neutral. Biologists selected
11 locations based on Gene Ontology: Cytoplasm,
Cytoskeleton, Endoplasmic reticulum, Extracellular,
Golgi apparatus, Granule, Lysosome, Mitochondria,
Nucleus, Peroxisome, and Plasma membrane. The
number of co-occurrences in GENIA corpus is 864.
1 Three human experts annotated with 79.49% of
inter-annotator agreement. For calculating the inter-
annotator agreement, all annotators annotated 117
1The co-occurrence in the proposed approach is a sentence
that contains at least one pair of protein and cellular component
names.
90
# Relevant Performance : F-score (Precision, Recall)
Location relations Baseline Text Sequence Text + Sequence
Nucleus 173 0.282 (0.164, 1.0) 0.764 (0.736, 0.794) 0.725 (0.569, 1.000) 0.778 (0.758, 0.798)
Cytoplasm 94 0.163 (0.089, 1.0) 0.828 (0.804, 0.852) 0.788 (0.657, 0.984) 0.828 (0.804, 0.852)
Plasma membrane 23 0.043 (0.022, 1.0) 0.875 (0.814, 0.946) 0.857 (0.766, 0.973) 0.885 (0.841, 0.932)
Table 1: Performance of protein sub-cellular localization prediction for each location.
co-occurrences. From the texts, we used eight fea-
tures: (1) protein and cellular component names an-
notated by human experts, (2) adjacent one and two
words of names, (3) bag of words, (4) order of names,
(5) distance between names, (6) syntactic category
of names, (7) predicates of names, and (8) part-of-
speech of predicates. To analyze the syntactic struc-
ture, we used the ENJU full parser whose output is
predicate-argument structures of a sentence.
To combine the information from sequences, we
attempted to predict PSL for all proteins in GE-
NIA corpus by two existing sequence-based meth-
ods: WoLF PSORT (Horton et al, 2006) and SOSUI
(Hirokawa et al, 1998). Approximately 14% of pro-
tein names in GENIA corpus obtained results. From
the sequences, we used two features: (1) existence
of the sequence-based results, and (2) the number of
sequence-based results.
3 Experimental results and Conclusion
The proposed approach has integrated text and
sequence-based approaches. To evaluate the system,
we performed 10-fold cross validation using 864 co-
occurrences including positive, negative, and neutral
relations. We measured the precision, recall, and
F-score of the system for all experiments. Among
864 co-occurrences in GENIA corpus, 301 positive
or negative co-occurrences have been considered as
relevant relations, and the remaining 563 neutral re-
lations have been considered as irrelevant relations.
Four approaches have been compared based on
three locations in Table 1. The four approaches are
baseline, text-based approach, sequence-based ap-
proach, and integration of the text and sequence-
based approaches. Baseline experiment used an as-
sumption: there is a relevant relation if a protein and
a cellular component names occur together in a co-
occurrence. The three locations selected when there
are the sequence-based results and the number of rel-
evant relations is more than one. All experiments
showed that the integration of text and sequence-
based approaches is the best, even though the exper-
iments for Cytoplasm showed the best performance
at both the text-based approach and the integration
approach.
A new prediction method has been developed for
protein sub-cellular localization, and it has integrated
text and sequence-based approach using an ML tech-
nique. The traditional NLP techniques contributed
to improve performance of the text-based approach,
and the text and sequence-based approaches recipro-
cally contributed to obtain a improved PSL predic-
tion method. The newly constructed corpus will be
included in the next version of GENIA corpus. There
are weak points in the proposed approach. The cur-
rent evaluation method has been focusing on eval-
uating the text-based approach, and the results of
the sequence-based approach were obtained for only
14% of proteins in GENIA corpus, so these situations
might be the reason that the sequence-based approach
did contribute a little. Thus, we need to evaluate the
proposed approach with a more reasonable method.
Acknowledgments
We acknowledge Fusano Todokoro for her technical
assistance.
References
Paul Horton, Keun-Joon Park, Takeshi Obayashi and
Kenta Nakai. 2006. Protein Subcellular Localization
Prediction with WoLF PSORT. Asia Pacific Bioinfor-
matics Conference (APBC), pp. 39?48.
Takatsugu Hirokawa, Seah Boon-Chieng and Shigeki Mi-
taku. 1998. SOSUI: classification and secondary
structure prediction system for membrane proteins.
Bioinformatics, 14(4): pp. 378?379.
Hagit Shatkay, Annette Ho?glund, Scott Brady, Torsten
Blum, Pierre Do?nnes and Oliver Kohlbacher. 2007.
SherLoc: high-accuracy prediction of protein subcellu-
lar localization by integrating text and protein sequence
data. Bioinformatics., 23(11): pp. 1410?1417
91
Proceedings of the BioNLP Shared Task 2013 Workshop, pages 67?75,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Overview of the Pathway Curation (PC) task of BioNLP Shared Task 2013
Tomoko Ohta 1, Sampo Pyysalo 1, Rafal Rak 1, Andrew Rowley1, Hong-Woo Chun2,
Sung-Jae Jung 2,3, Chang-Hoo Jeong 2 Sung-Pil Choi 2,3, Jun?ichi Tsujii 4,Sophia Ananiadou 1
1National Centre for Text Mining and School of Computer Science, University of Manchester
2Software Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology Information (KISTI)
3Department of Applied Information Science, University of Science and Technology (UST)
4Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
Abstract
We present the Pathway Curation (PC)
task, a main event extraction task of
the BioNLP shared task (ST) 2013.
The PC task concerns the automatic ex-
traction of biomolecular reactions from
text. The task setting, representation
and semantics are defined with respect
to pathway model standards and ontolo-
gies (SBML, BioPAX, SBO) and docu-
ments selected by relevance to specific
model reactions. Two BioNLP ST 2013
participants successfully completed the
PC task. The highest achieved F-
score, 52.8%, indicates that event extrac-
tion is a promising approach to support-
ing pathway curation efforts. The PC
task continues as an open challenge with
data, resources and tools available from
http://2013.bionlp-st.org/
1 Introduction
Following developments in molecular biology, bi-
ological phenomena are increasingly understood
on the molecular level, as the products of complex
systems of molecular reactions. Pathway mod-
els formalizing biomolecules and their reactions
in machine readable representations are a key way
of sharing and communicating human understand-
ing of these phenomena and of developing com-
putational models of biological systems (Kitano,
2002). Many pathway models integrate knowl-
edge from hundreds or thousands of scientific pub-
lications, and their curation requires substantial
manual effort. To support this effort, we have de-
veloped PathText (Kemper et al, 2010) which pro-
vides a seamless environment integrating a path-
way visualizer, text mining systems and annota-
tion tools. Furthermore, automatic processing of
the domain literature could thus potentially play
pyruvate kinase catalyzes the conversion of PEP to pyruvate.
GGP +Regulation Conversion Chem ChemicalThemeCause Theme Product
Figure 1: Event representation for a conversion re-
action.
an important role in the support of pathway cura-
tion.
Information extraction targeting biomolecular
reactions has been a major focus of efforts in
biomedical natural language processing, with sev-
eral tasks, resources, and tools addressing in par-
ticular protein-protein interactions (Krallinger et
al., 2007; Pyysalo et al, 2008; Tikk et al, 2010).
However, most such efforts have employed sim-
ple representations, such as entity pairs, that are
not sufficient for capturing molecular reactions to
the level of detail required to support the curation
of pathway models. Additionally, previous efforts
have not directly involved the semantics (e.g. re-
action type definitions) of such models. Perhaps
in part due to these reasons, natural language pro-
cessing and information extraction methods have
not been widely embraced by biomedical pathway
curation communities (Ohta et al, 2011c; Ohta et
al., 2011a).
We believe that the extraction of structured
event representations (Figure 1) pursued in the
BioNLP Shared Tasks offers many opportuni-
ties to make significant contributions to support
the development, evaluation and maintenance of
biomolecular pathways. The Pathway Curation
(PC) task, a main task of the BioNLP Shared Task
2013, is proposed as a step toward realizing these
opportunities. The PC task aims to evaluate the ap-
plicability of event extraction systems to pathway
curation and to encourage the further development
of methods for related tasks. The design of the
task aims to address current issues in information
extraction for pathway curation by explicitly bas-
ing its representation and extraction targets on ma-
67
GTP GDP
GAPs
re1
re1 Protein Molecule MoleculeReactantModifier ProductConversion GAPs catalyze the hydrolysis of GTP to GDP.GGP +Reg Conversion Chem Chem
Cause ThemeTheme Product
(a) CONVERSION
p38 gamma Pp38 gamma
MKK6
re1
re1
MKK6 phosphorylates p38 gamma.Protein Protein
Protein
Modifier Reactant
Product
Phosphorylation MKK6 phosphorylates p38 gamma.GGP Phosphorylation GGP
Cause Theme
(b) PHOSPHORYLATION
NF-kappaB
p65
p50
p65
p50re1
p65 binds to p50.
GGP Bind GGPTheme Theme2
p65-p50 complex formation.
Complex BindingProduct
p65 and p50 form p65-p50 complex.
Protein Protein NC binding ComplexReactant2 Product
Reactant
(c) BINDING
Figure 2: Illustration of pathway reaction (left), matching representation as an idealized text-bound event
structure (middle) and applied event representation for statements actually appearing in text (right).
jor standards developed in the biomolecular path-
way curation community, such as SBML (Hucka
et al, 2003) and BioPAX (Mi et al, 2011), and
ontologies such as the Systems Biology Ontology1
(SBO) (Courtot et al, 2011). Further, The corpus
texts are selected on the basis of relevance to a se-
lection of pathway models from PANTHER Path-
way DB2 (Mi and Thomas, 2009) and BioMod-
els3 (Li et al, 2010) repositories. The PC task set-
ting and its document selection protocol aim to ac-
count for both signalling and metabolic pathways,
the latter of which has received comparatively lit-
tle attention in recent domain IE efforts (Li et al,
2013).
2 Task setting
The PC task is formulated as an event extraction
task (Ananiadou et al, 2010) following the general
representation and task setting first introduced in
the BioNLP ST 2009 (Kim et al, 2011). The pri-
mary aim is the extraction of event structures, or
events, each of which can involve any number of
physical entities or other events in specific roles.
The event representation is sufficiently expres-
sive to allow the definition of event structures that
closely parallel the definition of reactions in path-
way representations such as SBML and BioPAX.
These pathway representations differentiate be-
tween three primary groups of reaction partici-
pants: reactants (?inputs?), products (?outputs?),
and modifiers, where the specific roles of modi-
fiers can be further identified to differentiate e.g.
1http://www.ebi.ac.uk/sbo/main/
2http://www.pantherdb.org/pathway/
3http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels-main/
reaction catalysts from inhibitors. Correspond-
ingly, the PC task applies the Theme role defined
in previous BioNLP ST tasks to capture reactants,
introduces a new Product role for products, and
applies the previously defined Cause role and reg-
ulatory events to capture modifiers (Figure 2; see
also Section 2.3).
It is important to note that while the event repre-
sentation allows a one-to-one mapping to reactions
in principle, an annotation scheme cannot guar-
antee that actual statements in text map to fully
specified reactions: in free-form text, authors fre-
quently omit mention of some entities taking part
in reactions, perhaps most typically to avoid re-
dundancies such as in ?p38? is phosphorylated
into phospho-p38?? (Figure 2b). Representations
extracted from explicit statements in text will thus
in some cases omit aspects of the corresponding
complete reactions in pathway models.
Systems addressing the PC task are expected to
extract events of specific types given 1) free-form
text and 2) gold standard annotation for mentions
of physical entities in that text. The task annota-
tions also include equivalence relations and event
modifications, a secondary extraction target. The
annotation types are detailed below.
2.1 Entities
The entity annotation marks mentions of physical
entities using start and end offsets in text (contigu-
ous span) and a type selected from a fixed set. The
following four entity types are marked in the PC
task: SIMPLE CHEMICAL, annotated with refer-
ence to the Chemical Entities of Biological Inter-
est (ChEBI) resource (Degtyarenko et al, 2008);
68
Entity type Scope Reference Ontology ID
SIMPLE CHEMICAL simple, non-repetitive chemical entities ChEBI SBO:0000247
GENE OR GENE PRODUCT genes, RNA and proteins gene/protein DBs SBO:0000246
COMPLEX entities of non-covalently linked components complex DBs SBO:0000253
CELLULAR COMPONENT parts of cell and extracellular environment GO-CC SBO:0000290
Table 1: Entity types, definitions, and reference resources.
Event type Core arguments Additional arguments Ontology ID
CONVERSION Theme:Molecule, Product:Molecule SBO:0000182
PHOSPHORYLATION Theme:Molecule, Cause:Molecule Site:SIMPLE CHEMICAL SBO:0000216
DEPHOSPHORYLATION Theme:Molecule, Cause:Molecule Site:SIMPLE CHEMICAL SBO:0000330
(Other modifications, such as ACETYLATION, defined similarly.)
LOCALIZATION Theme:Molecule At/From/ToLoc:CELL. COMP. GO:0051179
TRANSPORT Theme:Molecule From/ToLoc:CELL. COMP. SBO:0000185
GENE EXPRESSION Theme:GENE OR GENE PRODUCT GO:0010467
TRANSCRIPTION Theme:GENE OR GENE PRODUCT SBO:0000183
TRANSLATION Theme:GENE OR GENE PRODUCT SBO:0000184
DEGRADATION Theme:Molecule SBO:0000179
BINDING Theme:Molecule, Product:COMPLEX SBO:0000177
DISSOCIATION Theme:COMPLEX, Product:Molecule SBO:0000180
REGULATION Theme:ANY, Cause:ANY GO:0065007
POSITIVE REGULATION Theme:ANY, Cause:ANY
GO:0048518,
GO:0044093
ACTIVATION Theme:Molecule, Cause:ANY SBO:0000412
NEGATIVE REGULATION Theme:ANY, Cause:ANY
GO:0048519,
GO:0044092
INACTIVATION Theme:Molecule, Cause:ANY SBO:0000412
PATHWAY Participant:Molecule SBO:0000375
Table 2: Event types and arguments. ?Molecule? refers to an entity annotation of any of the types
SIMPLE CHEMICAL, GENE OR GENE PRODUCT, or COMPLEX, and ?ANY? refers to an annotation of
any type, either entity or event. The indentation corresponds to ontological relationships between the
event types: for example, PHOSPHORYLATION is-a CONVERSION and TRANSCRIPTION part-of
GENE EXPRESSION.
GENE OR GENE PRODUCT, annotated with refer-
ence to gene and protein databases such as UniProt
(Consortium, 2011), Entrez Gene (Maglott et al,
2005) and PFam (Finn et al, 2010); COMPLEX,
annotated with reference to database resources
covering complexes; and CELLULAR COMPO-
NENT, annotated following the scope of the Gene
Ontology cellular component subontology
(Ashburner et al, 2000) (Table 1). For discussion
of the relation between these types and the repre-
sentations applied in pathway models, we refer to
Ohta et al (2011c).
In terms of mention types in text, the annotation
for SIMPLE CHEMICAL, GENE OR GENE PROD-
UCT and COMPLEX covers entity name mentions
only, while the annotation for CELLULAR COM-
PONENT covers entity name mentions, nominal
mentions, and adjectival references (e.g. ?mito-
chondrial?).
2.2 Relations
The PC task defines one relation type, Equiv
(equivalence), which can hold between entity
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK, also known as ERK)
Gene or gene product GGP GGPEquivEquiv
Figure 3: Example Equiv annotation.
mentions of the same type and specifies that they
refer to the same real-world entity (Figure 3).
These relations are only applied to determine if
two events match during evaluation, where entities
connected by an Equiv relation are considered in-
terchangeable. Gold standard Equiv relations are
applied also for test data, and systems participat-
ing in the task are not expected to extract these
relations.
2.3 Events
The event annotation marks references to reac-
tions, processes and comparable associations in
scope of the annotation using the event represen-
tation. For the definition and scope of the event
annotation, we rely primarily on the Systems Biol-
ogy Ontology (SBO), drawing some general types
not in scope of this ontology from the Gene Ontol-
ogy (GO). Table 2 presents the event types anno-
69
Pathway Repository ID Publication
mTOR BioModels MODEL1012220002 (Caron et al, 2010)
mTORC1 upstream regulators BioModels MODEL1012220003 (Caron et al, 2010)
TLR BioModels MODEL2463683119 (Oda and Kitano, 2006)
Yeast Cell Cycle BioModels MODEL1011020000 (Kaizu et al, 2010)
Rb BioModels MODEL4132046015 (Calzone et al, 2008)
EGFR BioModels MODEL2463576061 (Oda et al, 2005)
Human Metabolic Network BioModels MODEL6399676120 (Duarte et al, 2007)
NF-kappaB pathway - - (Oda et al, 2008)
p38 MAPK PANTHER DB P05918 -
p53 PANTHER DB P00059 -
p53 feedback loop pathway PANTHER DB P04392 -
Wnt signaling pathway PANTHER DB P00057 -
Table 3: Pathway models used to select documents for the task, with pathway repository model identifiers
and publications presenting each model (when applicable).
tated in the PC task and their arguments. We refer
again to Ohta et al (2011c) for detailed discussion
of the relation between these types and other rep-
resentations applied in pathway models.
The role in which each event argument (entity
or other event) participates in an event is specified
as one of the following:
Theme entity/event that undergoes the effects of
the event. For example, the entity that is tran-
scribed in a TRANSCRIPTION event or transported
in a TRANSPORT event.
Cause entity/event that is causally active in the
event. Marks, for example, ?P1? in ?P1 inhibits P2
expression?.
AtLoc,FromLoc,ToLoc : location in which the
Theme entity of a LOCALIZATION event is local-
ized (At) in LOCALIZATION events not involving
movement or is transported (or moves) from/to
(From/To) in LOCALIZATION and TRANSPORT
events involving movement.
Site site on the Theme entity that is modified in
the event. Can be specified for modification events
such as PHOSPHORYLATION.
Participant general role type identifying an en-
tity that participates in some underspecified way in
a high-level process. Only applied for the PATH-
WAY type.
2.4 Event modifications
In addition to events, the PC task defines a sec-
ondary extraction target, event modifications. Two
modification types are defined: NEGATION and
SPECULATION. Both are binary flags that mod-
ify events, the former marking an event as be-
ing explicitly stated as not occurring (e.g. ?P is
not phosphorylated?) and the latter as being stated
in a speculative context (?P may be phosphory-
lated.?). Both are defined in terms of annotation
scope and semantics identically as in the BioNLP
ST?09 (Kim et al, 2009).
2.5 Evaluation
The PC task evaluation applies the standard evalu-
ation criteria established in the BioNLP ST 2009.
These criteria relax exact matching between gold
and predicted events in two aspects: approximate
trigger boundary matching, and approximate re-
cursive event matching. The former allows pre-
dicted event triggers to differ from gold triggers
by one word, and the latter requires recursively re-
ferred events to only match in their core arguments
(see Table 2). We refer to Kim et al (2011) for a
detailed definition of these criteria.
3 Corpus
This section presents the PC task corpus and its
annotation process.
3.1 Document selection
To assure that the documents annotated for the PC
task corpus are relevant to pathway reactions, we
applied two complementary approaches, both se-
lecting documents on the basis of relevance to a
specific pathway reaction. First, we selected from
the BioModels repository those pathway models
with the largest numbers of manually created an-
notations referencing a specific PubMed document
identifier. For each of these models, we extracted
literature references, selected a random subset,
downloaded the documents, and manually filtered
to select abstracts that explicitly discuss relevant
molecular reactions. Second, as only a small sub-
set of models include explicit references to the
70
literature providing evidence for specific pathway
reactions, we applied an alternative strategy where
reactions from a selection of PANTHER DB mod-
els were entered into the PathText system (Kem-
per et al, 2010),4 which is capable of suggest-
ing documents relevant to given reactions based
on an SBML model. We then selected a random
set of reactions to query the system, and manually
evaluated the highest-ranking documents to iden-
tify those whose abstracts explicitly discuss the se-
lected reaction. We refer to Miwa et al (2013a)
for a detailed description of this approach. Table 3
presents the pathway models on which the docu-
ment selection was based.
3.2 Annotation process
The base entity annotation for the PC corpus was
created automatically using state-of-the-art entity
mention taggers for each of the targeted entity
types. For SIMPLE CHEMICAL tagging, the OS-
CAR4 system (Jessop et al, 2011) trained on
the chemical named entity recognition corpus of
Corbett and Copestake (2008) was applied. For
GENE OR GENE PRODUCT mention detection, the
NERsuite5 system trained on the BioCreative 2
Gene Mention task (Wilbur et al, 2007) corpus
was used. NERsuite was also applied for CEL-
LULAR COMPONENT mention detection, for this
task trained on the Anatomical Entity Mention
(AnEM) corpus (Ohta et al, 2012). Finally, COM-
PLEX annotations were created using a combi-
nation of a dictionary and heuristics making use
of the GENE OR GENE PRODUCT annotation (for
mentions such as ?cyclin E/CDK2 complex?). To
support the curation process, these tools were in-
tegrated into the NaCTeM text-analysis workflow
system Argo (Rak et al, 2012).
Based on the evaluations of each of these tools
in the studies presenting them, we expected initial
automatic tagging performance to be in the range
80-90% in both precision and recall. Following
initial automatic annotation, the entity mention an-
notation was manually revised to improve quality
and consistency. As the entity annotation is not
itself a target of extraction in the shared task, we
did not separately evaluate the consistency of the
revised entity mention annotation.
To assure that the quality and consistency of
the event annotation are as high as possible, ini-
4http://nactem.ac.uk/pathtext/
5http://nersuite.nlplab.org/
Item Train Devel Test Total
Documents 260 90 175 525
Words 53811 18579 35966 108356
Entities 7855 2734 5312 15901
Events 5992 2129 4004 12125
Modifications 317 80 174 571
Table 4: PC corpus statistics
tial event annotation was created entirely man-
ually, without automatic support. This annota-
tion effort was carried out using the BRAT anno-
tation tool (Stenetorp et al, 2012) by a group of
biologists in collaboration between NaCTeM and
KISTI. Following initial annotator training and re-
finement of guidelines based on the event type def-
initions provided by the reference ontologies, the
primary event annotation was created by three bi-
ologists. To evaluate and maintain annotation con-
sistency, a random 20% of documents were an-
notated redundantly by all annotators, and these
overlapping annotations were periodically evalu-
ated and differences in annotation were discussed
between the annotators and annotation coordina-
tors. Following initial annotation, a round of semi-
automatic consistency checks were applied using
BRAT. Evaluation of the redundantly annotated
documents using the primary task evaluation cri-
teria gave an inter-annotator agreement of 61.0%
in F-score. For the final corpus, the redundantly
annotated documents were evaluated separately by
an annotation coordinator to select the best of each
set.6
The overall statistics of the corpus are summa-
rized in Table 4. We note that the among the
previous BioNLP ST corpora, only the GENIA
(GE) task corpus has a larger number of annotated
events than the PC corpus.
4 Results
4.1 Participation
Two groups submitted final results to the PC
task, one from the National Centre for Text Min-
ing (NaCTeM) and one from the University of
Turku BioNLP group (TEES-2.1) (Table 5). Both
participants applied their well-established, state-
of-the-art event extraction systems, EventMine7
(Miwa et al, 2012) (NaCTeM) and the Turku
6This selection implies that the consistency of the event
annotation of the final corpus is expected to exceed the 61%
F-score of the IAA experiment. Consistency after selection
was not separately evaluated.
7http://nactem.ac.uk/EventMine/
71
NLP Events Other resources
Rank Team Org Word Parse Trig. Arg. Group. Modif. Corpora Other
1 NaCTeM 1NLP Snowball Enju, GDep SVM SVM SVM SVM (see text) triggers
2 TEES-2.1 1BI Porter McCCJ + SD SVM SVM SVM SVM GE hedge words
Table 5: Participants and summary of system descriptions. Abbreviations: BI=Bioinformatician,
NLP=Natural Language Processing researcher, McCCJ=McClosky-Charniak-Johnson parser, Char-
niak=Charniak parser, SD=Stanford Dependency conversion, GE=GE task corpus.
Team recall prec. F-score
NaCTeM 52.23 53.48 52.84
TEES-2.1 47.15 55.78 51.10
Table 6: Primary evaluation results
Event Extraction System8 (Bjo?rne et al, 2011)
(TEES). The two systems share the same over-
all architecture, a one-best pipeline with SVM-
based stages for event trigger detection, trigger-
argument relation detection, argument grouping
into event structures, and modification prediction.
The feature representations of both systems draw
on substructures of dependency-like representa-
tions of sentence syntax, derived from full parses
of input sentences. TEES applies the Charniak
and Johnson (2005) parser with the McClosky
(2009) biomedical model, converting the phrase-
structure parses into dependencies using the Stan-
ford tools (de Marneffe et al, 2006). By contrast,
EventMine uses a combination of the predicate-
argument structure analyses created by the deep
parser Enju (Miyao and Tsujii, 2008) and the out-
put of the the GDep best-first shift-reduce depen-
dency parser (Sagae and Tsujii, 2007). All three
parsers have models trained in part on the biomed-
ical domain GENIA treebank (Tateisi et al, 2005).
Interestingly, both systems make use of the GE
task data, but the application of EventMine ex-
tends on this considerably by applying a stacked
model (Miwa et al, 2013b) with predictions also
from models trained on the BioNLP ST 2011 EPI
and ID tasks (Pyysalo et al, 2012) as well as from
four corpora introduced outside of the shared tasks
by Thompson et al (2011), Pyysalo et al (2011),
Ohta et al (2011b) and Ohta et al (2011c).
4.2 Evaluation results
Table 6 summarizes the primary evaluation results.
The two systems demonstrate broadly similar per-
formance in terms of F-scores, with NaCTeM
achieving an 1.7% point higher overall result.
8http://jbjorne.github.io/TEES/
However, the systems show quite different per-
formance in terms of the precision/recall balance:
while the NaCTeM system has little difference
between precision and recall, TEES-2.1 shows a
clear preference for precision, with 8.6% lower re-
call than precision.
Results are shown separately for each event type
in Table 7. The results largely mirror the over-
all performance, with the NaCTeM system show-
ing better performance for 13 out of the 21 event
types present in the test data and more balanced
precision and recall than TEES-2.1, which em-
phasizes precision over recall for almost all event
types. Although the results do not include evalu-
ation of EventMine with a reduced set of stacked
models in training, the modest difference in per-
formance suggests that comprehensive use of pre-
viously released event resources in EventMine did
not confer a decisive advantage, perhaps in part
due to differences in the event definitions between
the PC task and previous resources.
Overall, the two systems appear quite similar
not only in architecture but also performance, with
the clearest systematic difference observed being
the different emphases on precision vs. recall. As
both systems are based on machine learning meth-
ods with real-valued outputs, it would be relatively
straightforward to use prediction confidences to
analyse performance over the entire precision-
recall curve instead of a single fixed point. Such
analysis could provide further insight into the rel-
ative strengths and weaknesses of these two sys-
tems.
5 Discussion
Although participation in this initial run of the PC
task was somewhat limited, the two participating
systems have been applied to a large variety of
event extraction tasks over the last years and have
shown consistently competitive performance with
the state of the art (Bjo?rne and Salakoski, 2011;
Miwa et al, 2012). It is thus reasonable to as-
sume that the higher performance achieved by the
72
NaCTeM TEES-2.1
Event recall prec. F-score recall prec. F-score
CONVERSION 34.33 35.48 34.90 35.82 42.86 39.02
PHOSPHORYLATION 62.46 55.94 59.02 53.40 66.00 59.03
DEPHOSPHORYLATION 45.00 56.25 50.00 35.00 77.78 48.28
ACETYLATION 69.57 72.73 71.11 82.61 76.00 79.17
DEACETYLATION 33.33 33.33 33.33 0.00 0.00 0.00
METHYLATION 42.86 60.00 50.00 57.14 80.00 66.67
DEMETHYLATION 100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00
UBIQUITINATION 52.94 64.29 58.06 58.82 76.92 66.67
DEUBIQUITINATION 100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00
LOCALIZATION 42.25 61.22 50.00 43.66 54.39 48.44
TRANSPORT 65.52 61.29 63.33 56.55 59.85 58.16
GENE EXPRESSION 90.65 83.15 86.74 84.55 79.39 81.89
TRANSCRIPTION 71.15 82.22 76.29 57.69 73.17 64.52
TRANSLATION 0.00 0.00 0.00 50.00 100.00 66.67
Simple-total 66.42 64.80 65.60 60.40 67.87 63.92
DEGRADATION 78.57 89.19 83.54 78.57 78.57 78.57
ACTIVATION 78.54 70.96 74.56 72.06 72.06 72.06
INACTIVATION 44.62 55.77 49.57 38.46 45.45 41.67
BINDING 64.96 47.30 54.74 53.96 53.96 53.96
DISSOCIATION 38.46 46.88 42.25 35.90 45.16 40.00
PATHWAY 84.91 75.50 79.93 70.94 75.50 73.15
General-total 69.07 62.69 65.72 61.16 65.74 63.37
REGULATION 33.33 33.97 33.65 29.73 39.51 33.93
POSITIVE REGULATION 35.49 42.81 38.81 34.51 45.45 39.23
NEGATIVE REGULATION 45.75 50.64 48.07 41.02 47.37 43.97
Regulation-total 37.73 42.79 40.10 35.17 44.76 39.39
Sub-total 53.47 53.96 53.72 48.23 56.22 51.92
NEGATION 24.52 35.87 29.13 25.16 41.30 31.27
SPECULATION 15.79 22.22 18.46 0.00 0.00 0.00
Modification-total 23.56 34.65 28.05 22.41 40.00 28.73
Total 52.23 53.48 52.84 47.15 55.78 51.10
Table 7: Primary evaluation results by event type.
task participants, a balanced F-score of 52.8%, is
a good estimate of the performance level that can
be attained for this task by present event extraction
technology.
The results achieved by the two systems are
broadly comparable to the best results achieved by
any system in similar previously introduced event
extraction tasks (Kim et al, 2012; Pyysalo et al,
2012). Given the novelty of the task domain and
reference resource and the broad selection of doc-
uments, we find the results highly encouraging re-
garding the applicability of event extraction tech-
nology to supporting the development, evaluation,
and maintenance of pathway models.
6 Conclusions
This paper presented the Pathway Curation (PC)
task, a main event extraction task of the BioNLP
ST 2013. The task was organized in collaboration
between groups with an interest in pathway cura-
tion with the aim of evaluating and advancing the
state of the art in event extraction toward methods
for developing, evaluating and maintaining formal
pathway models in representations such as SBML
and BioPAX. We introduced an event extraction
task setting with reference to pathway model stan-
dards and the Systems Biology Ontology, selected
a set of 525 publication abstracts relevant to spe-
cific model reactions, and created fully manual
73
event annotation marking over 12,000 event struc-
tures in the corpus.
Two participants in the BioNLP ST 2013 sub-
mitted final predictions to the PC task, applying
established, state-of-the-art event extraction sys-
tems, EventMine and the Turku Event Extrac-
tion System. Both systems achieved F-scores
over 50%, with the EventMine system achiev-
ing the best overall result of 52.8%. This level
of performance is broadly comparable with re-
sults achieved in comparable previously proposed
tasks, indicating that current event extraction tech-
nology is applicable to the projected pathway cu-
ration support tasks.
To allow the further development and evalua-
tion of event extraction methods for the task, the
PC task continues as an open challenge to all inter-
ested participants, with the annotated corpus data,
supporting resources, and evaluation tools avail-
able under open licenses from the task homepage,
http://2013.bionlp-st.org/
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Yonghwa Jo, Hyeyeon
Choi, Jeong-Ik Lee and Ssang-Goo Cho of
Konkuk University for their contribution to the de-
velopment of the relevance judgment annotation
criteria. We also wish to thank Hyun Uk Kim,
Jinki Kim and Kyusang Hwang of KAIST for
their efforts in producing the PC task annotation.
This work is a part of joint research of KISTI and
NaCTeM, and partially supported by the Biotech-
nology and Biological Sciences Research Council
(BBSRC) [BB/G53025X/1].
References
Sophia Ananiadou, Sampo Pyysalo, Jun?ichi Tsujii, and Dou-
glas B. Kell. 2010. Event extraction for systems biology
by text mining the literature. Trends in Biotechnology,
28(7):381?390.
Michael Ashburner, Catherine A. Ball, Judith A. Blake,
David Botstein, Heather Butler, J. Michael Cherry, Al-
lan P. Davis, Kara Dolinski, et al 2000. Gene ontology:
tool for the unification of biology. Nature genetics, 25:25?
29.
Jari Bjo?rne and Tapio Salakoski. 2011. Generalizing
biomedical event extraction. In Proceedings of the
BioNLP Shared Task 2011 Workshop, pages 183?191.
Jari Bjo?rne, Juho Heimonen, Filip Ginter, Antti Airola, Tapio
Pahikkala, and Tapio Salakoski. 2011. Extracting contex-
tualized complex biological events with rich graph-based
feature sets. Computational Intelligence, 27(4):541?557.
Laurence Calzone, Ame?lie Gelay, Andrei Zinovyev, Franc?ois
Radvanyl, and Emmanuel Barillot. 2008. A comprehen-
sive modular map of molecular interactions in rb/e2f path-
way. Molecular systems biology, 4(1).
Etienne Caron, Samik Ghosh, Yukiko Matsuoka, Dariel
Ashton-Beaucage, Marc Therrien, Se?bastien Lemieux,
Claude Perreault, Philippe P Roux, and Hiroaki Kitano.
2010. A comprehensive map of the mtor signaling net-
work. Molecular systems biology, 6(1).
Eugene Charniak and Mark Johnson. 2005. Coarse-to-Fine
n-Best Parsing and MaxEnt Discriminative Reranking. In
Proceedings of ACL?05, pages 173?180.
The UniProt Consortium. 2011. Ongoing and future devel-
opments at the universal protein resource. Nucleic Acids
Research, 39(suppl 1):D214?D219.
Peter Corbett and Ann Copestake. 2008. Cascaded classifiers
for confidence-based chemical named entity recognition.
BMC Bioinformatics, 9(Suppl 11):S4.
Me?lanie Courtot, Nick Juty, Christian Knu?pfer, Dagmar Wal-
temath, Anna Zhukova, Andreas Dra?ger, Michel Dumon-
tier, Andrew Finney, Martin Golebiewski, Janna Hastings,
et al 2011. Controlled vocabularies and semantics in sys-
tems biology. Molecular systems biology, 7(1).
Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill MacCartney, and Christo-
pher D Manning. 2006. Generating typed dependency
parses from phrase structure parses. In Proceedings of
LREC, volume 6, pages 449?454.
Kirill Degtyarenko, Paula De Matos, Marcus Ennis, Janna
Hastings, Martin Zbinden, Alan Mcnaught, Rafael
Alca?ntara, Michael Darsow, Mickae?l Guedj, and Michael
Ashburner. 2008. Chebi: a database and ontology for
chemical entities of biological interest. Nucleic acids re-
search, 36(suppl 1):D344?D350.
Natalie C Duarte, Scott A Becker, Neema Jamshidi, Ines
Thiele, Monica L Mo, Thuy D Vo, Rohith Srivas, and
Bernhard ? Palsson. 2007. Global reconstruction of
the human metabolic network based on genomic and bib-
liomic data. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences, 104(6):1777?1782.
Robert D. Finn, Jaina Mistry, John Tate, Penny Coggill, An-
dreas Heger, Joanne E. Pollington, O. Luke Gavin, Prasad
Gunasekaran, et al 2010. The Pfam protein families
database. Nucleic Acids Research, 38(suppl 1):D211?
D222.
Michael Hucka, Andrew Finney, Herbert M Sauro, Hamid
Bolouri, John C Doyle, Hiroaki Kitano, Adam P Arkin,
Benjamin J Bornstein, et al 2003. The systems biology
markup language (SBML): a medium for representation
and exchange of biochemical network models. Bioinfor-
matics, 19(4):524?531.
David M. Jessop, Sam Adams, Egon L. Willighagen, Lezan
Hawizy, and Peter Murray-Rust. 2011. Oscar4: a flexible
architecture for chemical text-mining. Journal of chemin-
formatics, 3(1):1?12.
Kazunari Kaizu, Samik Ghosh, Yukiko Matsuoka, Hisao
Moriya, Yuki Shimizu-Yoshida, and Hiroaki Kitano.
2010. A comprehensive molecular interaction map of the
budding yeast cell cycle. Molecular systems biology, 6(1).
Brian Kemper, Takuya Matsuzaki, Yukiko Matsuoka, Yoshi-
masa Tsuruoka, Hiroaki Kitano, Sophia Ananiadou, and
Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2010. Pathtext: a text mining integra-
tor for biological pathway visualizations. Bioinformatics,
26(12):i374?i381.
74
Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo, Yoshinobu
Kano, and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2009. Overview of BioNLP?09
Shared Task on Event Extraction. In Proceedings of
BioNLP?09.
Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo, Yoshinobu
Kano, and Junichi Tsujii. 2011. Extracting bio-molecular
events from literature ? the bionlp?09 shared task. Com-
putational Intelligence, 27(4):513?540.
Jin-Dong Kim, Ngan Nguyen, Yue Wang, Jun?ichi Tsujii,
Toshihisa Takagi, and Akinori Yonezawa. 2012. The
genia event and protein coreference tasks of the bionlp
shared task 2011. BMC bioinformatics, 13(Suppl 11):S1.
Hiroaki Kitano. 2002. Systems biology: a brief overview.
Science, 295(5560):1662?1664.
Martin Krallinger, Florian Leitner, and Alfonso Valencia.
2007. Assessment of the Second BioCreative PPI task:
Automatic Extraction of Protein-Protein Interactions. In
L. Hirschman, M. Krallinger, and A. Valencia, editors,
Proceedings of BioCreative II, pages 29?39.
Chen Li, Marco Donizelli, Nicolas Rodriguez, Harish
Dharuri, Lukas Endler, Vijayalakshmi Chelliah, Lu Li,
Enuo He, et al 2010. BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative
kinetic models. BMC Systems Biology, 4:92.
Chen Li, Maria Liakata, and Dietrich Rebholz-Schuhmann.
2013. Biological network extraction from scientific litera-
ture: state of the art and challenges. Briefings in bioinfor-
matics.
Donna Maglott, Jim Ostell, Kim D. Pruitt, and Tatiana
Tatusova. 2005. Entrez gene: gene-centered information
at ncbi. Nucleic Acids Research, 33(suppl 1):D54.
David McClosky. 2009. Any Domain Parsing: Automatic
Domain Adaptation for Natural Language Parsing. Ph.D.
thesis, Brown University.
Huaiyu Mi and Paul Thomas. 2009. PANTHER pathway: an
ontology-based pathway database coupled with data anal-
ysis tools. In Protein Networks and Pathway Analysis,
pages 123?140. Springer.
Huaiyu Mi, Anushya Muruganujan, Emek Demir, Yukiko
Matsuoka, Akira Funahashi, Hiroaki Kitano, and Paul D
Thomas. 2011. Biopax support in celldesigner. Bioinfor-
matics, 27(24):3437?3438.
Makoto Miwa, Paul Thompson, and Sophia Ananiadou.
2012. Boosting automatic event extraction from the liter-
ature using domain adaptation and coreference resolution.
Bioinformatics, 28(13):1759?1765.
Makoto Miwa, Tomoko Ohta, Rafal Rak, Andrew Rowley,
Douglas B. Kell, Sampo Pyysalo, and Sophia Ananiadou.
2013a. A method for integrating and ranking the evidence
for biochemical pathways by mining reactions from text.
Bioinformatics. in press.
Makoto Miwa, Sampo Pyysalo, Tomoko Ohta, and Sophia
Ananiadou. 2013b. Wide coverage biomedical event
extraction using multiple partially overlapping corpora.
BMC bioinformatics, 14(1):175.
Yusuke Miyao and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2008. Feature forest mod-
els for probabilistic HPSG parsing. Computational Lin-
guistics, 34(1):35?80.
Kanae Oda and Hiroaki Kitano. 2006. A comprehensive
map of the toll-like receptor signaling network. Molecular
Systems Biology, 2(1).
Kanae Oda, Yukiko Matsuoka, Akira Funahashi, and Hiroaki
Kitano. 2005. A comprehensive pathway map of epider-
mal growth factor receptor signaling. Molecular systems
biology, 1(1).
Kanae Oda, Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Daisuke
Okanohara, Takuya Matsuzaki, Yuka Tateisi, and Jun?ichi
Tsujii. 2008. New challenges for text mining: mapping
between text and manually curated pathways. BMC bioin-
formatics, 9(Suppl 3):S5.
Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo, Sophia Ananiadou, and Ju-
nichi Tsujii. 2011a. Pathway curation support as an infor-
mation extraction task. Proceedings of LBM?11.
Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo, Makoto Miwa, and Jun?ichi
Tsujii. 2011b. Event extraction for dna methylation.
Journal of Biomedical Semantics, 2(Suppl 5):S2.
Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo, and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2011c.
From pathways to biomolecular events: opportunities and
challenges. In Proceedings of BioNLP?11, pages 105?
113.
Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo, Jun?ichi Tsujii, and Sophia
Ananiadou. 2012. Open-domain anatomical entity men-
tion detection. In Proceedings of DSSD?12, pages 27?36.
Sampo Pyysalo, Antti Airola, Juho Heimonen, Jari Bjo?rne,
Filip Ginter, and Tapio Salakoski. 2008. Comparative
analysis of five protein-protein interaction corpora. BMC
Bioinformatics, 9(Suppl 3):S6.
Sampo Pyysalo, Tomoko Ohta, Makoto Miwa, and Jun?ichi
Tsujii. 2011. Towards exhaustive event extraction for pro-
tein modifications. In Proceedings of BioNLP?11, pages
114?123.
Sampo Pyysalo, Tomoko Ohta, Rafal Rak, Dan Sullivan,
Chunhong Mao, Chunxia Wang, Bruno Sobral, Jun?ichi
Tsujii, and Sophia Ananiadou. 2012. Overview of the id,
epi and rel tasks of bionlp shared task 2011. BMC bioin-
formatics, 13(Suppl 11):S2.
Rafal Rak, Andrew Rowley, William Black, and Sophia Ana-
niadou. 2012. Argo: an integrative, interactive, text
mining-based workbench supporting curation. Database:
The Journal of Biological Databases and Curation, 2012.
Kenji Sagae and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2007. Dependency parsing
and domain adaptation with lr models and parser ensem-
bles. In Proceedings of the CoNLL Shared Task Session of
EMNLP-CoNLL 2007, pages 1044?1050.
Pontus Stenetorp, Sampo Pyysalo, Goran Topic?, Tomoko
Ohta, Sophia Ananiadou, and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2012. Brat:
a web-based tool for nlp-assisted text annotation. In Pro-
ceedings of EACL?12, pages 102?107.
Yuka Tateisi, Akane Yakushiji, Tomoko Ohta, and Junichi
Tsujii. 2005. Syntax annotation for the genia corpus. In
Proceedings of IJCNLP, volume 5, pages 222?227.
Paul Thompson, Raheel Nawaz, John McNaught, and Sophia
Ananiadou. 2011. Enriching a biomedical event corpus
with meta-knowledge annotation. BMC Bioinformatics,
12(1):393.
Domonkos Tikk, Philippe Thomas, Peter Palaga, Jo?rg Haken-
berg, and Ulf Leser. 2010. A comprehensive benchmark
of kernel methods to extract protein-protein interactions
from literature. PLoS Comput Biol, 6(7):e1000837, 07.
John Wilbur, Lawrence Smith, and Lorraine Tanabe. 2007.
BioCreative 2. Gene Mention Task. In L. Hirschman,
M. Krallinger, and A. Valencia, editors, Proceedings of
BioCreative II, pages 7?16.
75
