Cross Lingual Information Access System for Indian Languages 
CLIA Consortium 
A Consortium of 11 Institutions as the Implementing Agency for the  
Project ?Development of Cross Lingual Information Access (CLIA) System? funded by Gov-
ernment of India, Ministry of Communications & Information Technology, Department of In-
formation Technology (No. 14(5)/2006 ? HCC (TDIL) Dated 29-08-2006) 
 
1 Introduction 
The CLIA (Cross Lingual Information Access) 
Project is a mission mode project funded by Gov-
ernment of India, Ministry of Communications & 
Information Technology, Department of Informa-
tion Technology vide its approval No. 14(5)/2006 
? HCC (TDIL), Dated 29-08-2006. It is being exe-
cuted by a consortium of 11 academic and research 
institutions and industry partners, IIT Bombay, IIT 
Kharagpur, IIIT Hyderabad, AU-KBC Chennai, 
AU-CEG Chennai, ISI Kolkata, Jadavpur Univer-
sity Kolkata, C-DAC Pune, C-DAC Noida, Utkal 
University Bhubaneswar and STDC, DIT New 
Delhi. The final deliverables of the project at the 
end of two years will be a portal where: 
 
 ? A user will be able to give a query in one Indian  
language and 
 
 ? S/he will be able to access documents available 
in 
   (a). the language of the query, 
   (b).  Hindi (if the query language is not Hindi),   
 and 
   (c).  English 
 
 ? Results will be presented to the user in the lan-
guage of the query. The results can also be pre-
sented in the language in which the information 
originally resided. The languages involved are 
Bengali, Hindi, Marathi, Punjabi, Tamil and Te-
lugu. 
2 Motivation 
With the tremendous growth of digital and online 
information repositories new opportunities and 
new problems are created for achieving informa-
tion retrieval across different languages. Online 
documents are available internationally in many 
different languages. Cross Lingual Information 
Access (CLIA) systems makes it possible for users 
to directly access sources of information which 
may be available in languages other than the lan-
guage of query. However in conventional informa-
tion retrieval systems the user must enter a search 
query in the language of the documents in order to 
retrieve it. This requires that the user can formulate 
his/her queries in all possible languages and can 
decipher documents returned by the retrieval proc-
ess. This restriction clearly limits the amount and 
type of information, which an individual user 
really has access to.  
Cross-language information retrieval enables 
users to enter queries in languages they are familiar 
to, and uses language translation methods to re-
trieve documents originally created in other lan-
guages. Cross-Language Information Access is an 
extension of the Cross-Language Information Re-
trieval paradigm. Users who are unfamiliar with 
the language of documents retrieved are often un-
able to obtain relevant information from these 
documents. The objective of Cross-Language In-
formation Access is to introduce additional post 
retrieval processing to enable users make sense of 
these retrieved documents. This additional process-
ing may take the form of machine translation of 
snippets, summarization and subsequent translation 
of summaries and/or information extraction.  
There have been efforts globally towards devel-
opment of such systems. Cross-Language Evalua-
tion Forum (CLEF), NTCIR Asian Language Re-
trieval, Question-answering Workshop and others 
have been working towards achieving the similar 
goals. In Indian context the need of such system 
becomes more evident that being multi-lingual 
country, the people here are familiar with more 
than one language. The availability of such system 
973
helps in reaching the information if it is available 
in language other than the language of query. In 
order to meet this requirement, the CLIA (Cross 
Lingual Information Access) project has been initi-
ated. 
3 System Features  
The system is intended to search different docu-
ments in Indian languages. Once the user starts the 
system, an initial screen with logo is displayed. By 
default, the screen is displayed in Hindi or English 
depending on the default language selected on the 
browser of the user. If the user wants to display 
this initial screen in any other language, he/she can 
select the language from the bottom of the screen. 
The screen is then displayed in the selected lan-
guage. At present, the screen is available in seven 
languages: Hindi, English, Marathi, Punjabi, Ben-
gali, Tamil and Telugu. To search a document, the 
first activity the user performs is the selection of 
the source language. Selection of source language 
allows the user to enter the text in the selected lan-
guage. 
 
?Selection of the Source Language: The user can 
select the source language by clicking a drop-down 
box. The system displays the languages available 
to select the source language.  
 
?Entering String for Search: The user enters the 
query string on which the search is to be made in 
the appropriate place. The system allows the user 
to enter the string in the source language selected 
by the user using a soft keyboard for the language.  
 
?Search the Web or the Site: Once the string is en-
tered, the user should select whether to search the 
local site or the World Wide Web. The user can 
then click the search option to search the site for 
the string entered.  
 
? Displaying the Results: Once the query is prop-
erly expanded and translated, it is used to search 
the web or the local site and the documents are re-
trieved according to the query. The snippets of the 
retrieved documents are displayed in the original 
language of the document as well as in the source 
language selected by the user. Thus, if the source 
language selected is Bengali, the user can enter 
query string in Bengali, the CLIA system searches 
for documents in English, Hindi and Bengali either 
from the web or the local site. The snippets of the 
retrieved documents are displayed in English/ 
Hindi and Bengali. 
?Advanced Search: The user can also select the 
advanced search option and the CLIA system dis-
plays all the options accordingly. The user can se-
lect here the domain for which he/she wants to 
search the documents. At present, the tourism and 
health domains are available. The user can also 
select the number of items to be displayed on a 
single page. By default, the system displays 10 
items on a single page. Once the selection is made, 
the user can click the ?search? option to start the 
search. In the advanced search option, the CLIA 
system provides summary as well as extracted in-
formation in the form of predefined information 
extraction templates, of the retrieved documents 
along with the generated snippet. The summary 
and the extracted information templates can be 
displayed in the original language of the document 
as well as in the source language selected by the 
user.  
4 Technical Details 
The CLIA system achieves its performance by 
means of the following five subsystems: 
 
   ? Input processing 
   ? Search 
   ? Processing of Retrieved Documents 
   ? Output Generation 
   ? UNL Based Search  
 
The main purpose of each of these subsystems is 
described below:  
 
? Input Processing Subsystem 
Input processing analyses the query entered by the 
user using language processing tools, expands the 
query to add more relevant terms and based on its 
analyses, either translates or transliterates all the 
query terms to the target language and then pro-
vides this as input to the search modules. The 
CLIA Input Processing subsystem consists of Lan-
guage Analyzer (Tokenization, Named Entity Rec-
ognition, Multiword Expression, Stop word identi-
fication, Stemmer), Query Expansion (Pre- and 
Post-Translation Query Expansion), Query Trans-
974
lation and Query Transliteration. The CLIA Focus 
Crawler subsystem consists of Classifier, Lan-
guage identifier and the Parallel crawler. 
 
? Search Subsystem 
The search subsystem lies at the heart of the CLIA-
search engine. The main purpose of this module is 
to:  
 (a). Crawl the web and download files for a spe 
cific language and domain.   
 
 (b). Extract the text part in these documents and 
perform certain processing on those texts and con-
vert them into indices.  
 
 (c). Extract results for a particular query by look-
ing up the indices built so far. 
 
(d). Arrange the document references returned by 
the search subsystem according to some order de-
pending upon page ranking. 
 
? Document Processing Subsystem 
 
The document-processing module facilitates the 
access of documents written in English, Hindi and 
in the other languages. The documents crawled 
from the web are preprocessed using language 
processing tools for extracting information and 
translating the extracted information into target 
languages. This module consists of many lan-
guage-processing tools such as Document Con-
verter, Language Pre-processors, POS taggers, 
Text Chunker, Named Entity Recognizer, Domain 
Dictionaries, Information Extraction Engine and 
Translation engine. These modules are used in 
processing the documents.  
 
? Output Generation Subsystem 
This subsystem consists of the snippet generation, 
summary generation and the snippet translation 
modules. Brief details of the modules are described 
below:   
 (a). Snippet Generation: The Snippet Generation 
Module generates the snippet corresponding to the 
retrieved document. This module gets the parse 
text of the retrieved documents and the query from 
the search engine and generates the Snippet of each 
document and returns the generated snippet on the 
output screen.  
(b). Summary Generation: The Summary Genera-
tion module generates the summary corresponding 
to the retrieved document. This module gets the 
parsed text of the retrieved documents and the 
query from the search engine and generates the 
summary of the documents.  
 
(c). Snippet and Summary Translation: Generated 
snippets for English and Hindi documents are 
translated to the query language. If the query lan-
guage is Hindi, then English documents are trans-
lated to Hindi. Translated snippet in the query lan-
guage is displayed on the output screen along with 
the original snippet.  
 
? UNL-Based Search Subsystem 
The advanced search system uses UNL as a lan-
guage independent intermediate representation to 
enable translation between the languages. The ad-
vanced search using UNL is based on concepts, 
and relations between concepts rather than bag of 
words. Hence it enables semantic search. Although 
the current system is designed for Tamil, it can be 
extended to other languages.  
5 Future Roadmap 
The functionalities of the CLIA system have been 
currently developed for Bengali, Marathi and Te-
lugu. The search option has been limited to the 
crawled documents that are stored and indexed in 
the CLIA server. The crawled documents are in the 
tourism domain. At present, the user can provide 3-
4 word queries to the CLIA system using soft key-
boards for the respective language. The output of 
the system shows only the snippets in the original 
language of the document.  
The CLIA system is being enhanced to provide 
full functionalities in the other Indian languages, 
i.e., Hindi, Tamil and Punjabi. The search option is 
expanded to provide search facility on the web 
also. Work is also going on for providing CLIA 
functionalities in the health domain. In future, 
snippet translation, summary generation and trans-
lation as well as information extraction templates 
generation and translation are going to be included 
in the CLIA system. The evaluation engine will 
judge the CLIA system based on the ranks of the 
relevant documents in the list of documents re-
trieved by the system. 
975
