Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2007, pages 9?16,
Rochester, NY, April 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
To Memorize or to Predict: Prominence Labeling in Conversational Speech
A. Nenkova, J. Brenier, A. Kothari, S. Calhoun?, L. Whitton, D. Beaver, D. Jurafsky
Stanford University
{anenkova,jbrenier,anubha,lwhitton,dib,jurafsky}@stanford.edu
?University of Edinburgh
Sasha.Calhoun@ed.ac.uk
Abstract
The immense prosodic variation of natural con-
versational speech makes it challenging to pre-
dict which words are prosodically prominent in
this genre. In this paper, we examine a new fea-
ture, accent ratio, which captures how likely it is
that a word will be realized as prominent or not.
We compare this feature with traditional accent-
prediction features (based on part of speech and
N -grams) as well as with several linguistically mo-
tivated and manually labeled information structure
features, such as whether a word is given, new, or
contrastive. Our results show that the linguistic fea-
tures do not lead to significant improvements, while
accent ratio alone can yield prediction performance
almost as good as the combination of any other sub-
set of features. Moreover, this feature is useful even
across genres; an accent-ratio classifier trained only
on conversational speech predicts prominence with
high accuracy in broadcast news. Our results sug-
gest that carefully chosen lexicalized features can
outperform less fine-grained features.
1 Introduction
Being able to predict the prominence or pitch accent
status of a word in conversational speech is impor-
tant for implementing text-to-speech in dialog sys-
tems, as well as in detection of prosody in conversa-
tional speech recognition.
Previous investigations of prominence prediction
from text have primarily relied on robust surface fea-
tures with some deeper information structure fea-
tures. Surface features like a word?s part-of-speech
(POS) (Hirschberg, 1993) and its unigram and bi-
gram probability (Pan and McKeown, 1999; Pan and
0Thanks to the Edinburgh-Stanford Link and ONR (MURI
award N000140510388) for generous support.
Hirschberg, 2000) are quite useful; content words
are much more likely to be accented than function
words, and words with higher probability are less
likely to be prominent. More sophisticated linguis-
tic features have also been used, generally based on
information-structural notions of contrast, focus, or
given-new. (Hirschberg, 1993).
For example, in the Switchboard utterance be-
low, there is an intrinsic contrast between the words
?women? and ?men?, making both terms more
salient (words in all capital letters represent promi-
nent tokens):
you SEE WOMENc GOING off to WARS as WELL as
MENc.
Similarly the givenness of a word may help deter-
mine its prominence. The speaker needs to focus the
hearer?s attention on new entities in the discourse, so
these are likely to be realized as prominent. Old en-
tities, on the other had, need not be prominent; these
tendencies can be seen in the following example.
theyold have all the WATERnew theyold WANT. theyold
can ACTUALLY PUMP waterold.
While previous models have attempted to cap-
ture global properties of words (via POS or unigram
probability), they have not in general used word
identity as a predictive feature, assuming either that
current supervised training sets would be too small
or that word identity would not be robust across gen-
res (Pan et al, 2002). In this paper, we show a way
to capture word identity in a feature, accent ratio,
that works well with current small supervised train-
ing sets, and is robust to genre differences.
We also use a corpus which has been hand-
labeled for information structure features (including
given/new and contrast information) to investigate
the relative usefulness of both linguistic and shallow
features, as well as how well different features com-
bine with each other.
9
2 Data and features
For our experiments we use 12 Switchboard (God-
frey et al, 1992) conversations, 14,555 tokens in to-
tal. Each word was manually labeled for presence
or absence of pitch accent1 , as well as additional
features including information status (or givenness),
contrast and animacy distinctions, (Nissim et al,
2004; Calhoun et al, 2005; Zaenen et al, 2004), fea-
tures that linguistic literature suggests are predictive
of prominence (Bolinger, 1961; Chafe, 1976).
All of the features described in detail below have
been shown to have statistically significant correla-
tion with prominence (Brenier et al, 2006).
Information status The information status (IS),
or givenness, of discourse entities is important for
choosing appropriate reference form (Prince, 1992;
Gundel et al, 1993) and possibly plays a role in
prominence decisions as well (Brown, 1983). No
previous studies have examined the usefulness of
information status in naturally occurring conversa-
tional speech. The annotation in our corpus is based
on the givenness hierarchy of Prince: first mentions
of entities were marked as new and subsequent men-
tions as old. Entities that are not previously men-
tioned, but that are generally known or semantically
related to other entities in the preceding context are
marked as mediated. Obviously, the givenness an-
notation applies only to referring expressions, i.e.
noun phrases the semantic interpretation of which is
a discourse entity. This restriction inherently limits
the power of the feature for prominence prediction,
which has to be performed for all classes of words.
Complete details of the IS annotation can be found
in (Nissim et al, 2004).
Kontrast One reason speakers make entities in
an utterance prominence is because of information
structure considerations (Rooth, 1992; Vallduv?? and
Vilkuna, 1998). That is, parts of an utterance which
distinguish the information the speaker actually says
from the information they could have said, are made
salient, e.g. because that information answers a
question, or contrasts with a similar entity in the
context. Several possible triggers of this sort of
salience were marked in the corpus, with words that
were not kontrastive (in this sense) being marked as
background:
1Of all tokens, 8,429 (or 58%) were not accented.
? contrastive if the word is directly differentiated
from a previous topical or semantically-related
word;
? subset if it refers to a member of a more general
set mentioned in the surrounding context;
? adverbial if a focus-sensitive adverb such as
?only? or ?even? is associated with the word
being annotated;
? correction if the speaker intended to correct or
clarify a previous word or phrase;
? answer if the word completes a question by the
other speaker;
? nonapplic for filler phrases such as ?in fact?, ?I
mean?, etc.
Note that only content words in full sentences
were marked for kontrast, and filler phrases such
as ?in fact? and ?I mean? were excluded. A com-
plete description of the annotation guidelines can be
found in (Calhoun et al, 2005).
Animacy Each noun and pronoun is labeled for the
animacy of its referent (Zaenen et al, 2004). The
categories include concrete, non-concrete, human,
organizations, place, and time.
Dialog act Specifies the function of the utterance
such as statement, opinion, agree, reject, abandon;
or type of question (yes/no, who, rhetoric)
In addition to the above theoretically motivated
features, we used several automatically derivable
word measures.
Part-of-speech Two such features were used, the
full Penn Treebank tagset (called POS) , and a col-
lapsed tagset (called BroadPOS) with six broad cat-
egories (nouns, verbs, function words, pronouns, ad-
jectives and adverbs).
Unigram and bigram probability These features
are defined as log(pw) and log(pwi |pwi?1) respec-
tively and their values were calculated from the
Fisher corpus (Cieri et al, 2004). High probability
words are less likely to be prominent.
TF.IDF This measure captures how central a word is
for a particular conversation. It is a function of the
frequency of occurrence of the word in the conver-
sation (nw), the number of conversations that con-
tain the word in a background corpus (k) and the
number of all conversations in the background cor-
pus (N ). Formally, TF.IDF1 = nw ? log(Nk ). We
10
also used a variant, TF.IDF2, computed by normal-
izing TF.IDF1 by the number of occurrences of the
most frequent word in the conversation. TF.IDF2 =
TF.IDF1/max(nw?conv). Words with high TF.IDF
values are important in the conversation and are
more likely to be prominent.
Stopword This is a binary feature indicating if the
word appears in a high-frequency stopword list from
the Bow toolkit (McCallum, 1996). The list spans
both function and content word classes, though nu-
merals and some nouns and verbs were removed.
Utterance length The number of words.
Length The number of characters in the words. This
feature is correlated with phonetic features that have
been shown to be useful for the task, such as the
number of vowels or phones in the word.
Position from end/beginning The position of the
word in the utterance divided by the number of
words that precede the current word.
Accent ratio This final (new) feature takes the
?memorization? of previous productions of a given
word to the extreme, measuring how likely it is that
a word belongs to a prominence class or not. Our
feature extends an earlier feature proposed by (Yuan
et al, 2005), which was a direct estimate of how
likely it is for the word to be accented as observed
in some corpus. (Yuan et al, 2005) showed that the
original accent ratio feature was not included in the
best set of features for accent prediction. We believe
the reason for this is the fact that the original ac-
cent ratio feature was computed for all words, even
words in which the value was indistinguishable from
chance (.50). Our new feature incorporates the sig-
nificance of the prominence probability, assuming a
default value of 0.5 for those words for which there
is insufficient evidence in the training data. More
specifically,
AccentRatio(w) =
{
k
n if B(k, n, 0.5) ? 0.05
0.5 otherwise
where k is the number of times word w appeared
accented in the corpus, n is the total number of
times the word w appeared, and B(k, n, 0.5) is
the probability (under a binomial distribution) that
there are k successes in n trials if the probabil-
ity of success and failure is equal. Simply put,
the accent ratio of a word is equal to the esti-
mated probability of the word being accented if this
probability is significantly different from 0.5, and
equal to 0.5 otherwise. For example, AccentRa-
tio(you)=0.3407, AccentRatio(education)=0.8666,
and AccentRatio(probably)=0.5.
Many of our features for accent prediction are
based only on the 12 training conversations. Other
features, such as the unigram, bigram, and TF*IDF
features, are computed from larger data sources. Ac-
cent ratio is also computed over a larger corpus,
since the binomial test requires a minimum of six
occurrences of a word in the corpus in order to get
significance and assign an accent ratio value differ-
ent from 0.5. We thus used 60 Switchboard conver-
sations (Ostendorf et al, 2001), annotated for pitch
accent, to compute k and n for each word.
3 Results
For our experiments we used the J48 decision trees
in WEKA (Witten and Frank, 2005). All the results
that we report are from 10-fold cross-validation on
the 12 Switchboard conversations.
Some previous studies have reported results on
prominence prediction in conversational speech with
the Switchboard corpus. Unfortunately these studies
used different parts of the corpus or different label-
ings (Gregory and Altun, 2004; Yuan et al, 2005),
so our results are not directly comparable. Bear-
ing this difference in mind, the best reported results
to our knowledge are those in (Gregory and Altun,
2004), where conditional random fields were used
with both textual, acoustic, and oracle boundary fea-
tures to yield 76.36% accuracy.
Table 1 shows the performance of decision tree
classifiers using a single feature. The majority class
baseline (not accented) has accuracy of 58%. Accent
ratio is the most predictive feature: the accent ratio
classifier has accuracy of 75.59%, which is two per-
cent net improvement above the previously known
best feature (unigram). The accent ratio classifier
assigns a ?no accent? class to all words with accent
ratio lower than 0.38 and ?accent? to all other words.
In Section 4 we discuss in detail the accent ratio dic-
tionary, but it is worth noting that it does correctly
classify even some high-frequency function words
like ?she?, ?he?, ?do? or ?up? as accented.
11
3.1 Combining features
We would expect that a combination of features
would lead to better prediction when compared to
a classifier based on a single feature. Several past
studies have examined classes of features. In order
to quantify the utility of different specific features,
we ran exhaustive experiments producing classifiers
with all possible combinations of two, three, four
and five features.
As we can see from figure 1 and table 2, the clas-
sifiers using accent ratio as a feature perform best,
for all sizes of feature sets. Moreover, the increase
of performance compared to a single-feature classi-
fier is very slight when accent ratio is used as fea-
ture. Kontrast seems to combine well with accent
ratio and all of the best classifiers with more than
one feature use kontrast in addition to accent ratio.
This indicates that automatic detection of kontrast
can potentially help in prominence prediction. But
the gains are small, the best classifiers without kon-
trast but still including accent ratio perform within
0.2 percent of the classifiers that use both.
On the other hand, classifiers that do not use ac-
cent ratio perform poorly compared to those that do,
and even a classifier using five features (unigram,
broad POS, token length, position from beginning
and bigram) performs about as well as a classifier
using solely accent ratio as a feature. Also, when
accent ratio is not used, the overall improvement of
the classifier grows faster with the addition of new
features. This suggest that accent ratio provides rich
information about words beyond that of POS class
and general informativeness.2
Table 2 gives the specific features in (n + 1)-
feature classifiers that lead to better results than the
best n-classifier. The figures are for the classifiers
performing best overall. Interestingly, none of these
best classifiers for all feature set sizes uses POS or
unigram as a feature. We assume that accent ratio
captures all the relevant information that is present
in the unigram and POS features. The best classifier
with five features uses, in addition to accent ratio,
kontrast, tf.idf, information status and distance from
the beginning of the utterance. All of these features
convey somewhat orthogonal information: seman-
2To verify this we will examine the accent ratio dictionary
in closer detail in the next section.
Accent Ratio (AR) 75.59%
AR + Kontrast 76.15%
AR + END/BEG 75.91%
AR + tf.idf2 75.82%
AR + Info Status 75.82%
AR + Length 75.77%
AR + tf.idf1 75.74%
AR + unigram 75.71%
AR + stopword 75.70%
AR + kontrast + length 76.45%
AR + kontrast + BEG 76.24%
AR + kontrast + unigram 76.24%
AR + kontrast + tf.idf1 76.24%
AR + kontrast + length + tfidf1 76.56%
AR + kontrast + length + stopword 76.54%
AR + kontrast + length +tf.idf2 76.52%
AR + kontrast + Status + BEG 76.47%
AR + kontrast + tf.idf1 + Status + BEG 76.65%
AR + kontrast + tf.idf2 + Status + BEG 76.58%
Table 2: Performance increase augmenting the ac-
cent ratio classifier.
tic, topicality, discourse and phrasing information
respectively. Still, all of them in combination im-
prove the performance over accent ratio as a single
feature only by one percent.
Figure 1 shows the overall improvement of clas-
sifiers with the addition of new features in three sce-
narios: overall best, best when kontrast is not used
as a feature and best with neither kontrast nor ac-
cent ratio. The best classifier with five features that
do not include kontrast has accent ratio, broad POS,
word length, stopword and bigram as features and
has accuracy of 76.28%, or just 0.27% worse than
the overall best classifier that uses kontrast and in-
formation status. This indicates that while there is
some benefit to using the two features, they do not
lead to any substantial boost in performance. Strik-
ingly, the best classifier that uses neither accent ra-
tio nor kontrast performs very similarly to a classi-
fier using accent ratio as the only feature: 75.82%
for the classifier using unigram, POS, tf.idf1, word
length and position from end of the utterance.
3.2 The power of linguistic features
One of the objectives of our study was to assess how
useful gold-standard annotations for complex lin-
guistic features are for the task of prominence pre-
diction. The results in this section indicate that an-
imacy distinctions (concrete/non-concrete, person,
time, etc) and dialog act did not have much power
12
AccentRatio unigram stopword POS tf.idf2 tf.idf1 BroadPos Length Kontrast bigram Info Stat
75.59 73.77 70.77 70.28 70.14 69.50 68.64 67.64 67.57 65.87 64.13
Table 1: Single feature classifier performance. Features not in the table (position from end, animacy, utter-
ance length and dialog act) all achieve lower accuracy of around 60%
1 2 3 4 5
73
74
75
76
77
78
Classifier performance
Number of features
Pr
ed
ict
io
n 
ac
cu
ra
cy
Overall best
Without kontrast
Without accent
+ ratio or kontrast
Figure 1: Performance increase with the addition of
new features.
as individual features (table 1) and were never in-
cluded in a model that was best for a given feature
set size (table 2).
Information status is somewhat useful and ap-
pears in the overall best classifier with five features
(table 2). But when compared with other classifiers
with the same number of features, the benefits from
adding information status to the model are small.
For example, the accent ratio + information status
classifier performs 0.23% better than accent ratio
alone, but so does the classifier using accent ratio
and tf.idf. There are two reasons that can explain
why the givenness of the referent is not as helpful
as we might have hoped. First of all, the informa-
tion status distinction applies only to referring ex-
pressions and has undefined values for words such
as verbs, adjectives or function words. Second, in-
formation status of an entity influences the form of
referring expression that is used, with old items be-
ing more likely to be pronominalized. In the numer-
ous cases where pronominalization of old informa-
tion does occur, features such as POS, unigram or
accent ratio will be sensitive to the change of infor-
mation status simply based on the lexical item.
Kontrast is by far the most useful linguistic fea-
ture. It is used in all of the best classifiers for any
feature set size (table 2). It applies to more words
than givenness does, since salience distinctions can
be made for any part-of-speech class. Still, not all
words were annotated for kontrast either, and more-
over kontrast only captures one kind of semantic
salience. This is particularly true of discourse mark-
ers like ?especially? or ?definitely?: these would ei-
ther be in sentence fragments that weren?t marked
for kontrast, or would probably be marked as ?back-
ground? since they are not salience triggers in a se-
mantic sense. As we can see from figure 1, clas-
sifiers that use kontrast perform only slightly better
than others that use only ?cheaper? features.
4 The accent ratio dictionary
Contrary to our initial expectations, both classes in
the accent ratio dictionary (for both low and high
probability of being prominent) cover the full set of
possible POS categories. Tables 3 and 4 list words in
both classes (with words sorted by increasing accent
ratio in each column). The ?no accent? class is dom-
inated by function words, but also includes nouns
and verbs. One of the drawbacks of POS as a fea-
ture for prominence prediction is that normally aux-
iliary verbs will be tagged as ?VB?, the same class
as other more contentful verbs. The informativeness
(unigram probability) of a word would distinguish
between these types of verbs, but so does the accent
ratio measure as well.
Furthermore, some relatively frequent words such
as ?too?, ?now?, ?both?, ?no?, ?yes?, ?else?, ?wow?
have high accent ratio, that is, a high probability for
accenting. Such distinctions within the class of func-
tion words would not be possible on the basis of in-
13
.00?.08 .09?.16 .17?.24 .25?.32 .33?.42
a could you?d being me
uh in because take i?ve
um minutes oh said we?re
uh-huh and since wanna went
the by says been over
an who us those you
of grew where into thing
to cause they?ve little what
were gonna am until some
as about sort they?re out
than their you?re I had
with but didn?t that make
at on her don?t way
for be going this did
from through i?ll should anything
or which will type i?m
you?ve are our we kind
was we?ll just so go
would during though have stuff
it huh like got then
when is your new she
them bit needs mean he
it?s there?s my much do
if any many i?d up
can has they know
him stayed get doesn?t
these supposed there even
Table 3: Accent ratio entries with low prominence
probability.
formativeness, POS, or even information structure
features. Another class like that is words like ?yes?,
?okay?, ?sure? that are mostly accented by virtue of
being the only word in the phrase.
Some rather common words, ?not? for example,
are not included in the accent ratio dictionary be-
cause they do not exhibit a statistically strong pref-
erence for a prominence class. The accent ratio clas-
sifier would thus assign class ?accented? to the word
?not?, which is indeed the class this word occurs in
more often.
Another fact that becomes apparent with the in-
spection of the accent ratio dictionary is that while
certain words have a statistically significant prefer-
ence for deaccenting, there is also a lot of variation
in their observed realization. For example, personal
pronouns such as ?I? and ?you? have accent ratios
near 0.33. This means that every third such pronoun
was actually realized as prominent by the speaker.
In a conversational setting there is an implicit con-
trast between the two speakers, which could partly
explain the phenomenon, but the situations which
prompt the speaker to realize the distinction in their
.58?.74 .75?.79 .80?.86 .87?1.0
lot both sometimes half
time no change topic
now seems child else
kids life young obviously
old tell Texas themselves
too ready town wow
really easy room gosh
three heard pay anyway
work isn?t interesting Dallas
nice again true outside
yeah first mother mostly
two right problems yes
person children agree great
day married war exactly
working may needed especially
job happen told definitely
talking business finally lately
usually still neat thirty
rather daughter sure higher
places gone house forty
government guess okay hey
ten news seven Iowa
parents major best poor
paper fact also glad
actually five older basic
Table 4: Accent ratio values for words with high
probability for being accented.
speech will be the focus of a future linguistic inves-
tigation.
Kontrast is helpful in predicting ?accented? class
for some generally low ratio words. However, even
with its help, production variation in the conversa-
tions cannot be fully explained. The following ex-
amples from our corpus show low accent ratio words
(that, did, and, have, had) that were produced as
prominent.
so i did THAT. and then i, you know, i DID that for SIX
years. AND then i stayed HOME with my SON.
i HAVE NOT, to be honest, HAD much EXPERIENCE
with CHILDREN in that SITUATION.
they?re going to HAVE to WORK it OUT to WORKING
part TIME.
The examples attest to the presence of variation
in production: in the first utterance, for example, we
see the words ?did?, ?and? and ?that? produced both
as prominent and not prominent. Intonational phras-
ing most probably accounts for some of this varia-
tion since it is likely that even words that are typ-
ically not prominent will be accented if they occur
just before or after a longer pause. We come back to
this point in the closing section.
14
5 Robustness of accent ratio
While accent ratio works well for our data (Table
2), a feature based so strongly on memorizing the
status of each word in the training data might lead
to problems. One potential problem, suggested by
Pan et al (2002) for lexicalized features in general,
is whether a lexical feature like accent ratio might
be less robust across genres. Another question is
whether our definition of accent ratio is better than
one that does not use the binomial test: we need to
investigate whether these statistical tests indeed im-
prove performance. We focus on these two issues in
the next two subsections.
Binomial test cut-off
As discussed above, the original accent ratio feature
(Yuan et al, 2005) was based directly on the frac-
tion of accented occurrences in the training set. We
might expect such a use of raw frequencies to be
problematic. Given what we know about word dis-
tributions in text (Baayen, 2001), we would expect
about half of the words in a big corpus to appear only
once. In an accent ratio dictionary without binomial
test cut-off, all such words will have accent ratio of
either exactly 1 or 0, but one or even few occurrences
of a word would not be enough to determine statis-
tical significance. By contrast, our modified accent
ratio feature uses binomial test cut-off to make the
accent ratio more robust to small training sets.
To test if the binomial test cut-off really improved
the accent ratio feature, we compared the perfor-
mance on Switchboard of classifiers using accent
ratio with and without cut-off. The binominal test
improved the performance of the accent ratio fea-
ture from 73.49% (Yuan et al original version) to
75.59% (our version).
Moreover, Yuan et al report that their version of
the feature did not combine well with other features,
while in our experiments best performance was al-
ways achieved by the classifiers that made use of the
accent ratio feature in addition to others.
A cross-genre experiment: broadcast news
In a systematic analysis of the usefulness of differ-
ent informativeness, syntactic and semantic features
for prominence prediction, Pan et al (2002) showed
that word identity is a powerful feature. But they hy-
pothesized that this would not be a useful feature in
a domain independent pitch accent prediction task.
Their hypothesis that word identity cannot be a ro-
bust across genres would obviously carry over to ac-
cent ratio. In order to test the hypothesis, we used
the accent ratio dictionary derived from the Switch-
board corpus to predict prominence in the Boston
University Radio corpus of broadcast news. Using
an accent ratio dictionary from Switchboard and as-
signing class ?not accented? to words with accent ra-
tio less than 0.38 and ?accented? otherwise leads to
82% accuracy of prediction for this broadcast news
corpus. If the accent ratio dictionary is built from
the BU corpus itself, the performance is 83.67%.3
These results indicate that accent ratio is a robust
enough feature and is applicable across genres.
6 Conclusions and future work
In this paper we introduced a new feature for promi-
nence prediction, accent ratio. The accent ratio of
a word is the (maximum likelihood estimate) prob-
ability that a word is accented if there is a signifi-
cant preference for a class, and 0.5 otherwise. Our
experiments demonstrate that the feature is power-
ful both by itself and in combination with other fea-
tures. Moreover, the feature is robust to genre, and
accent ratio dictionaries can be used for prediction
of prominence in read news with very good results.
Of the linguistic features we examined, kontrast
is the only one that is helpful beyond what can be
gained using shallow features such as n-gram prob-
ability, POS or tf.idf. While the improvements from
kontrast are relatively small, the consistency of these
small improvements suggest that developing auto-
matic methods for approximating the gold-standard
annotation we used here, similar to what has been
done for information status in (Nissim, 2006), may
be worthwhile. An automatic predictor for kontrast
may also be helpful in other applications such as
question answering or textual entailment.
All of the features in our study were text-based.
There is a wide variety of research investigating
phonological or acoustic features as well. For exam-
ple Gregory and Altun (2004) used acoustic features
3This result is comparable with the result of (Yuan et al,
2005) who in their experiment with the same corpus report the
best result as 83.9% using three features: unigram, bigram and
backwards bigram probability.
15
such as duration and energy, and phonological fea-
tures such as oracle (hand-labeled) intonation phrase
boundaries, and the number of phones and sylla-
bles in a word. Although acoustic features are not
available in a text-to-speech scenario, we hypothe-
size that in a task where such features are available
(such as in speech recognition applications), acous-
tic or phonological features could improve the per-
formance of our text-only features. To test this hy-
pothesis, we augmented our best 5-feature classifier
which did not include kontrast with hand-labeled in-
tonation phrase boundary information. The resulting
classifier reached an accuracy of 77.45%, more than
one percent net improvement over 76.28% accuracy
of the model based solely on text features and not in-
cluding kontrast. Thus in future work we plan to in-
corporate more acoustic and phonological features.
Finally, prominence prediction classifiers need to
be incorporated in a speech synthesis system and
their performance should be gauged via listening
experiments that test whether the incorporation of
prominence leads to improvement in synthesis.
References
R. H. Baayen. 2001. Word Frequency Distributions.
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
D.L. Bolinger. 1961. Contrastive Accent and Contrastive
Stress. Language, 37(1):83?96.
J. Brenier, A. Nenkova, A. Kothari, L. Whitton,
D. Beaver, and D. Jurafsky. 2006. The (non)utility of
linguistic features for predicting prominence in spon-
taneous speech. In IEEE/ACL 2006 Workshop on Spo-
ken Language Technology.
G. Brown. 1983. Prosodic structure and the given/new
distinction. Prosody: Models and Measurements,
pages 67?77.
S. Calhoun, M. Nissim, M. Steedman, and J.M. Brenier.
2005. A framework for annotating information struc-
ture in discourse. Pie in the Sky: Proceedings of the
workshop, ACL, pages 45?52.
W. Chafe. 1976. Givenness, contrastiveness, definite-
ness, subjects, topics, and point of view. Subject and
Topic, pages 25?55.
C. Cieri, D. Graff, O. Kimball, D. Miller, and Kevin
Walker. 2004. Fisher English training speech part 1
transcripts. LDC.
J. Godfrey, E. Holliman, and J. McDaniel. 1992.
SWITCHBOARD: Telephone speech corpus for re-
search and development. In IEEE ICASSP-92.
M. Gregory and Y. Altun. 2004. Using conditional ran-
dom fields to predict pitch accents in conversational
speech. Proceedings of ACL, 2004.
J. Gundel, N. Hedberg, and R. Zacharski. 1993. Cog-
nitive status and the form of referring expressions in
discourse. Language, 69:274?307.
J. Hirschberg. 1993. Pitch Accent in Context: Predicting
Intonational Prominence from Text. Artificial Intelli-
gence, 63(1-2):305?340.
A. McCallum. 1996. Bow: A toolkit for statistical lan-
guage modeling, text retrieval, classification and clus-
tering. http://www.cs.cmu.edu/ mccallum/bow.
M. Nissim, S. Dingare, J. Carletta, and M. Steedman.
2004. An annotation scheme for information status in
dialogue. In LREC 2004.
M. Nissim. 2006. Learning information status of dis-
course entities. In Proceedings of EMNLP 2006.
M. Ostendorf, I. Shafran, S. Shattuck-Hufnagel,
L. Carmichael, and W. Byrne. 2001. A prosodically
labeled database of spontaneous speech. Proc. of the
ISCA Workshop on Prosody in Speech Recognition and
Understanding, pages 119?121.
S. Pan and J. Hirschberg. 2000. Modeling local context
for pitch accent prediction. In Proceedings of ACL-00.
S. Pan and K. McKeown. 1999. Word informativeness
and automatic pitch accent modeling. In Proceedings
of EMNLP/VLC-99.
S. Pan, K. McKeown, and J. Hirschberg. 2002. Ex-
ploring features from natural language generation in
prosody modeling. Computer speech and language,
16:457?490.
E. Prince. 1992. The ZPG letter: subject, definiteness,
and information status. In S. Thompson and W. Mann,
editors, Discourse description: diverse analyses of a
fund raising text, pages 295?325. John Benjamins.
Mats Rooth. 1992. A theory of focus interpretation. Nat-
ural Language Semantics, 1(1):75?116.
E. Vallduv?? and M. Vilkuna. 1998. On rheme and kon-
trast. Syntax and Semantics, 29:79?108.
I. H. Witten and E. Frank. 2005. Data Mining: Practical
machine learning tools and techniques. 2nd Edition,
Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco.
J. Yuan, J. Brenier, and D. Jurafsky. 2005. Pitch Accent
Prediction: Effects of Genre and Speaker. Proceed-
ings of Interspeech.
A. Zaenen, J. Carletta, G. Garretson, J. Bresnan,
A. Koontz-Garboden, T. Nikitina, M.C. O?Connor, and
T. Wasow. 2004. Animacy Encoding in English: why
and how. ACL Workshop on Discourse Annotation.
16
Proceedings of the Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus Annotation II: Pie in the Sky, pages 45?52,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Framework for Annotating Information Structure in Discourse
Sasha Calhoun   , Malvina Nissim   , Mark Steedman   and Jason Brenier 
 
Institute for Communicating and Collaborative Systems, University of Edinburgh, UK
Sasha.Calhoun@ed.ac.uk,

steedman,mnissim  @inf.ed.ac.uk

Department of Linguistics, University of Colorado at Boulder
jbrenier@colorado.edu
Abstract
We present a framework for the integrated
analysis of the textual and prosodic char-
acteristics of information structure in the
Switchboard corpus of conversational En-
glish. Information structure describes the
availability, organisation and salience of
entities in a discourse model. We present
standards for the annotation of informa-
tion status (old, mediated and new), and
give guidelines for annotating informa-
tion structure, i.e. theme/rheme and back-
ground/kontrast. We show that informa-
tion structure in English can only be anal-
ysed concurrently with prosodic promi-
nence and phrasing. This annotation, us-
ing stand-off XML in NXT, can help es-
tablish standards for the annotation of in-
formation structure in discourse.
1 Introduction
We present a framework for the integrated analysis
of the textual and prosodic characteristics of infor-
mation structure in a corpus of conversational En-
glish. Section 2 introduces the corpus as well as the
tools we employ in the annotation process. We pro-
pose two complementary annotation efforts within
this framework. The rst, information status (old,
mediated, new), expresses the availability of entities
in discourse (Section 3). The second scheme will
rstly annotate theme/rheme, i.e. how each intona-
tion phrase is organised in the discourse model, and
secondly kontrast: how salient the speaker wishes
to make each entity, property or relation (Section 4).
We will demonstrate that the perception of both of
these is intimately affected by prosodic structure. In
particular, the theme/rheme division affects prosodic
phrasing; and information status and kontrast affect
relative prosodic prominence. Therefore we also
propose to annotate a subset of the corpus for this
prosodic information (Section 5). In conjunction
with existing annotations of the corpus, our inte-
grated framework using NXT will be unique in the
eld of conversational speech in terms of size and
richness of annotation.
2 Corpus and Tools
The Switchboard Corpus (Godfrey et al, 1992) con-
sists of 2430 spontaneous phone conversations (av-
erage six minutes), between speakers of American
English, for three million words. The corpus is
distributed as stereo speech signals with an ortho-
graphic transcription per channel time-stamped at
the word level. A third of this is syntactically parsed
as part of the Penn Treebank (Marcus et al, 1993)
and has dialog act annotation (Shriberg et al, 1998).
We used a subset of this. In adherence with current
standards, we converted all the existing annotations,
and are producing the new discourse annotations in
a coherent multi-layered XML-conformant schema,
using NXT technology (Carletta et al, 2004).1 This
allows us to search over and integrate information
from the many layers of annotation, including the
1Beside the NXT tools, we also used the TIGER Switch-
board filter (Mengel and Lezius, 2000) for the XML-
conversion. Using existing markup we automatically selected
and filtered NPs to be annotated, excluding locative, directional,
and adverbial NPs and disfluencies, and adding possessive pro-
nouns. See (Nissim et al, 2004) for technical details.
45
sound les. NXT tools can be easily customised
to accommodate different layers of annotation users
want to add, including data sets that have low-level
annotations time-stamped against a set of synchro-
nized signals, multiple, crossing tree structures, and
connection to external corpus resources such as ges-
ture ontologies and lexicons (Carletta et al, 2004).
3 Information Status
Information Status describes how available an en-
tity is in the discourse. We dene this in terms of
the speaker?s assumptions about the hearer?s knowl-
edge/beliefs, and we express it by the well-known
old/new distinction.2
3.1 Annotation Scheme
Our annotation scheme for the discourse layer
mainly builds on (Prince, 1992) and (Eckert and
Strube, 2001), as well as on related work on
annotation of anaphoric links (Passonneau, 1996;
Hirschman and Chinchor, 1997; Davies et al, 1998;
Poesio, 2000). Prince denes ?old? and ?new? with
respect to the discourse model as well as the hearer?s
point of view. Considering the interaction of both
these aspects, we dene as new an entity which has
not been previously referred to and is yet unknown
to the hearer, and as mediated an entity that is newly
mentioned in the dialogue but that the hearer can in-
fer from the prior context.3 This is mainly the case
of generally known entities (such as ?the sun?, or
?the Pope? (L?obner, 1985)), and bridging (Clark,
1975), where an entity is related to a previously in-
troduced one. Whenever an entity is not new nor
mediated is considered as old.
Because ner-grained distinctions (e.g. (Prince,
1981; Lambrecht, 1994)) have proved hard to distin-
guish reliably in practice, we organise our scheme
hierarchically: we use the three main classes de-
scribed above as top level categories for which more
specic subtypes can assigned. This approach pre-
serves a high-level, more reliable distinction while
allowing a ner-grained classication that can be ex-
ploited for specic tasks.
Besides the main categories, we introduce two
more classes. A category non-applicable is used for
2We follow Prince in using ? old? rather than ?given? to refer
to ?not-new? information, but regard the two as identical.
3This type corresponds to Prince?s (1981; 1992) inferrables.
wrongly extracted markables (such as ?course? in
?of course?), for idiomatic occurrences, and exple-
tive uses of ?it?. Traces are automatically extracted
as markables, but are left unannotated. In the rare
event the annotators nd some fragments too dif-
cult to understand, a category not-understood can be
assigned. Entities marked as non-applicable or not-
understood are excluded from any further annotation.
For all other markables, the annotators must choose
between old, mediated, and new. For the rst two,
subtypes can also be specied: subtype assignment
is encouraged but not compulsory.
New The category new is assigned to entities that
have not yet been introduced in the dialogue and that
the hearer cannot infer from previously mentioned
entities. No subtypes are specied for this category.
Mediated Mediated entities are inferrable from
previously mentioned ones, or generally known to
the hearer. We specify nine subtypes: general, bound,
part, situation, event, set, poss, func value, aggrega-
tion.4 Generally known entities such as ?the moon?
or ?Italy? are assigned a subtype general. Most
proper nouns fall into this subclass, but the anno-
tator could opt for a different tag, depending on the
context. Also mediated are bound pronouns, such as
?them? in (1), which are assigned a subtype bound.5
(1) [. . . ] it?s hard to raise one child without them
thinking they?re the pivot point of the universe.
A subtype poss is used to mark all kinds of intra-
phrasal possessive relations (pre- and postnominal).
Four subtypes (part, situation, event, and set) are
used to mark instances of bridging. The subtype part
is used to mark part-whole relations for physical ob-
jects, both as intra- and inter-phrasal relations. (This
category is to be preferred to poss whenever appli-
cable.) The occurrence of ?the door? in (2), for in-
stance, is annotated as mediated/part.
(2) When I come home in the evenings my dog
greets me at the door.
For similar relations that do not involve physical ob-
jects, i.e. if an entity is part of a situation set up by
4Some of the subtypes are inspired by categories developed
for bridging markup (Passonneau, 1996; Davies et al, 1998).
5All examples in this paper are from the Switchboard Cor-
pus. The markable in question is typed in boldface; antecedents
or trigger entities, where present, are in italics. For the sake of
space we do not provide examples for each category (see (Nis-
sim, 2003)).
46
a previously introduced entity, we use the subtype
situation.6,as for the NP ?the specications? in (3).
(3) I guess I don?t really have a problem with cap-
ital punishment. I?m not really sure what the
exact specifications are for Texas.
The subtype event is applied whenever an entity is
related to a previously mentioned verb phrase (VP).
In (4), e.g., ?the bus? is triggered by travelling
around Yucatan.
(4) We were travelling around Yucatan, and the
bus was really full.
Whenever an entity referred to is a subset of, a super-
set of, or a member of the same set as a previously
mentioned entity, the subtype set is applied.
Rarely, an entity refers to a value of a previously
mentioned function, as ?zero? and ?ten? in (5). In
such cases a subtype func-value is assigned.
(5) I had kind of gotten used to centigrade temper-
ature [. . . ] if it?s between zero and ten it?s cold.
Lastly, a subtype aggregation is used to classify co-
ordinated NPs. Two old or med entities, for instance
do not give rise to an old coordinated NP, unless it
has been previously introduced as such. A medi-
ated/aggregation tag is assigned instead.
Old An entity is old when it is not new nor medi-
ated. This is usually the case if an entity is coref-
erential with an already introduced entity, if it is
a generic pronoun, or if it is a personal pronoun
referring to the dialogue participants. Six differ-
ent subtypes are available for old entities: identity,
event, general, generic, ident generic, relative. In (6),
for instance, ?us? would be marked as old because it
corefers with ?we?, and a subtype identity would also
be assigned.
(6) [. . . ] we camped in a tent, and uh there were
two other couples with us.
In addition, a coreference link is marked up between
anaphor and antecedent, thus creating anaphoric
chains (see also (Carletta et al, 2004)). The subtype
event applies whenever the antecedent is a VP. In (7),
?it? is old/event, as its antecedent is the VP ?educate
three?. As we do not extract VPs as markables, no
link can be marked up.
(7) I most certainly couldn?t educate three. I don?t
know how my parents did it.
6This includes elements of the thematic grid of an already
introduced entity. It subsumes Passonneau?s (1996) class ?arg?.
Also classied as old are personal pronouns refer-
ring to the dialogue participants as well as generic
pronouns. In the rst case, a subtype general is spec-
ied, whereas the subtype for the second is generic.
An instance of old/generic is ?you? in (8).
(8) up here you got to wait until Aug- August until
the water warms up.
In a chain of generic references, the subtype
ident generic is assigned, and a coreference link is
marked up. Coreference is also marked up for rel-
ative pronouns: they receive a subtype relative and
are linked back to their head.
The guidelines contain a decision tree the annota-
tors use to establish priority in case more than one
class is appropriate for a given entity. For example,
if a mediated/general entity is also old/identity the latter
is to be preferred to the former. Similar precedence
relations hold among subtypes.
To provide more robust and reliable clues in an-
notating bridging types (e.g. for distinguishing
between poss and part), we provided replacement
tests and referred to relations encoded in knowledge
bases such as WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) (for part)
and FrameNet (Baker et al, 1998) (for situation).
3.2 Validation of the Scheme
Three Switchboard dialogues (for a total of 1738
markables) were marked up by two different anno-
tators for assessing the validity of the scheme. We
evaluated annotation reliability by using the Kappa
statistic (Carletta, 1996). Good quality annotation
of discourse phenomena normally yields a kappa
(  ) of about .80. We assessed the validity of the
scheme on the four-way classication into the three
main categories (old, mediated and new) and the non-
applicable category. We also evaluated the annota-
tion including the subtypes. All cases where at least
one annotator assigned a not-understood tag were ex-
cluded from the agreement evaluation (14 mark-
ables). Also excluded were all traces (222 mark-
ables), which the annotators left unmarked. The
total markables considered for evaluation over the
three dialogues was therefore 1502.
The annotation of the three dialogues yielded
 	
 for the high-level categories, and  
 when including subtypes (  ; 