Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions, pages 827?834,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Infrastructure for standardization of Asian language resources
Tokunaga Takenobu
Tokyo Inst. of Tech.
Virach Sornlertlamvanich
TCL, NICT
Thatsanee Charoenporn
TCL, NICT
Nicoletta Calzolari
ILC/CNR
Monica Monachini
ILC/CNR
Claudia Soria
ILC/CNR
Chu-Ren Huang
Academia Sinica
Xia YingJu
Fujitsu R&D Center
Yu Hao
Fujitsu R&D Center
Laurent Prevot
Academia Sinica
Shirai Kiyoaki
JAIST
Abstract
As an area of great linguistic and cul-
tural diversity, Asian language resources
have received much less attention than
their western counterparts. Creating a
common standard for Asian language re-
sources that is compatible with an interna-
tional standard has at least three strong ad-
vantages: to increase the competitive edge
of Asian countries, to bring Asian coun-
tries to closer to their western counter-
parts, and to bring more cohesion among
Asian countries. To achieve this goal, we
have launched a two year project to create
a common standard for Asian language re-
sources. The project is comprised of four
research items, (1) building a description
framework of lexical entries, (2) building
sample lexicons, (3) building an upper-
layer ontology and (4) evaluating the pro-
posed framework through an application.
This paper outlines the project in terms of
its aim and approach.
1 Introduction
There is a long history of creating a standard
for western language resources. The human
language technology (HLT) society in Europe
has been particularly zealous for the standardiza-
tion, making a series of attempts such as EA-
GLES1, PAROLE/SIMPLE (Lenci et al, 2000),
ISLE/MILE (Calzolari et al, 2003) and LIRICS2.
These continuous efforts has been crystallized as
activities in ISO-TC37/SC4 which aims to make
an international standard for language resources.
1http://www.ilc.cnr.it/Eagles96/home.html
2lirics.loria.fr/documents.html
(1) Description 
framework of lexical 
entries
(2) Sample lexicons
(4) Evaluation 
through application
(3) Upper layer 
ontologyrefinement
description classification
refinement
evaluationevaluation
Figure 1: Relations among research items
On the other hand, since Asia has great lin-
guistic and cultural diversity, Asian language re-
sources have received much less attention than
their western counterparts. Creating a common
standard for Asian language resources that is com-
patible with an international standard has at least
three strong advantages: to increase the competi-
tive edge of Asian countries, to bring Asian coun-
tries to closer to their western counterparts, and to
bring more cohesion among Asian countries.
To achieve this goal, we have launched a two
year project to create a common standard for
Asian language resources. The project is com-
prised of the following four research items.
(1) building a description framework of lexical
entries
(2) building sample lexicons
(3) building an upper-layer ontology
(4) evaluating the proposed framework through
an application
Figure 1 illustrates the relations among these re-
search items.
Our main aim is the research item (1), building
a description framework of lexical entries which
827
fits with as many Asian languages as possible, and
contributing to the ISO-TC37/SC4 activities. As
a starting point, we employ an existing descrip-
tion framework, the MILE framework (Bertagna
et al, 2004a), to describe several lexical entries of
several Asian languages. Through building sam-
ple lexicons (research item (2)), we will find prob-
lems of the existing framework, and extend it so
as to fit with Asian languages. In this extension,
we need to be careful in keeping consistency with
the existing framework. We start with Chinese,
Japanese and Thai as target Asian languages and
plan to expand the coverage of languages. The re-
search items (2) and (3) also comprise the similar
feedback loop. Through building sample lexicons,
we refine an upper-layer ontology. An application
built in the research item (4) is dedicated to evalu-
ating the proposed framework. We plan to build an
information retrieval system using a lexicon built
by extending the sample lexicon.
In what follows, section 2 briefly reviews the
MILE framework which is a basis of our de-
scription framework. Since the MILE framework
is originally designed for European languages, it
does not always fit with Asian languages. We ex-
emplify some of the problems in section 3 and sug-
gest some directions to solve them. We expect
that further problems will come into clear view
through building sample lexicons. Section 4 de-
scribes a criteria to choose lexical entries in sam-
ple lexicons. Section 5 describes an approach
to build an upper-layer ontology which can be
sharable among languages. Section 6 describes
an application through which we evaluate the pro-
posed framework.
2 The MILE framework for
interoperability of lexicons
The ISLE (International Standards for Language
Engineering) Computational Lexicon Working
Group has consensually defined the MILE (Mul-
tilingual ISLE Lexical Entry) as a standardized
infrastructure to develop multilingual lexical re-
sources for HLT applications, with particular at-
tention toMachine Translation (MT) and Crosslin-
gual Information Retrieval (CLIR) application
systems.
The MILE is a general architecture devised
for the encoding of multilingual lexical informa-
tion, a meta-entry acting as a common representa-
tional layer for multilingual lexicons, by allowing
integration and interoperability between different
monolingual lexicons3.
This formal and standardized framework to en-
code MILE-conformant lexical entries is provided
to lexicon and application developers by the over-
all MILE Lexical Model (MLM). As concerns
the horizontal organization, the MLM consists of
two independent, but interlinked primary compo-
nents, the monolingual and the multilingual mod-
ules. The monolingual component, on the vertical
dimension, is organized over three different repre-
sentational layers which allow to describe differ-
ent dimensions of lexical entries, namely the mor-
phological, syntactic and semantic layers. More-
over, an intermediate module allows to define
mechanisms of linkage and mapping between the
syntactic and semantic layers. Within each layer, a
basic linguistic information unit is identified; basic
units are separated but still interlinked each other
across the different layers.
Within each of the MLM layers, different types
of lexical object are distinguished :
? the MILE Lexical Classes (MLC) represent
the main building blocks which formalize
the basic lexical notions. They can be seen
as a set of structural elements organized in
a layered fashion: they constitute an on-
tology of lexical objects as an abstraction
over different lexical models and architec-
tures. These elements are the backbone of
the structural model. In the MLM a defini-
tion of the classes is provided together with
their attributes and the way they relate to each
other. Classes represent notions like Inflec-
tionalParadigm, SyntacticFunction, Syntac-
ticPhrase, Predicate, Argument,
? the MILE Data Categories (MDC) which
constitute the attributes and values to adorn
the structural classes and allow concrete en-
tries to be instantiated. MDC can belong to
a shared repository or be user-defined. ?NP?
and ?VP? are data category instances of the
class SyntacticPhrase, whereas and ?subj?
and ?obj? are data category instances of the
class SyntacticFunction.
? lexical operations, which are special lexical
entities allowing the user to define multilin-
3MILE is based on the experience derived from exist-
ing computational lexicons (e.g. LE-PAROLE, SIMPLE, Eu-
roWordNet, etc.).
828
gual conditions and perform operations on
lexical entries.
Originally, in order to meet expectations placed
upon lexicons as critical resources for content pro-
cessing in the Semantic Web, the MILE syntactic
and semantic lexical objects have been formalized
in RDF(S), thus providing a web-based means to
implement the MILE architecture and allowing for
encoding individual lexical entries as instances of
the model (Ide et al, 2003; Bertagna et al, 2004b).
In the framework of our project, by situating our
work in the context of W3C standards and relying
on standardized technologies underlying this com-
munity, the original RDF schema for ISLE lexi-
cal entries has been made compliant to OWL. The
whole data model has been formalized in OWL by
using Prote?ge? 3.2 beta and has been extended to
cover the morphological component as well (see
Figure 2). Prote?ge? 3.2 beta has been also used as
a tool to instantiate the lexical entries of our sam-
ple monolingual lexicons, thus ensuring adherence
to the model, encoding coherence and inter- and
intra-lexicon consistency.
3 Existing problems with the MILE
framework for Asian languages
In this section, we will explain some problematic
phenomena of Asian languages and discuss pos-
sible extensions of the MILE framework to solve
them.
Inflection The MILE provides the powerful
framework to describe the information about in-
flection. InflectedForm class is devoted to de-
scribe inflected forms of a word, while Inflec-
tionalParadigm to define general inflection rules.
However, there is no inflection in several Asian
languages, such as Chinese and Thai. For these
languages, we do not use the Inflected Form and
Inflectional Paradigm.
Classifier Many Asian languages, such as
Japanese, Chinese, Thai and Korean, do not dis-
tinguish singularity and plurality of nouns, but use
classifiers to denote the number of objects. The
followings are examples of classifiers of Japanese.
? inu
(dog)
ni
(two)
hiki
(CL)
? ? ? two dogs
? hon
(book)
go
(five)
satsu
(CL)
? ? ? five books
?CL? stands for a classifier. They always follow
cardinal numbers in Japanese. Note that differ-
ent classifiers are used for different nouns. In the
above examples, classifier ?hiki? is used to count
noun ?inu (dog)?, while ?satsu? for ?hon (book)?.
The classifier is determined based on the semantic
type of the noun.
In the Thai language, classifiers are used in var-
ious situations (Sornlertlamvanich et al, 1994).
The classifier plays an important role in construc-
tion with noun to express ordinal, pronoun, for in-
stance. The classifier phrase is syntactically gener-
ated according to a specific pattern. Here are some
usages of classifiers and their syntactic patterns.
? Enumeration
(Noun/Verb)-(cardinal number)-(CL)
e.g. nakrian
(student)
3 khon
(CL)
? ? ? three students
? Ordinal
(Noun)-(CL)-/thi:/-(cardinal number)
e.g. kaew
(glass)
bai
(CL)
thi: 4
(4th)
? ? ? the 4th glass
? Determination
(Noun)-(CL)-(Determiner)
e.g. kruangkhidlek
(calculator)
kruang
(CL)
nii
(this)
? ? ? this calculator
Classifiers could be dealt as a class of the part-
of-speech. However, since classifiers depend on
the semantic type of nouns, we need to refer to
semantic features in the morphological layer, and
vice versa. Some mechanism to link between fea-
tures beyond layers needs to be introduced into the
current MILE framework.
Orthographic variants Many Chinese words
have orthographic variants. For instance, the con-
cept of rising can be represented by either char-
acter variants of sheng1: ? or ?. However,
the free variants become non-free in certain com-
pound forms. For instance, only? allowed for?
? ?liter?, and only? is allowed for?? ?to sub-
lime?. The interaction of lemmas and orthographic
variations is not yet represented in MILE.
Reduplication as a derivational process In
some Asian languages, reduplication of words de-
rives another word, and the derived word often has
a different part-of-speech. Here are some exam-
ples of reduplication in Chinese. Man4 ? ?to be
slow? is a state verb, while a reduplicated form
829
Inflectional
Paradigm
Lexical Entry SyntacticUnit
Form Lemmatized Form Stem
Inflected Form
Combiner
Calculator Mrophfeat
Operation Argument
Morph
DataCats
0..*
0..* 0..*
0..*
0..*
0..1
0..*
0..*
1..*
<LemmatizedForm rdf:ID="LFstar">
  <hasInflectedForm>
    <InflectedForm rdf:ID="stars">
      <hasMorphoFeat>
<MorphoFeat rdf:ID="pl">
  <number rdf:datatype="http://www.w3c.org/
2001/ XMLSchema#string">
    plural
  </number>
</MorphoFeat>
      </hasMorphoFeat>
    </InflectedForm>
  </hasInflectedForm>
  <hasInflectedForm>
    <InflectedForm rdf:ID="star">
      <hasMorphoFeat>
<MorphoFeat rdf:ID="sg">
  <number rdf:datatype="http://www.w3c.org/
2001/ XMLSchema#string">
    singular
  </number>
</MorphoFeat>
      </hasMorphoFeat>
    </InflectedForm>
  </hasInflectedForm>
</LemmatiedForm>
Figure 2: Formalization of the morphological layer and excerpt of a sample RDF instantiation
man4-man4 ?? is an adverb. Another example
of reduplication involves verbal aspect. Kan4 ?
?to look? is an activity verb, while the reduplica-
tive form kan4-kan4 ??, refers to the tentative
aspect, introducing either stage-like sub-division
or the event or tentativeness of the action of the
agent. This morphological process is not provided
for in the current MILE standard.
There are also various usages of reduplication in
Thai. Some words reduplicate themselves to add a
specific aspect to the original meaning. The redu-
plication can be grouped into 3 types according to
the tonal sound change of the original word.
? Word reduplication without sound change
e.g. /dek-dek/ ? ? ? (N) children, (ADV) child-
ishly, (ADJ) childish
/sa:w-sa:w/ ? ? ? (N) women
? Word reduplication with high tone on the first
word
e.g. /dam4-dam/ ? ? ? (ADJ) extremely black
/bo:i4-bo:i/ ? ? ? (ADV) really often
? Triple word reduplication with high tone on
the second word
e.g. /dern-dern4-dern/ ?? (V) intensively walk
/norn-norn4-norn/??(V) intensively sleep
In fact, only the reduplication of the same sound
is accepted in the written text, and a special sym-
bol, namely /mai-yamok/ is attached to the origi-
nal word to represent the reduplication. The redu-
plication occurs in many parts-of-speech, such as
noun, verb, adverb, classifier, adjective, preposi-
tion. Furthermore, various aspects can be added
to the original meaning of the word by reduplica-
tion, such as pluralization, emphasis, generaliza-
tion, and so on. These aspects should be instanti-
ated as features.
Change of parts-of-speech by affixes Af-
fixes change parts-of-speech of words in
Thai (Charoenporn et al, 1997). There are
three prefixes changing the part-of-speech of the
original word, namely /ka:n/, /khwa:m/, /ya:ng/.
They are used in the following cases.
? Nominalization
/ka:n/ is used to prefix an action verb and
/khwa:m/ is used to prefix a state verb
in nominalization such as /ka:n-tham-nga:n/
(working), /khwa:m-suk/ (happiness).
? Adverbialization
An adverb can be derived by using /ya:ng/ to
prefix a state verb such as /ya:ng-di:/ (well).
Note that these prefixes are also words, and form
multi-word expressions with the original word.
This phenomenon is similar to derivation which
is not handled in the current MILE framework.
Derivation is traditionally considered as a different
phenomenon from inflection, and current MILE
focuses on inflection. The MILE framework is al-
ready being extended to treat such linguistic phe-
nomenon, since it is important to European lan-
guages as well. It would be handled in either the
morphological layer or syntactic layer.
830
Function Type Function types of predicates
(verbs, adjectives etc.) might be handled in a
partially different way for Japanese. In the syn-
tactic layer of the MILE framework, Function-
Type class is prepared to denote subcategorization
frames of predicates, and they have function types
such as ?subj? and ?obj?. For example, the verb
?eat? has two FunctionType data categories of
?subj? and ?obj?. Function types basically stand
for positions of case filler nouns. In Japanese,
cases are usually marked by postpositions and case
filler positions themselves do not provide much in-
formation on case marking. For example, both of
the following sentences mean the same, ?She eats
a pizza.?
? kanojo
(she)
ga
(NOM)
piza
(pizza)
wo
(ACC)
taberu
(eat)
? piza
(pizza)
wo
(ACC)
kanojo
(she)
ga
(NOM)
taberu
(eat)
?Ga? and ?wo? are postpositions which mark
nominative and accusative cases respectively.
Note that two case filler nouns ?she? and ?pizza?
can be exchanged. That is, the number of slots is
important, but their order is not.
For Japanese, we might use the set of post-
positions as values of FunctionType instead of
conventional function types such as ?subj? and
?obj?. It might be an user defined data category or
language dependent data category. Furthermore,
it is preferable to prepare the mapping between
Japanese postpositions and conventional function
types. This is interesting because it seems more
a terminological difference, but the model can be
applied also to Japanese.
4 Building sample lexicons
4.1 Swadesh list and basic lexicon
The issue involved in defining a basic lexicon for a
given language is more complicated than one may
think (Zhang et al, 2004). The naive approach of
simply taking the most frequent words in a lan-
guage is flawed in many ways. First, all frequency
counts are corpus-based and hence inherit the bias
of corpus sampling. For instance, since it is eas-
ier to sample written formal texts, words used pre-
dominantly in informal contexts are usually under-
represented. Second, frequency of content words
is topic-dependent and may vary from corpus to
corpus. Last, and most crucially, frequency of a
word does not correlate to its conceptual necessity,
which should be an important, if not only, criteria
for core lexicon. The definition of a cross-lingual
basic lexicon is even more complicated. The first
issue involves determination of cross-lingual lexi-
cal equivalencies. That is, how to determine that
word a (and not a?) in language A really is word b
in language B. The second issue involves the deter-
mination of what is a basic word in a multilingual
context. In this case, not even the frequency of-
fers an easy answer since lexical frequency may
vary greatly among different languages. The third
issue involves lexical gaps. That is, if there is a
word that meets all criteria of being a basic word
in language A, yet it does not exist in language D
(though it may exist in languages B, and C). Is this
word still qualified to be included in the multilin-
gual basic lexicon?
It is clear not all the above issues can be un-
equivocally solved with the time frame of our
project. Fortunately, there is an empirical core lex-
icon that we can adopt as a starting point. The
Swadesh list was proposed by the historical lin-
guist Morris Swadesh (Swadesh, 1952), and has
been widely used by field and historical linguists
for languages over the world. The Swadesh list
was first proposed as lexico-statistical metrics.
That is, these are words that can be reliably ex-
pected to occur in all historical languages and can
be used as the metrics for quantifying language
variations and language distance. The Swadesh
list is also widely used by field linguists when
they encounter a new language, since almost all
of these terms can be expected to occur in any
language. Note that the Swadesh list consists of
terms that embody human direct experience, with
culture-specific terms avoided. Swadesh started
with a 215 items list, before cutting back to 200
items and then to 100 items. A standard list of
207 items is arrived at by unifying the 200 items
list and the 100 items list. We take the 207 terms
from the Swadesh list as the core of our basic lex-
icon. Inclusion of the Swadesh list also gives us
the possibility of covering many Asian languages
in which we do not have the resources to make a
full and fully annotated lexicon. For some of these
languages, a Swadesh lexicon for reference is pro-
vided by a collaborator.
4.2 Aligning multilingual lexical entries
Since our goal is to build a multilingual sample
lexicon, it is required to align words in several
831
Asian languages. In this subsection, we propose
a simple method to align words in different lan-
guages. The basic idea for multilingual alignment
is an intermediary by English. That is, first we
prepare word pairs between English and other lan-
guages, then combine them together to make cor-
respondence among words in several languages.
The multilingual alignment method currently we
consider is as follows:
1. Preparing the set of frequent words of each
language
Suppose that {Jw
i
}, {Cw
i
}, {Tw
i
} is the
set of frequent words of Japanese, Chinese
and Thai, respectively. Now we try to con-
struct a multilingual lexicon for these three
languages, however, our multilingual align-
ment method can be easily extended to han-
dle more languages.
2. Obtaining English translations
A word Xw
i
is translated into a set of En-
glish words EXw
ij
by referring to the bilin-
gual dictionary, where X denotes one of our
languages, J , C or T . We can obtain map-
pings as in (1).
Jw
1
: EJw
11
, EJw
12
, ? ? ?
Jw
2
: EJw
21
, EJw
22
, ? ? ?
...
Cw
1
: ECw
11
, ECw
12
, ? ? ?
Cw
2
: ECw
21
, ECw
22
, ? ? ?
...
Tw
1
: ETw
11
, ETw
12
, ? ? ?
Tw
2
: ETw
21
, ETw
22
, ? ? ?
...
(1)
Notice that this procedure is automatically
done and ambiguities would be left at this
stage.
3. Generating new mapping
From mappings in (1), a new mapping is gen-
erated by inverting the key. That is, in the
new mapping, a key is an English word Ew
i
and a correspondence for each key is sets
of translations XEw
ij
for 3 languages, as
shown in (2):
Ew
1
: (JEw
11
, JEw
12
, ? ? ?)
(CEw
11
, CEw
12
, ? ? ?)
(TEw
11
, TEw
12
, ? ? ?)
Ew
2
: (JEw
21
, JEw
22
, ? ? ?)
(CEw
21
, CEw
22
, ? ? ?)
(TEw
21
, TEw
22
, ? ? ?)
...
(2)
Notice that at this stage, correspondence be-
tween different languages is very loose, since
they are aligned on the basis of sharing only
a single English word.
4. Refinement of alignment
Groups of English words are constructed by
referring to the WordNet synset information.
For example, suppose that Ew
i
and Ew
j
be-
long to the same synset S
k
. We will make a
new alignment by making an intersection of
{XEw
i
} and {XEw
j
} as shown in (3).
Ew
i
: (JEw
i1
, ??) (CEw
i1
, ??) (TEw
i1
, ??)
Ew
j
: (JEw
j1
, ??)(CEw
j1
, ??)(TEw
j1
, ??)
? intersection
S
k
: (JEw?
k1
, ??)(CEw?
k1
, ??)(TEw?
k1
, ??)
(3)
In (3), the key is a synset S
k
, which is sup-
posed to be a conjunction of Ew
i
and Ew
j
,
and the counterpart is the intersection of set
of translations for each language. This oper-
ation would reduce the number of words of
each language. That means, we can expect
that the correspondence among words of dif-
ferent languages becomes more precise. This
new word alignment based on a synset is a
final result.
To evaluate the performance of this method,
we conducted a preliminary experiment using the
Swadesh list. Given the Swadesh list of Chi-
nese, Italian, Japanese and Thai as a gold stan-
dard, we tried to replicate these lists from the En-
glish Swadesh list and bilingual dictionaries be-
tween English and these languages. In this experi-
ment, we did not perform the refinement step with
WordNet. From 207 words in the Swadesh list,
we dropped 4 words (?at?, ?in?, ?with? and ?and?)
due to their too many ambiguities in translation.
As a result, we obtained 181 word groups
aligned across 5 languages (Chinese, English, Ital-
ian, Japanese and Thai) for 203 words. An
aligned word group was judged ?correct? when the
words of each language include only words in the
Swadesh list of that language. It was judged ?par-
tially correct? when the words of a language also
include the words which are not in the Swadesh
list. Based on the correct instances, we obtain
0.497 for precision and 0.443 for recall. These fig-
ures go up to 0.912 for precision and 0.813 for re-
call when based on the partially correct instances.
This is quite a promising result.
832
5 Upper-layer ontology
The empirical success of the Swadesh list poses
an interesting question that has not been explored
before. That is, does the Swadesh list instantiates a
shared, fundamental human conceptual structure?
And if there is such as a structure, can we discover
it?
In the project these fundamental issues are as-
sociated with our quest for cross-lingual interop-
erability. We must make sure that the items of
the basic lexicon are given the same interpreta-
tion. One measure taken to ensure this consists in
constructing an upper-ontology based on the ba-
sic lexicon. Our preliminary work of mapping the
Swadesh list items to SUMO (Suggested Upper
Merged Ontology) (Niles and Pease, 2001) has al-
ready been completed. We are in the process of
mapping the list to DOLCE (Descriptive Ontology
for Linguistic and Cognitive Engineering) (Ma-
solo et al, 2003). After the initial mapping, we
carry on the work to restructure the mapped nodes
to form a genuine conceptual ontology based on
the language universal basic lexical items. How-
ever one important observation that we have made
so far is that the success of the Swadesh list is
partly due to its underspecification and to the lib-
erty it gives to compilers of the list in a new lan-
guage. If this idea of underspecification is essen-
tial for basic lexicon for human languages, then we
must resolve this apparent dilemma of specifying
them in a formal ontology that requires fully spec-
ified categories. For the time being, genuine ambi-
guities resulted in the introduction of each disam-
biguated sense in the ontology. We are currently
investigating another solution that allows the in-
clusion of underspecified elements in the ontology
without threatening its coherence. More specifi-
cally we introduce a underspecified relation in the
structure for linking the underspecified meaning
to the different specified meaning. The specified
meanings are included in the taxonomic hierarchy
in a traditional manner, while a hierarchy of un-
derspecified meanings can be derived thanks to the
new relation. An underspecified node only inherits
from the most specific common mother of its fully
specified terms. Such distinction avoids the clas-
sical misuse of the subsumption relation for rep-
resenting multiple meanings. This method does
not reflect a dubious collapse of the linguistic and
conceptual levels but the treatment of such under-
specifications as truly conceptual. Moreover we
Internet
Query
Local 
DB
User interest
 model
Topic
Feedback
Search
engine
Crawler
Retrieval
results
Figure 3: The system architecture
hope this proposal will provide a knowledge rep-
resentation framework for the multilingual align-
ment method presented in the previous section.
Finally, our ontology will not only play the role
of a structured interlingual index. It will also serve
as a common conceptual base for lexical expan-
sion, as well as for comparative studies of the lex-
ical differences of different languages.
6 Evaluation through an application
To evaluate the proposed framework, we are build-
ing an information retrieval system. Figure 3
shows the system architecture.
A user can input a topic to retrieve the docu-
ments related to that topic. A topic can consist
of keywords, website URL?s and documents which
describe the topic. From the topic information, the
system builds a user interest model. The system
then uses a search engine and a crawler to search
for information related to this topic in WWW and
stores the results in the local database. Generally,
the search results include many noises. To filter
out these noises, we build a query from the user
interest model and then use this query to retrieve
documents in the local database. Those documents
similar to the query are considered as more related
to the topic and the user?s interest, and are returned
to the user. When the user obtains these retrieval
results, he can evaluate these documents and give
the feedback to the system, which is used for the
further refinement of the user interest model.
Language resources can contribute to improv-
ing the system performance in various ways.
Query expansion is a well-known technique which
expands user?s query terms into a set of similar and
related terms by referring to ontologies. Our sys-
tem is based on the vector space model (VSM) and
traditional query expansion can be applicable us-
ing the ontology.
There has been less research on using lexical in-
833
formation for information retrieval systems. One
possibility we are considering is query expansion
by using predicate-argument structures of terms.
Suppose a user inputs two keywords, ?hockey?
and ?ticket? as a query. The conventional query
expansion technique expands these keywords to
a set of similar words based on an ontology. By
referring to predicate-argument structures in the
lexicon, we can derive actions and events as well
which take these words as arguments. In the above
example, by referring to the predicate-argument
structure of ?buy? or ?sell?, and knowing that
these verbs can take ?ticket? in their object role,
we can add ?buy? and ?sell? to the user?s query.
This new type of expansion requires rich lexical
information such as predicate argument structures,
and the information retrieval system would be a
good touchstone of the lexical information.
7 Concluding remarks
This paper outlined a new project for creating a
common standard for Asian language resources
in cooperation with other initiatives. We start
with three Asian languages, Chinese, Japanese
and Thai, on top of the existing framework which
was designed mainly for European languages.
We plan to distribute our draft to HLT soci-
eties of other Asian languages, requesting for
their feedback through various networks, such
as the Asian language resource committee net-
work under Asian Federation of Natural Language
Processing (AFNLP)4, and Asian Language Re-
source Network project5. We believe our ef-
forts contribute to international activities like ISO-
TC37/SC46 (Francopoulo et al, 2006) and to the
revision of the ISO Data Category Registry (ISO
12620), making it possible to come close to the
ideal international standard of language resources.
Acknowledgment
This research was carried out through financial
support provided under the NEDO International
Joint Research Grant Program (NEDO Grant).
References
F. Bertagna, A. Lenci, M. Monachini, and N. Calzo-
lari. 2004a. Content interoperability of lexical re-
sources, open issues and ?MILE? perspectives. In
4http://www.afnlp.org/
5http://www.language-resource.net/
6http://www.tc37sc4.org/
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC2004),
pages 131?134.
F. Bertagna, A. Lenci, M. Monachini, and N. Calzo-
lari. 2004b. The MILE lexical classes: Data cat-
egories for content interoperability among lexicons.
In A Registry of Linguistic Data Categories within
an Integrated Language Resources Repository Area
? LREC2004 Satellite Workshop, page 8.
N. Calzolari, F. Bertagna, A. Lenci, and M. Mona-
chini. 2003. Standards and best practice for mul-
tilingual computational lexicons. MILE (the mul-
tilingual ISLE lexical entry). ISLE Deliverable
D2.2&3.2.
T. Charoenporn, V. Sornlertlamvanich, and H. Isahara.
1997. Building a large Thai text corpus ? part-
of-speech tagged corpus: ORCHID?. In Proceed-
ings of the Natural LanguageProcessing Pacific Rim
Symposium.
G. Francopoulo, G. Monte, N. Calzolari, M. Mona-
chini, N. Bel, M. Pet, and C. Soria. 2006. Lex-
ical markup framework (LMF). In Proceedings of
LREC2006 (forthcoming).
N. Ide, A. Lenci, and N. Calzolari. 2003. RDF in-
stantiation of ISLE/MILE lexical entries. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL 2003 Workshop on Linguistic
Annotation: Getting the Model Right, pages 25?34.
A. Lenci, N. Bel, F. Busa, N. Calzolari, E. Gola,
M. Monachini, A. Ogonowsky, I. Peters, W. Peters,
N. Ruimy, M. Villegas, and A. Zampolli. 2000.
SIMPLE: A general framework for the development
of multilingual lexicons. International Journal of
Lexicography, Special Issue, Dictionaries, Thesauri
and Lexical-Semantic Relations, XIII(4):249?263.
C. Masolo, A. Borgo, S.; Gangemi, N. Guarino, and
A. Oltramari. 2003. Wonderweb deliverable d18
?ontology library (final)?. Technical report, Labo-
ratory for Applied Ontology, ISTC-CNR.
I. Niles and A Pease. 2001. Towards a standard upper
ontology. In Proceedings of the 2nd International
Conference on Formal Ontology in Information Sys-
tems (FOIS-2001).
V. Sornlertlamvanich, W. Pantachat, and S. Mek-
navin. 1994. Classifier assignment by corpus-
based approach. In Proceedings of the 15th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING-94), pages 556?561.
M. Swadesh. 1952. Lexico-statistical dating of pre-
historic ethnic contacts: With special reference to
north American Indians and Eskimos. In Proceed-
ings of the American Philo-sophical Society, vol-
ume 96, pages 452?463.
H. Zhang, C. Huang, and S. Yu. 2004. Distributional
consistency: A general method for defining a core
lexicon. In Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC2004), pages 1119?1222.
834
Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Interactive Presentation Sessions, pages 9?12,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
LeXFlow: a System for Cross-fertilization of Computational Lexicons 
Maurizio Tesconi and Andrea Marchetti 
CNR-IIT 
Via Moruzzi 1, 56024 Pisa, Italy 
{maurizio.tesconi,andrea.marchetti}@iit.cnr.it 
Francesca Bertagna and Monica Monachini and Claudia Soria and Nicoletta Calzolari 
CNR-ILC 
Via Moruzzi 1, 56024 Pisa, Italy 
{francesca.bertagna,monica.monachini, 
claudia.soria,nicoletta.calzolari}@ilc.cnr.it 
 
  
Abstract 
This demo presents LeXFlow, a work-
flow management system for cross-
fertilization of computational lexicons. 
Borrowing from techniques used in the 
domain of document workflows, we 
model the activity of lexicon manage-
ment as a set of workflow types, where 
lexical entries move across agents in the 
process of being dynamically updated. A 
prototype of LeXFlow has been imple-
mented with extensive use of XML tech-
nologies (XSLT, XPath, XForms, SVG) 
and open-source tools (Cocoon, Tomcat, 
MySQL). LeXFlow is a web-based ap-
plication that enables the cooperative and 
distributed management of computational 
lexicons. 
1 Introduction 
LeXFlow is a workflow management system 
aimed at enabling the semi-automatic manage-
ment of computational lexicons. By management 
we mean not only creation, population and vali-
dation of lexical entries but also integration and 
enrichment of different lexicons.  
A lexicon can be enriched by resorting to 
automatically acquired information, for instance 
by means of an application extracting informa-
tion from corpora. But a lexicon can be enriched 
also by resorting to the information available in 
another lexicon, which can happen to encode 
different types of information, or at different lev-
els of granularity. LeXFlow intends to address 
the request by the computational lexicon com-
munity for a change in perspective on computa-
tional lexicons: from static resources towards 
dynamically configurable multi-source entities, 
where the content of lexical entries is dynami-
cally modified and updated on the basis of the 
integration of knowledge coming from different 
sources (indifferently represented by human ac-
tors, other lexical resources, or applications for 
the automatic extraction of lexical information 
from texts). 
This scenario has at least two strictly related 
prerequisites: i) existing lexicons have to be 
available in or be mappable to a standard form 
enabling the overcoming of their respective dif-
ferences and idiosyncrasies, thus making their 
mutual comprehensibility a reality; ii) an archi-
tectural framework should be used for the effec-
tive and practical management of lexicons, by 
providing the communicative channel through 
which lexicons can really communicate and 
share the information encoded therein. 
For the first point, standardization issues obvi-
ously play the central role. Important and exten-
sive efforts have been and are being made to-
wards the extension and integration of existing 
and emerging open lexical and terminological 
standards and best practices, such as EAGLES, 
ISLE, TEI, OLIF, Martif (ISO 12200), Data 
Categories (ISO 12620), ISO/TC37/SC4, and 
LIRICS. An important achievement in this re-
spect is the MILE, a meta-entry for the encoding 
of multilingual lexical information (Calzolari et 
al., 2003); in our approach we have embraced the 
MILE model.  
As far as the second point is concerned, some 
initial steps have been made to realize frame-
works enabling inter-lexica access, search, inte-
gration and operability. Nevertheless, the general 
impression is that little has been made towards 
the development of new methods and techniques 
9
for the concrete interoperability among lexical 
and textual resources. The intent of LeXFlow is 
to fill in this gap.  
2 LeXFlow Design and Application 
LeXFlow is conceived as a metaphoric extension 
and adaptation to computational lexicons of 
XFlow, a framework for the management of 
document workflows (DW, Marchetti et al, 
2005).  
A DW can be seen as a process of cooperative 
authoring where the document can be the goal of 
the process or just a side effect of the coopera-
tion. Through a DW, a document life-cycle is 
tracked and supervised, continually providing 
control over the actions leading to document 
compilation In this environment a document 
travels among agents who essentially carry out 
the pipeline receive-process-send activity.  
Each lexical entry can be modelled as a docu-
ment instance (formally represented as an XML 
representation of the MILE lexical entry), whose 
behaviour can be formally specified by means of 
a document workflow type (DWT) where differ-
ent agents, with clear-cut roles and responsibili-
ties, act over different portions of the same entry 
by performing different tasks.  
Two types of agents are envisaged: external 
agents are human or software actors which per-
form activities dependent from the particular 
DWT, and internal agents are software actors 
providing general-purpose activities useful for 
any DWT and, for this reason, implemented di-
rectly into the system. Internal agents perform 
general functionalities such as creat-
ing/converting a document belonging to a par-
ticular DWT, populating it with some initial data, 
duplicating a document to be sent to multiple 
agents, splitting a document and sending portions 
of information to different agents, merging du-
plicated documents coming from multiple agents, 
aggregating fragments, and finally terminating 
operations over the document. An external agent 
executes some processing using the document 
content and possibly other data, e.g. updates the 
document inserting the results of the preceding 
processing, signs the updating and finally sends 
the document to the next agent(s). 
The state diagram in Figure 1 describes the 
different states of the document instances. At the 
starting point of the document life cycle there is 
a creation phase, in which the system raises a 
new instance of a document with information 
attached.  
Figure 1. Document State Diagram. 
 
The document instance goes into pending 
state. When an agent gets the document, it goes 
into processing state in which the agent compiles 
the parts under his/her responsibility. If the 
agent, for some reason, doesn?t complete the in-
stance elaboration, he can save the work per-
formed until that moment and the document in-
stance goes into freezing state. If the elaboration 
is completed (submitted), or cancelled, the in-
stance goes back into pending state, waiting for a 
new elaboration. 
Borrowing from techniques used in DWs, we 
have modelled the activity of lexicon manage-
ment as a set of DWT, where lexical entries 
move across agents and become dynamically 
updated.  
3 Lexical Workflow General Architec-
ture 
As already written, LeXFlow is based on XFlow 
which is composed of three parts: i) the Agent 
Environment, i.e. the agents participating to all 
DWs; ii) the Data, i.e. the DW descriptions plus 
the documents created by the DW and iii) the 
Engine. Figure 2 illustrates the architecture of the 
framework. 
Figure 2. General Architecture. 
 
The DW environment is the set of human and 
software agents participating to at least one DW. 
10
The description of a DW can be seen as an ex-
tension of the XML document class. A class of 
documents, created in a DW, shares the schema 
of their structure, as well as the definition of the 
procedural rules driving the DWT and the list of 
the agents attending to it. Therefore, in order to 
describe a DWT, we need four components:  
? a schema of the documents involved in the 
DWT; 
? the agent roles chart, i.e. the set of the ex-
ternal and internal agents, operating on the 
document flow. Inside the role chart these 
agents are organized in roles and groups in 
order to define who has access to the 
document. This component constitutes the 
DW environment; 
? a document interface description used by 
external agents to access the documents. 
This component also allows checking ac-
cess permissions to the document; 
? a document workflow description defining 
all the paths that a document can follow in 
its life-cycle, the activities and policies for 
each role.  
The document workflow engine constitutes the 
run-time support for the DW, it implements the 
internal agents, the support for agents? activities, 
and some system modules that the external agents 
have to use to interact with the DW system. 
Also, the engine is responsible for two kinds of 
documents useful for each document flow: the 
documents system logs and the documents system 
metadata. 
4 The lexicon Augmentation Workflow 
Type 
In this section we present a first DWT, called 
?lexicon augmentation?, for dynamic augmenta-
tion of semantic MILE-compliant lexicons. This 
DWT corresponds to the scenario where an entry 
of a lexicon A becomes enriched via basically 
two steps. First, by virtue of being mapped onto 
a corresponding entry belonging to a lexicon B, 
the entry(A) inherits the semantic relations avail-
able in the mapped entry(B). Second, by resorting 
to an automatic application that acquires infor-
mation about semantic relations from corpora, 
the acquired relations are integrated into the en-
try and proposed to the human encoder. 
In order to test the system we considered the 
Simple/Clips (Ruimy et al, 2003) and ItalWord-
Net (Roventini et al, 2003) lexicons.  
An overall picture of the flow is shown in Fig-
ure 3, illustrating the different agents participat-
ing to the flow. Rectangles represent human ac-
tors over the entries, while the other figures 
symbolize software agents: ovals are internal 
agents and octagons external ones. The function-
ality offered to human agents are: display of 
MILE-encoded lexical entries, selection of lexi-
cal entries, mapping between lexical entries be-
longing to different lexicons1, automatic calcula-
tions of new semantic relations (either automati-
cally derived from corpora and mutually inferred 
from the mapping) and manual verification of the 
newly proposed semantic relations.  
5 Implementation Overview 
Our system is currently implemented as a web-
based application where the human external 
agents interact with system through a web 
browser. All the human external agents attending 
the different document workflows are the users 
of system. Once authenticated through username 
and password the user accesses his workload 
area where the system lists all his pending docu-
ments (i.e. entries) sorted by type of flow. 
The system shows only the flows to which the 
user has access. From the workload area the user 
                                                 
1 We hypothesize a human agent, but the same role could be 
performed by a software agent. To this end, we are investi-
gating the possibility of automatically exploiting the proce-
dure described in (Ruimy and Roventini, 2005). 
Figure 3. Lexicon Augmentation Workflow. 
 
11
can browse his documents and select some op-
erations  
 
Figure 4. LeXFlow User Activity State Diagram. 
 
such as: selecting and processing pending docu-
ment; creating a new document; displaying a 
graph representing a DW of a previously created 
document; highlighting the current position of 
the document. This information is rendered as an 
SVG (Scalable Vector Graphics) image. Figure 5 
illustrates the overall implementation of the sys-
tem. 
5.1 The Client Side: External Agent Inter-
action 
The form used to process the documents is ren-
dered with XForms. Using XForms, a browser 
can communicate with the server through XML 
documents and is capable of displaying the 
document with a user interface that can be de-
fined for each type of document. A browser with 
XForms capabilities will receive an XML docu-
ment that will be displayed according to the 
specified template, then it will let the user edit 
the document and finally it will send the modi-
fied document to the server. 
5.2 The Server Side 
The server-side is implemented with Apache 
Tomcat, Apache Cocoon and MySQL. Tomcat is 
used as the web server, authentication module 
(when the communication between the server 
and the client needs to be encrypted) and servlet 
container. Cocoon is a publishing framework that 
uses the power of XML. The entire functioning 
of Cocoon is based on one key concept: compo-
nent pipelines. The pipeline connotes a series of 
events, which consists of taking a request as in-
put, processing and transforming it, and then giv-
ing the desired response. MySQL is used for 
storing and retrieving the documents and the 
status of the documents. 
Each software agent is implemented as a web-
service and the WSDL language is used to define 
its interface.  
References 
Nicoletta Calzolari, Francesca Bertagna, Alessandro 
Lenci and Monica Monachini, editors. 2003. Stan-
dards and Best Practice for Multilingual Computa-
tional Lexicons. MILE (the Multilingual ISLE 
Lexical Entry). ISLE Deliverable D2.2 & 3.2. Pisa. 
Andrea Marchetti, Maurizio Tesconi, and Salvatore 
Minutoli. 2005. XFlow: An XML-Based Docu-
ment-Centric Workflow. In Proceedings of WI-
SE?05, pages 290- 303, New York, NY, USA. 
Adriana Roventini, Antonietta Alonge, Francesca 
Bertagna, Nicoletta Calzolari, Christian Girardi, 
Bernardo Magnini, Rita Marinelli, and Antonio 
Zampolli. 2003. ItalWordNet: Building a Large 
Semantic Database for the Automatic Treatment of 
Italian. In Antonio Zampolli, Nicoletta Calzolari, 
and Laura Cignoni, editors, Computational Lingui-
stics in Pisa, Istituto Editoriale e Poligrafico Inter-
nazionale, Pisa-Roma, pages 745-791. 
Nilda Ruimy, Monica Monachini, Elisabetta Gola, 
Nicoletta Calzolari, Cristina Del Fiorentino, Marisa 
Ulivieri, and Sergio Rossi. 2003. A Computational 
Semantic Lexicon of Italian: SIMPLE. In Antonio 
Zampolli, Nicoletta Calzolari, and Laura Cignoni, 
editors, Computational Linguistics in Pisa, Istituto 
Editoriale e Poligrafico Internazionale, Pisa-Roma, 
pages 821-864. 
Nilda Ruimy and Adriana Roventini. 2005. Towards 
the linking of two electronic lexical databases of 
Italian. In  Proceedings of L&T'05 - Language 
Technologies as a Challenge for Computer Science 
and Linguistics, pages 230-234, Poznan, Poland.
Figure 5. Overall System Implementation. 
12
Broadening the Scope of the EAGLES/ISLE Lexical 
Standardization Initiative 
 
Nicoletta CALZOLARI 
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale, CNR  
Area della Ricerca, Via Moruzzi 1 
Pisa, Italy, 56100 
glottolo@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Alessandro LENCI 
Dipartimento di Linguistica, Universit? di Pisa 
Via S. Maria 36 
Pisa, Italy, 56100 
alessandro.lenci@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Francesca BERTAGNA 
Dipartimento di Linguistica, Universit? di Pisa 
Via S. Maria 36 
Pisa, Italy, 56100 
francesca.bertagna@ilc.cnr.it 
Antonio ZAMPOLLI 
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale, CNR  
Area della Ricerca, Via Moruzzi 1 
Pisa, Italy, 56100 
pisa@ilc.cnr.it 
Abstract  
ISLE is a continuation of the long standing EAGLES initiative and it is supported by EC and NSF under the 
Human Language Technology (HLT) programme. Its objective is to develop widely agreed and urgently 
demanded standards and guidelines for infrastructural language resources, tools, and HLT products. 
EAGLES itself is a well-known trademark and point of reference for HLT projects and products and its 
previous results have already become de facto widely adopted standards. Multilingual computational 
lexicons, natural interaction and multimodality, and evaluation are the three areas targeted by ISLE. In the 
first section of the paper we describe the overall goals and methodology of EAGLES/ISLE, in the second 
section we focus on the work of the Computational Lexicon Working Group, introducing its work strategy 
and the preliminary guidelines of a standard framework for multilingual computational lexicons, based on a 
general schema for the ?Multilingual ISLE Lexical Entry? (MILE). 
 
1 Introducing EAGLES/ISLE 
ISLE (International Standards for Language 
Engineering) is a continuation of the long 
standing European EAGLES (Expert Advisory 
Group for Language Engineering Standards) 
initiative (Calzolari et al, 1996), carried out 
through a number of subsequent projects 
funded by the European Commission (EC) 
since 1993. ISLE is an initiative under the 
Human Language Technology (HLT) 
programme within the EU-US International 
Research Co-operation with the aim to develop 
and promote widely agreed and urgently 
demanded HLT standards, common guidelines 
and best practice recommendations for 
infrastructural language resources (Zampolli, 
1998), (Calzolari, 1998), tools that exploit 
them, and language engineering products.  
Object of EAGLES/ISLE are large-scale 
language resources (such as text corpora, 
computational lexicons, speech corpora, 
multimodal resources), means of manipulating 
such knowledge via computational linguistic 
formalisms, mark-up languages and various 
software tools and means of assessing and 
evaluating  resources, tools and products 
(EAGLES EWG final report, 1996). 
EAGLES was set up to determine which 
aspects of our field are open to short-term de 
facto  standardisation and to encourage the 
development of such standards for the benefit 
of consumers and producers of language 
technology, through bringing together 
representatives of major collaborative 
European R&D projects, and of HLT industry, 
in relevant areas. In this respect, more than 150 
leading industrial and academic players in the 
HLT field have actively participated in the 
definition of this initiative and have lent 
invaluable support to its execution.  
Successful standards are those which respond 
to commonly perceived needs or aid in 
overcoming common problems. In terms of 
offering workable, compromise solutions, they 
must be based on some solid platform of 
accepted facts and acceptable practices.  
The current ISLE project1 targets the three 
areas of : 
-multilingual computational lexicons2, 
-natural interaction and multimodality 
(NIMM)3,  
-evaluation of HLT systems4.  
For multilingual computational lexicons, ISLE 
goals are: i) extending EAGLES work on 
lexical semantics, necessary to establish inter-
language links; ii) designing and proposing 
standards for multilingual lexicons; iii) 
developing a prototype tool to implement 
lexicon guidelines and standards; iv) creating 
exemplary EAGLES-conformant sample 
lexicons and tagging exemplary corpora for 
validation purposes; v) developing 
standardised evaluation procedures for 
lexicons.  
For NIMM, ISLE work is targeted to develop 
guidelines for: i) the creation of NIMM data 
resources; ii) interpretative annotation of 
NIMM data, including spoken dialogue in 
NIMM contexts; iii) metadata descriptions for 
large NIMM resources; iv) annotation of 
discourse phenomena.  
For evaluation, ISLE is working on: i) quality 
models for machine translation systems; ii) 
maintenance of previous guidelines - in an ISO 
based framework (ISO 9126, ISO 14598). 
Three Working Groups, and their sub-groups, 
carry out the work, according to the EAGLES 
                                                 
1 Coordinated by A. Zampolli for EU and M. Palmer for 
US, see 
http://www.ilc.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/isle/ISLE_Home_Pag
e.htm. 
2 EU chair: N. Calzolari; US chairs: M. Palmer and R. 
Grishman.  
3 EU chair: N. O. Bernsen; US chair: M. Liberman. 
4 EU chair: M. King; US chair: E. Hovy. 
methodology, with experts from both the EU 
and US, acting as a catalyst in order to pool 
concrete results coming from major 
international/national/industrial projects. 
Relevant common practices or upcoming 
standards are being used where appropriate as 
input to EAGLES/ISLE work. Numerous 
theories, approaches, and systems are being 
taken into account as any recommendation for 
harmonisation must take into account the needs 
and nature of the different major contemporary 
approaches.  
Results are widely disseminated, after due 
validation in collaboration with EU and US 
HLT R&D projects, National projects, and 
industry.  
In the following we concentrate on the 
Computational Lexicon Working Group 
(CLWG), trying to describe its specific 
methodology and its goal of establishing a 
general and consensual standardized 
environment for the development and 
integration of multilingual resources. The 
general vision adheres to the idea of enhancing 
the sharing and reusability of multilingual 
lexical resources, by promoting the definition 
of a common parlance for the community of 
multilingual HLT and computational lexicon 
developers. The CLWG pursues this goal by 
proposing a general schema for the encoding of 
multilingual lexical information, the MILE 
(Multilingual ISLE Lexical Entry). This has to 
be intended as a meta-entry, acting as a 
common representational layer for multilingual 
lexical resources.  
We describe the preliminary proposals of 
guidelines for the MILE, highlighting some 
methodological principles applied in previous 
EAGLES. 
2 The Computational Lexicon 
Working Group 
Existing EAGLES results in the Lexicon and 
Corpus areas are currently adopted by an 
impressive number of European - and recently 
also National ? projects and has became the 
?de-facto standard? for LR in Europe. This is a 
very good measure of the impact ? and of the 
need ? of such a standardisation initiative in 
the HLT sector. To mention just a few key 
examples:  
- the LE PAROLE/SIMPLE resources 
(morphological/syntactic/semantic  lexicons 
and corpora for 12 EU languages (Zampolli, 
1997) (Ruimy et al, 1998) (Lenci et al, 
1999) (Bel et al, 2000) rely on EAGLES 
results (Sanfilippo et al, 1996) (Sanfilippo 
et al, 1999), and are now being enlarged to 
real-size lexicons through many National 
Projects, thus building a really large 
infrastructural platform of harmonised 
lexicons in Europe, sharing the same model;   
- the ELRA Validation Manuals for Lexicons 
(Underwood and Navarreta, 1997) and 
Corpora (Burnard et al, 1997) are based on 
EAGLES guidelines;  
- morpho-syntactic encoding of lexicons and 
tagging of corpora in a very large number of 
EU, international and national projects ? and 
for more than 20 languages ? is conformant 
to EAGLES recommendations (Monachini 
and Calzolari, 1996) (Monachini and 
Calzolari, 1999) (Leech and Wilson, 1996).  
Standards must emerge from state -of-the-art 
developments. The process of standardisation, 
although by its own nature not intrinsically 
innovative, must ? and actually does ? proceed 
shoulder to shoulder with the most advanced 
research. Since ISLE involves many bodies 
active in EU-US NLP and speech projects, 
close collaboration with these projects is 
assured and, significantly, free manpower has 
been contributed by the projects, as a sign of 
both their commitment and of the crucial 
importance they place on reusability issues. 
Lexical semantics has always represented a 
sort of wild frontier in the investigation of 
natural language. In fact, the number of open 
issues in lexical semantics both on the 
representational, architectural and content level 
might induce an actually unjustified negative 
attitude towards the possibility of designing 
standards in this difficult territory. Rather to 
the contrary, standardisation must be conceived 
as enucleating and singling out the areas in the 
open field of lexical semantics, that already 
present themselves with a clear and high 
degree of stability, although this is often 
hidden behind a number of formal differences 
or representational variants, that prevent the 
possibility of exploiting and enhancing the 
aspects of commonality and the already 
consolidated achievements.  
With no intent of imposing any constraints on 
investigation and experimentation, the ISLE 
CLWG rather aims at selecting mature areas 
and results in computational lexical semantics 
and in multilingual lexicons, which can also be 
regarded as stabilised achievements, thus to be 
used as the basis for future research. Therefore, 
consolidation of a standards proposal must be 
viewed, by necessity, as a slow process 
comprising, after the phase of putting forward 
proposals, a cyclical phase involving ISLE 
external groups and projects with: i) careful 
evaluation and testing of recommendations in 
concrete applications; ii) application, if 
appropriate, to a large number of European 
languages; iii) feedback on and readjustment of 
the proposals until a stable platform is reached; 
dissemination and promotion of consensual 
recommendations. 
The process of standard definition undertaken 
by CLWG represents an essential interface 
between advanced research in the field of 
multilingual lexical semantics, and the 
practical task of developing resources for HLT 
systems and applications. It is through this 
interface that the crucial trade-off between 
research practice and applicative needs will 
actually be achieved. 
In what follows we briefly describe the two-
step strategy adopted in the journey towards 
standards design: a first activity of survey of 
existing multilingual resources both in the 
European and American research and industrial 
scenarios. A second ongoing phase aiming at 
individuating hot areas on the domains of 
multilingual lexical resources, which call ? and 
de facto  can access to ? a process of 
standardisation. 
2.1 Preliminary Step: the Survey Phase 
Following the well established EAGLES 
methodology, the first priority was to do a 
wide-range survey of bilingual/multilingual (or 
semantic monolingual) lexicons, so as to reach 
a fair level of coverage of existing lexical 
resources. With respect to this target, one of 
the first objectives is to discover and list the 
(maximal) set of (granular) basic notions 
needed to describe the multilingual level. The 
Survey of existing lexicons (Calzolari, 
Grishman and Palmer, 2001) has been 
accompanied by the analysis of the 
requirements of a few multilingual 
applications, and by the parallel analysis of 
typical cross-lingually complex phenomena5. 
The main issue is how to state in the most 
proper way the translation correspondences 
among entries in the multilingual lexicon. The 
passage from source language (SL) to target 
language (TL) makes it necessary to express 
very complex and articulated transfer 
conditions , which have to take into account as 
difficult and pervasive phenomena as argument 
switching, multi-word expressions, 
collocational patterns, etc.  
The function of an entry in a multilingual 
lexicon is to supply enough information to 
allow the system to identify a distinct sense of 
a word or phrase in SL, in many different 
contexts, and reliably associate each context 
with the most appropriate translation. The first 
step is to determine, of all the information that 
can be associated with SL lexical entries, what 
is the most relevant to a particular task. We 
decided to focus the work of survey and 
subsequent recommendations around two 
major broad categories of application: Machine 
Translation and Cross-Language Information 
Retrieval. They have partially 
different/complementary needs, and can be 
considered to represent the requirements of 
other application types. It is necessary in fact 
to ensure that any guidelines meet the 
requirements of industrial applications and that 
they are implementable. 
In the Survey, some Korean and Japanese 
examples were present in the case study 
dedicated to relevant cross-linguistic 
phenomena, (e. g. sense distinctions according 
to variation in syntactic frames/semantic type/ 
                                                 
5 Contributors are: Atkins, Bel, Bertagna, Bouillon, 
Calzolari, Dorr, Fellbaum, Grishman, Habash, Lange, 
Lehmann, Lenci, McCormick, McNaught, Ogonowski, 
Palmer, Pentheroudakis, Richardson, Thurmair, 
Vanderwende, Villegas, Vossen, Zampolli.   
domain information, differences in predicate 
argument structure, argument incorporation, 
conflation, head switching etc). 
2.2 Towards the Recommendation Phase: 
designing the MILE Architecture  
Since the architecture of the PAROLE-
SIMPLE lexicons has been selected to provide 
the necessary bootstrapping basis for the 
stepwise refinement cycle leading to MILE, we 
briefly provide here some information about 
these resources. The design of the SIMPLE 
lexicons (Bel et al, 2000) complies with the 
EAGLES Lexicon/Semantics Working Group 
guidelines (Sanfilippo et al, 1999), and the set 
of recommended semantic notions. 
The SIMPLE lexicons are built as a new layer 
connected to the PAROLE syntactic layer, and 
encode structured ?semantic types? and 
semantic (subcategorization) frames. They 
cover 12 languages (Catalan, Danish, Dutch, 
English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, 
Italian, Portuguese, Spanish, Swedish). The 
common model is designed to facilitate future 
cross-language linking: they share the same 
core ontology and the same set of semantic 
templates.  
The ?conceptual core? of the lexicons consists 
of the basic structured set of ?semantic types? 
(the SIMPLE ontology) and the basic set of 
notions to be encoded for each Semantic Unit 
(SemU): domain information, lexicographic 
gloss, argument structure, selectional 
restrictions/preferences on the arguments, 
event type, links of the arguments to the 
syntactic subcategorization frames as 
represented in the PAROLE lexicons, ?qualia? 
structure, following the Generative Lexicon 
(Pustejovsky, 1995), semantic relations, etc.. 
SIMPLE and PAROLE lexicons are layered 
resources, with links between the 
morphological and syntactic layers expressed 
in PAROLE and the semantic information 
present in SIMPLE. 
In its general design, also MILE is envisaged 
as a highly modular and layered architecture as 
described in Calzolari et al (2001). Modularity 
concerns the ?horizontal? MILE organization, 
in which independent and yet linked modules 
target different dimensions of lexical entries. 
On the other hand, at the ?vertical? level, a 
layered organization is necessary to allow for 
different degrees of granularity of lexical 
descriptions, so that both ?shallow? and ?deep? 
representations of lexical items can be 
captured. This feature is particularly crucial in 
order to stay open to the different styles and 
approaches to the lexicon adopted by existing 
multilingual systems. 
At the top level, MILE includes two main 
modules, mono-MILE, providing monolingual 
lexical representations, and multi-MILE, where 
multilingual correspondences are defined. With 
this design choice the ISLE-CLWG intends 
also to address the particularly complex and 
yet crucial issue of multilingual resource 
development through the integration of 
monolingual computational lexicons. As in the 
reference model, PAROLE/SIMPLE, Mono-
MILE is organized into independent modules, 
respectively providing morphological, 
syntactic and semantic descriptions. The latter 
surely represents the core and the most 
challenging part of the ISLE-CLWG activities, 
together with the two other crucial topics of 
collocations and multi-word expressions, 
which have often remained outside 
astandardization initiatives, and nevertheless 
have a crucial role at the multilingual level. 
This bias is motivated by the necessity of 
providing an answer to the most urgent needs 
and desiderata of next generation HLT, as also 
expressed by the industrial partners 
participating to the project. With respect to the 
issue of the representation of multi-word 
expressions in computational lexicons, the 
ISLE-CLWG is actively cooperating with the 
NSF sponsored XMELLT project (Calzolari et 
al.,  2002). 
Multi-MILE specifies a formal environment 
for the characterization of multilingual 
correspondences between lexical items. In 
particular, source and target lexical entries can 
be linked by exploiting (possibly combined) 
aspects of their monolingual descriptions. 
Moreover, in multi-MILE both syntactic and 
semantic lexical representations can also be 
enriched, so as to achieve the granularity of 
lexical description required to establish proper 
multilingual correspondences, and which is 
possibly lacking in the original monolingual 
lexicons. 
According to the ISLE approach, monolingual 
lexicons can thus be regarded as pivot lexical 
repositories, on top of which various language-
to-language multilingual modules can be 
defined, where lexical correspondences are 
established by partly exploiting and partly 
enriching the monolingual descriptions. This 
architecture guarantees the independence of 
monolingual descriptions while allowing for  
the maximum degree of flexibility and 
consistency in reusing existing monolingual 
resources to build new bilingual lexicons.  
The MILE architecture is intended to provide 
the common representational environment 
needed to implement such an approach to 
multilingual resource development, with the 
goal of maximizing the reuse, integration and 
extension of existing monolingual 
computational lexicons. 
In the process of specifying the various 
components of MILE, the ISLE-CLWG has 
adopted a two-track strategy:  
1) identifying the lexical dimensions and 
the various types of information which 
are relevant to establish multilingual 
correspondences; 
2) idefining a suitable formal data model 
to encode this information as well as 
the operations required at the 
multilingual level. 
To tackle point 1) the survey of the available 
computational lexicons (see section 2.1) has 
been complemented with a more 
lexicographic-based effort, to identify the types 
of information used in bilingual dictionaries to 
establish translation equivalents. To this 
purpose, the CLWG has organized two ?task 
forces? with the responsibility respectively of 
creating a sample of lexical entries and 
investigating the use of the so-called sense 
indicators in traditional bilingual dictionaries. 
The work on sense indicators has been carried 
out mainly by S. Atkins and P. Bouillon: sense 
indicators are the  ?clues? given by the 
lexicographer to the bilingual dictionary users 
in order to guide them to the most appropriate 
choice of equivalence in the foreign language. 
The source word with its syntactic category, 
the target words and the sense indicators were 
automatically extracted from an English-
French dictionary and then the sense indicators 
have been classified on the basis of lexical 
relevant facts (cf. Atkins et al, 2002). 
The aim of these activities has been twofold: 
on one hand, we wanted to be able to highlight 
the various types of information useful to 
determine the transfer conditions; on the other, 
we had to explore and evaluate the full 
expressive potentialities provided by the 
reference computational model (i.e. the 
PAROLE-SIMPLE architecture). 
3.2 The MILE Data Structure and 
Lexicographic Environment 
 
The CLWG is setting up a lexicographic 
environment consisting of the following four 
main components: i) the MILE Entry Skeleton, 
ii)  the MILE Lexical Data Categories, iii) the 
MILE Shared Lexical Objects, iv) the ISLE 
Lexicographic Station. 
The MILE Entry Skeleton, formalized as an 
XML DTD, is an Entity Relationship model 
that will define the general constraints for the 
construction of multilingual entries, as well as 
the grammar to build the whole array of lexical 
elements needed for a given lexical 
description. 
The MILE Lexical Data Categories will 
provide the lexical objects (syntactic and 
semantic features, semantic relations, syntactic 
constructions, predicates and arguments etc..) 
that are the basic components of MILE-
conformant lexical entries. Lexical Data 
Categories will be organized in a hierarchy and 
will be defined using RDF schema (Brickley 
and Guha, 2000) to formalize their properties 
and make their ?semantics? explicit. 
The MILE Shared Lexical Objects will 
instantiate the MILE Lexical Data Categories, 
to be used to build in an easy and 
straightforward way lexical entries. These will 
include main syntactic constructions, basic 
operations and conditions to establish 
multilingual links, macro-semantic objects, 
such as lexical conceptual templates acting as 
general constraints for the encoding of 
semantic units. 
For instance, at the multilingual level it is 
possible to identify a first set of basic 
operations that are at the basis of multilingual 
transfer tests and actions. This would include: 
i) adding to a monolingual lexical entry a new 
syntactic position (required for a given 
translation correspondence); ii) adding to a 
monolingual semantic description a new 
semantic feature (required for a given 
transla tion correspondence); iii) constraining 
the source-target correspondence to apply only 
if an existing syntactic position is realized by a 
certain type of phrase, etc. 
Lexical  objects will be identified by an URI 
and will act as a common resources for lexical 
representation, to be in turn described by RDF 
metadata. The defined lexical objects will be 
used by the lexicon (or applications) 
developers  to build and target lexical data at a 
higher level of abstraction. Thus, they have to 
be seen as a step in the direction of simplifying 
and improving the usability of the MILE 
recommendations. 
The ISLE Lexicographic Station is a 
development platform used to automatically 
generate a prototype tool starting from the 
MILE DTD. The aim of this prototype tool is 
to i) exemplify the MILE entry ii)  make 
extensive use of already existing monolingual 
resources, and iii) eventually test the guidelines 
in a real scenario. This situation led us to 
define a lexicographic station development 
platform that guarantees the portability of the 
final prototype to the final specifications as 
well as to existing monolingual resources 
which will serve as the basic data for MILE  
(for a detailed description, cf. Villegas and Bel, 
2002). 
Both at monolingual and multilingual level 
(but with particular emphasis on the latter), 
ISLE intends to start up the incremental 
definition of a more Object-Oriented layer for 
lexical description and to foster the vision of 
open and distributed lexicons, with elements 
possibly residing in different sites of the web.  
3 Enlargement to Asian Languages  
An enlargement of the group to involve also 
Asian languages is going on and 
representatives of Chinese, Japanese, Korean, 
and Thai languages have contributed to ISLE 
work and participated in some ISLE 
workshops.  
The cooperation between Asia and Europe has 
to be pursued also through new common 
initiatives, as the expression of interest for the 
creation of an Open Distributed Lexical 
Infrastructure that has been submitted to the 
European Commission for the 6th Framework 
Programme for Research.  
This expression of interest is supported by 
many non-EU participants, as the newly 
formed Asian Federation of Natural Language 
Processing Associations (AFNLPA), the 
Department of Computer Science of the 
University of Tokyo, the Korean KAIST and 
KORTERM, the Taiwanese Institute of 
Linguistics of the Academia Sinica. 
The Open Distributed Lexical Infrastructure, a 
natural development of the ISLE model, can be 
seen as a new paradigm of distributed lexicon 
creation and maintenance and it would be a 
step of great importance for the fulfilment of 
the vision of the Semantic Web (Berners-Lee, 
1998). The creation of such infrastructure has 
to be consensual and in this regard needs the 
collaboration of a group of languages as large 
as possible (for example the AFNLPA brings 
into the initiative many Asian languages, such 
as Chinese, Hindi, Indonesian, Japanese, 
Korean, Malay, Tamil, Thai and Urdu). A 
prerequisite in order to reach interoperability is 
the existence of best practices and standards 
that have been consensually agreed on or have 
been submitted to the international community 
as de-facto  standards. 
 
4 Conclusions 
In this paper we presented overall goals and 
methodological principles of the 
standardization activity of EAGLES/ISLE. In 
particular, we describe the work of the 
Computational Lexicon Working Group and its 
effort towards recommendations, focussing on 
the MILE, the multilingual lexical meta-entry 
proposed as the standard representational 
format for multilingual computational lexical 
resources. Lexical representation is articulated 
over different information layers, each 
factoring out different, but possibly inter-
related, linguistic facets of information, 
relevant in order to establish multilingual 
lexical links. We also pointed out the necessity 
to involve a broader group of languages in 
order to ensure the achievement of a real 
consensual standard. 
Acknowledgements 
We thank all the members of the ISLE CLWG 
for their active participation and contribution to 
this enterprise. 
References 
Atkins S., Bel N., Bertagna F., Bouillon P., 
Calzolari N., Fellbaum C., Grishman R., 
Lenci A., MacLeod C., Palmer M., Thurmair 
R., Villegas M., Zampolli A. (2002) From 
Resources to Applications. Designing The 
Multilingual ISLE Lexical Entry. In 
Proceedings of LREC 2002, Las Palmas, 
Canary Islands, Spain. 
Bel N., Busa, F., Calzolari, N., Gola, E., Lenci, 
A., Monachini, M., Ogonowski, A., Peters, 
I., Peters, W., Ruimy, N., Villegas, M., 
Zampolli A. (2000) Simple: A General 
Framework for the Development of 
Multilingual Lexicons. In: LREC 
Proceedings. Athens. 
Berners-Lee T. (1998) Semantic Web road 
map. Personal note. Available at: 
http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/Semantic.ht
ml. 
Burnard L., Baker P., McEnery A., Wilson A. 
(1997) An analytic framework for the 
validation of language corpora. Report of 
the Elra Corpus Validation Group.  
Calzolari N (1998)  An Overview of Written 
Language Resources in Europe: a few 
Reflections, Facts, and a Vision. In: Rubio, 
A., Gallardo, N., Castro, R., Tejada A. (eds.) 
Proceedings of the First International 
Conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation. Granada 217-224. 
Calzolari N., Grishman R., Palmer M. (eds.) 
(2001)  Survey of major approaches towards  
Bilingual/Multilingual Lexicons. ISLE 
Deliverable D2.1-D3.1. Pisa  
Calzolari N., Fillmore C.J., Grishman R., Ide 
N., Lenci A., MacLeod C., Zampolli A. 
(2002)  Towards Best Practice for Multiword 
Expressions in Computational Lexicons. In 
Proceedings of LREC 2002, Las Palmas, 
Canary Islands, Spain. 
Calzolari N., Lenci A., Zampolli A., Bel N., 
Villegas M., Thurmair G. (2001)  The ISLE 
in the Ocean. Transatlantic Standards for 
Multilingual Lexicons (with an eye to 
Machine Translation). In Proceedings of 
Machine Translation Summit VIII, Santiago 
de Compostela, Spain. 
Calzolari N., Mc Naught J., Zampolli A (1996)  
Eagles Final Report: Eagles Editors? 
Introduction. Pisa.  
Eagles (1996)  Evaluation of Natural Language 
Processing Systems. Final Report. CST, 
Copenhagen. Also at http://issco-
www.unige.ch/projects/ewg96/ewg96.html. 
Brickley D., Guha R. (2000) Resource 
Description Framework (RDF) Schema 
Specification 1.0, W3C Candidate 
Recommendation. Available online at 
http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-schema. 
Leech G., Wilson A. (1996) Recommendations 
for the morphosyntactic annotation of 
corpora.  Lancaster. 
Lenci A., Busa F., Ruimy N., Gola E., 
Monachini M., Calzolari N., Zampolli A. 
(1999)  Linguistic Specifications. Simple 
Deliverable D2.1. ILC and University of 
Pisa. 
Monachini M., Calzolari N. (1996)  Synopsis 
and comparison of morphosyntactic 
phenomena encoded in lexicons and corpora. 
A common proposal and applications to 
European languages. ILC-CNR, Pisa. 
Monachini M., Calzolari N. (1999)  
Standardization in the Lexicon. In: H. van 
Halteren (ed.): Syntactic Wordclass Tagging. 
Kluwer, Dordrecht 149-173. 
Pustejovsky J. (1995)  The Generative Lexicon. 
Cambridge, MA, MIT Press. 
Ruimy N., Corazzari O., Gola E., Spanu A., 
Calzolari N., Zampolli A. (1998) The 
European LE-Parole Project: The Italian 
Syntactic Lexicon. In: Proceedings of the 
First International Conference on Language 
resources and Evaluation. Granada 241-248. 
Sanfilippo A. et al (1996) Eagles 
Subcategorization Standards. See 
http://www.icl.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/syntax/s
yntax.html 
Sanfilippo A. et al (1999) Eagles 
Recommendations on Semantic Encoding.. 
See http://www.ilc.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/rep2  
Underwood N., Navarretta C. (1997) A Draft 
Manual for the Validation of Lexica. Final 
ELRA Report. Copenhagen. 
Villegas M., Bel N. (2002) From DTDs to 
relational dBs. An automatic generation of a 
lexicographical station out off ISLE 
guidelines. In Proceedings of LREC 2002, 
Las Palmas, Canary Islands, Spain. 
Zampolli A. (1997) The PAROLE project in 
the general context of the European actions 
for Language Resources. In: 
Marcinkeviciene, R., Volz, N. (eds.): Telri 
Proceedings of the Second European 
Seminar: Language Applications for a 
Multilingual Europe. IDS/VDU, 
Manheim/Kaunas. 
Zampolli A. (1998) Introduction of the 
General Chairman. In: Rubio, A., Gallardo, 
N. Castro, R., Tejada A. (eds.): Proceedings 
of the First International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation. 
Granada, Spain. 
 
RDF Instantiation of ISLE/MILE Lexical Entries
Nancy Ide
Department of Computer
Science
Vassar College
Poughkeepsie, New York
USA 12604-0520
ide@cs.vassar.edu
Alessandro Lenci
Universit? di Pisa
Dipartimento di Linguistica
Via Santa Maria 36
56100 PISA
Italy
lenci@ilc.cnr.it
Nicoletta Calzolari
Istituto di Linguistica
Computazionale, CNR
Area della Ricerca
Via Moruzzi 1 ? 56100 PISA
Italy
glottolo@ilc.cnr.it
Abstract
In this paper we describe the overall
model for MILE lexical entries and
provide an instantiation of the model in
RDF/OWL. This work has been done
with an eye toward the goal of creating a
web-based registry of lexical data
categories and enabling the description of
lexical information by establishing
relations among them, and/or using pre-
defined objects that may reside at various
locations on the web. It is also assumed
that using OWL specifications to enhance
specifications of the ontology of lexical
objects will eventually enable the
exploitation of inferencing engines to
retrieve and possibly create lexical
information on the fly, as suited to
particular contexts. As such, the model
and RDF instantiation provided here are
in line with the goals of ISO TC37 SC4,
and should be fully mappable to the
proposed pivot.
1 Introduction
The eventual vision for computational lexicons is
to enable universal access to sophisticated
linguistic information, which in turn will serve as a
central component for content-based information
management on the web. This demands, first of all,
some standardized means to represent complex
lexical information while retaining the flexibility
required to accommodate diverse approaches to
lexicon organization and use. To this end, the
ISLE
1
 ( International Standards for Language
Engineering) Computational Lexicons Working
Group (CLWG) has designed MILE (Multilingual
ISLE Lexical Entry), a general schema for the
encoding of multilingual lexical information
intended as a meta-entry that can serve as a
standardized representational layer for multilingual
lexical resources. MILE consists of an incremental
definition of object-oriented layers for lexical
description that will enable open and distributed
lexicons, with elements possibly residing in
different sites of the web. The defined lexical
objects are intended for use by lexicon and
application developers to build and target lexical
data at high level of abstraction.
The Resource Definition Framework (RDF) and
the Ontology Web Language (OWL) recently
developed by the World Wide Web Consortium
(W3C) build upon the XML web infrastructure to
enable the creation of a Semantic Web, wherein
web objects can be classified according to their
properties, and the semantics of their relations
(links) to other web objects can be precisely
defined. This in turn will enable powerful
inferencing capabilities that can adapt language
processing applications to particular contexts.
The MILE lexical entry is an ideal structure for
rendering via RDF/OWL. It consists of a hierarchy
of lexical objects that are built up in a layered
fashion by combining atomic data categories via
clearly defined relations. The overall architecture is
modular and layered, as described in Atkins et al
                                                       
1
 ISLE Web Site URL:
lingue.ilc.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/isle/ISLE_Home_Page.htm
(2002) and Calzolari et al (2003). On the
horizontal dimension, independent, linked modules
target different dimensions of lexical entries. On
the vertical dimension, the layered organization
allows for varying degrees of granularity in lexical
descriptions, allowing both ?shallow? and ?deep?
lexical representations. RDF?s class hierarchy
mechanism, together with its capacity to specify
named relations among objects in the various
classes, provide a web-based means to represent
this architecture.
2
 Furthermore, because RDF
allows for instantiating objects in any defined class
and subsequently referring to them as the target of
appropriate relations, lexical objects at any level of
specificity can be pre-defined. This provides an
important mechanism for standardization of lexical
elements, since these elements may be pre-defined,
organized in class hierarchies with inherited
properties, and used ?off-the-shelf? as needed.
In this paper we describe the overall model for
MILE lexical entries and provide an instantiation
of the model in RDF/OWL. This work has been
done with an eye toward the goal of creating a
web-based registry of lexical data categories and
enabling the description of lexical information by
establishing relations among them, and/or using
pre-defined objects that may reside at various
locations on the web. It is also assumed that using
OWL specifications to enhance specifications of
the ontology of lexical objects will eventually
enable the exploitation of inferencing engines to
retrieve and possibly create lexical information on
the fly, as suited to particular contexts. As such, the
model and RDF instantiation provided here are in
line with the goals of ISO TC37 SC4, and should
be fully mappable to the proposed pivot.
3
2 The MILE Lexical Model
The MILE Lexical Model (MLM) consists of two
primary components: a mono-lingual component
and a multi-lingual component. The mono-lingual
                                                       
2
 It should be noted that this architecture is analogous to
other data models, including ER diagrams and various
knowledge representation schemes.
3
 We have in fact produced a version of the prototype
ISLE lexical entry in an XML format instantiating the
proposed ISO pivot format (Ide and Romary,
Vassar/LORIA internal document).
component comprises three layers: morphological,
syntactic, and semantic. The overall architecture is
shown in Figure 1.
Within each of the MLM layers, two types of
objects are defined:
1. MILE Lexical Classes (MLC): the main
building blocks of lexical entries. They
formalize the basic lexical notions for each
layer defined in the ISLE project (Calzolari et
al. 2003). The MLM defines each class by
specifying its attributes and the relations
among them. Classes represent notions like
syntactic feature, syntactic phrase, predicate,
semantic relation, synset, etc. Instances of
MLCs are the MILE Data Categories (MDC).
So for instance, NP and VP are data category
instances of the class <Phrase>, and SUBJ and
OBJ are data category instances of the class
<Function>. Each MDC is identified by a URI.
MDC can be either user- defined or reside in a
shared repository.
2. lexical operations: special lexical entities
which allow users to state conditions and
perform complex operations over lexical
entries. They will for instance allow
lexicographers to establish multilingual
conditions, link the slots within two different
syntactic frames, link semantic arguments with
syntactic slots, etc.
The MLM is described with Entity-Relationship
(E-R) diagrams defining the entities of the lexical
model and the way they can be combined to design
an actual lexical entry. As such, the MLM does not
correspond to a specific lexical entry, but is rather
an entry schema corresponding to a lexical meta-
entry. This means that different possible lexical
entries can be designed as instances of the schema
provided by the MLM. Instance entries might
therefore differ for the type of information they
include (e.g. morphological, syntactic, semantic,
monolingual or multilingual, etc.), and for the
depth of lexical description.
Figure 2 depicts the MLM classes and relations for
the syntactic layer (SynU for ?syntactic unit?). Full
definitions for the MLM can be found in the ISLE
document (Calzolari et al 2003).
Figure 1. Overall MILE architecture
MLC:SynU 
 
 
id: xs:anyURY 
comment: xs:string 
example: xs:string 
MLC:SyntacticFrame  
hasSyntacticFrame  
1..* 
MLC:FrameSet  
Composition 
hasFrameSet  
* 
* 
composedBy  
MLC:SemU 
correspondsTo  
* 
CorrespSynUSemU  
Figure 2. Lexical classes and their relations for the syntactic layer (SynU)
morphological 
layer 
syntactic layer 
semantic layer 
linking conditions 
mono-Mile 
multi-MILE 
 
 
 
 
 
multilingual 
correspondence 
conditions 
mono-Mile 
3 RDF instantiation
We have created an RDF schema for the
syntactic layer of the ISLE/MILE lexical entry
and instantiated one entry in several alternative
forms to explore its potential as a representation
for lexical data that can be integrated into the
Semantic Web. The following describes the
various components.
3.1.1 RDF schema for ISLE lexical entries
An RDF schema defines classes of objects and
their relations to other objects. It does not in
itself comprise an instance of these objects, but
simply specifies the properties and constraints
applicable to objects that conform to it.
The RDF schema for the syntactic layer of ISLE
lexical entries can be accessed at
http://www.cs.vassar.edu/~ide/rdf/isle-schema-
v.6. The classes and relations (properties)
defined in the schema correspond to the ER
diagrams in Calzolari et al (2003). The schema
indicates that there is class of objects called
Entry; a property declaration indicates that the
relation hasSynU holds between Entry objects
and SynU  objects. Note that classes can be
defined to be subclasses of other classes, in
which case properties associated with the parent
class are inherited. In the ISLE schema, for
example, the objects Self and SlotRealization
are defined to be sub-classes of PhraseElement,
and the hasPhrase property holds between any
object of type PhraseElement (including its
sub-classes) and objects of type Phrase.
The ISLE RDF schema and entries have been
validated using the ICS-FORTH Validating RDF
Parser (VRP v2.1), which analyzes the syntax of
a given RDF/ XML file according to the RDF
Model and Syntax Specification
4
 and checks
whether the statements contained in both RDF
schemas and resource descriptions satisfy the
semantic constraints derived by the RDF Schema
Specification.
5
                                                       
4
 http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-syntax-grammar/
5
 http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-schema/
4  ISLE Lexical Entries and the Data
Category Registry
Appendix A contains three versions of the SynU
description for ?eat?, instantiated as RDF
objects. The first is a ?full? version in which all
of the information is specified, including atomic
values (strings) at the leaves of the tree structure.
The second two versions, rather than specifying
all information explicitly, rely on the existence
of a Data Category Registry (DCR) in which
pre-defined lexical objects are instantiated and
may be included in the entry by a direct
reference.
The potential to develop a Data Category
Registry in which lexical objects are instantiated
in RDF is one of the most important for the
creation of multi-lingual, reusable lexicons. It
allows for the following:
1. specification of a universally accessible,
standard set of morphological, syntactic, and
semantic information that can serve as a
reference for lexicons creators;
2. a fully modular specification of lexical
entities that enables use of all or parts of the
lexical information in the repository as
desired or appropriate, to build more
complex lexical information modules;
3. a template for data category description that
lexicon creators can use to create their own
data categories at any level of granularity;
4. means to reuse lexical specifications in
entries sharing common properties, thereby
eliminating redundancy as well as providing
direct means to identify lexical entries or
sub-entries with shared properties;
5. a universally accessible set of lexical
information categories that may be used in
applications or resources other than lexicons.
Note that the existence of a repository of lexical
objects, instantiated and specified at different
levels of complexity, does not imply that these
objects must be used by lexicon creators. Rather,
it provides a set of ?off the shelf? lexical objects
which either may be used as is, or which provide
a departure point for the definition of new or
modified categories.
The examples in Appendix A provide a general
idea of how a repository of RDF-instantiated
lexical objects can be used. Sample repositories
at three different levels of granularity,
corresponding to the examples in Appendix A,
are given in Appendix B:
1. a repository of enumerated classes for
lexical objects at the lowest level of
granularity; this comprises a definition of
sets of possible values for various lexical
objects. Any object of this type must be
instantiated with one of the listed values.
2. a repository of phrase classes which
instantiate common phrase types, e.g., NP,
VP, etc.
3. a repository of constructions containing
instantiations of common syntactic
constructions (e.g., for verbs which are both
transitive and intransitive, as shown in the
example).
The example entries demonstrate three different
possibilities for the use of information in the
repositories:
1. Entry 1 uses only the enumerated classes in
the LDCR for SynFeatureName and
SynFeatureValue. Note that in this case, the
LDCR only provides a closed list of possible
values, from which the assigned value in the
entry must be chosen.
2. Entry 2 refers to instances of phrase objects
in the LDCR rather than including them in
the entry; this enables referring to a complex
phrase (Vauxhave in the example) rather
than including it directly in the entry, and
provides the potential to reuse the same
instance by reference in the same or other
entries (this is done with N P  in the
example).
3. Entry 3 takes advantage of construction
instances in the LDCR, thus eliminating the
full specification in the entry and, again,
allowing for reuse in other entries.
5 Summary
This exercise is intended to exemplify how RDF
may be used to instantiate lexical objects at
various levels of granularity, which can be used
and reused to create lexical entries within a
single lexicon as well as across lexicons. By
relying on the developing standardized
technologies underlying the Semantic Web, we
ensure universal accessibility and commonality.
Ultimately, lexical objects defined in this way
can be used not only for lexicons, but also in
language processing and other applications.
This example serves primarily as a proof of
concept that may be refined and modified as we
consider in more depth the exact RDF
representation that would best serve the needs of
lexicon creation. However, the potential of
exploiting the developments in the Semantic
Web world for lexicon development should be
clear. More importantly, by situating our work in
the context of W3 standards, we are in step with
ISO TC37/SC4 vision of a Linguistic Annotation
Framework that includes a Data Category
Registry of the type we describe here.
References
Atkins, S., Bel, N., Bertagna, F., Bouillon, P.,
Calzolari, N., Fellbaum, C., Grishman, R., Lenci,
A., MacLeod, C., Palmer, M., Thurmair, G.,
Villegas, M., Zampolli A., 2002. ?From
Resources to Applications. Designing the
Multilingual ISLE Lexical Entry?, Proceedings
of LREC 2002, Las Palmas, Canary Islands,
Spain: 687-693.
Calzolari, N., Bertagna, F., Lenci, A.,
Monachini, M., 2003. Standards and best
Practice for Multilingual Computational
Lexicons and MILE (Multilingual ISLE Lexical
Entry), ISLE Computational Lexicon Working
Group deliverables D2.2 ? D3.2, Pisa.
Appendix A: Sample Entries
ENTRY 1 : Full entry
Highlighted lines refer to objects whose values are constrained in DCR definitions (Appendix B).
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!-- Sample ISLE lexical Entry for EAT (transitive), SynU only
     Abbreviated syntax version using no pre-defined objects
     2002/10/23 Author: Nancy Ide -->
<rdf:RDF xmlns:rdf="http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#"
         xmlns:rdfs="http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#"
         xmlns:mlc="http://www.cs.vassar.edu/~ide/rdf/isle-schema-v.6#"
         xmlns="http://www.cs.vassar.edu/~ide/rdf/isle-schema-v.6#">
<Entry rdf:ID="eat1">
   <!-- The SynU for eat1 -->
   <hasSynu rdf:parseType="Resource">
      <SynU rdf:ID="eat1-SynU">
         <example>John ate the cake</example>
         <hasSyntacticFrame>
            <SyntacticFrame rdf:ID="eat1SynFrame">
               <hasSelf>
                  <Self rdf:ID="eat1Self">
                     <headedBy>
                        <Phrase rdf:ID="Vauxhave">
                           <hasSynFeature>
                              <SynFeature>
                                 <hasSynFeatureName rdf:value="aux"/>
                                 <hasSynFeatureValue rdf:value="have"/>
              </SynFeature></hasSynFeature></Phrase></headedBy></Self></hasSelf>
               <hasConstruction>
                  <Construction rdf:ID="eat1Const">
                     <slot>
                        <SlotRealization rdf:ID="NPsubj">
                            <hasFunction rdf:value="Subj"/>
                            <filledBy rdf:value="NP"/>
                     </SlotRealization></slot>
                     <slot>
                        <SlotRealization rdf:ID="NPobj">
                             <hasFunction rdf:value="Obj"/>
                             <filledBy rdf:value="NP"/>
              </SlotRealization></slot></Construction></hasConstruction>
                <hasFrequency rdf:value="8788" mlc:corpus="PAROLE"/>
</SyntacticFrame></hasSyntacticFrame></SynU></hasSynu></Entry></rdf:RDF>
ENTRY 2 : Using DCR categories for PHRASE
The highlighted lines refer to pre-instantiated lexical objects. A portion of the LDCR for Phrases is given
in Appendix C. The URL reference is to the actual web address where the object is instantiated.
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!--
     Sample ISLE lexical Entry for EAT (transitive), SynU only
     Abbreviated syntax version using no pre-defined objects
     2002/10/23 Author: Nancy Ide -->
<rdf:RDF xmlns:rdf="http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#"
         xmlns:rdfs="http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#"
         xmlns:mlc="http://www.cs.vassar.edu/~ide/rdf/isle-schema-v.6#"
         xmlns="http://www.cs.vassar.edu/~ide/rdf/isle-schema-v.6#">
<Entry rdf:ID="eat1">
   <!-- The SynU for eat1 -->
   <hasSynu rdf:parseType="Resource">
      <SynU rdf:ID="eat1-SynU">
         <example>John ate the cake</example>
         <hasSyntacticFrame>
            <SyntacticFrame rdf:ID="eat1SynFrame">
               <hasSelf>
                  <Self rdf:ID="eat1Self">
                    <headedBy rdf:resource=
                    "http://www.cs.vassar.edu/~ide/rdf/isle-datcats/Phrases#Vauxhave"/>
               </Self></hasSelf>
               <hasConstruction>
                  <Construction rdf:ID="eat1Const">
                     <slot>
                       <SlotRealization rdf:ID="NPsubj">
                         <hasFunction rdf:value="Subj"/>
                         <filledBy rdf:resource=
                         "http://www.cs.vassar.edu/~ide/rdf/isle-datcats/Phrases#NP"/>
                     </SlotRealization></slot>
                     <slot>
                       <SlotRealization rdf:ID="NPobj">
                         <hasFunction rdf:value="Obj"/>
                         <filledBy rdf:resource=
                         "http://www.cs.vassar.edu/~ide/rdf/isle-datcats/Phrases#NP"/>
                </SlotRealization></slot></Construction></hasConstruction>
                <hasFrequency rdf:value="8788" mlc:corpus="PAROLE"/>
</SyntacticFrame></hasSyntacticFrame></SynU></hasSynu></Entry></rdf:RDF>
ENTRY 3 : Using DCR categories for CONSTRUCTION
The highlighted lines refer to a pre-instantiated Construction object. A portion of the DCR for
Constructions is given in Appendix B. The URL reference is to the actual web address where the object is
instantiated.
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!-- Sample ISLE lexical Entry for EAT (transitive)
     Abbreviated syntax version using pre-defined construction
     2002/10/23 Author: Nancy Ide -->
<rdf:RDF xmlns:rdf="http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#"
         xmlns:rdfs="http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#"
         xmlns:mlc="http://www.cs.vassar.edu/~ide/rdf/isle-schema-v.6#"
         xmlns="http://www.cs.vassar.edu/~ide/rdf/isle-schema-v.6#">
<Entry rdf:ID="eat1">
   <!-- The SynU for eat1 -->
   <hasSynu rdf:parseType="Resource">
      <SynU rdf:ID="eat1-SynU">
         <example>John ate the cake</example>
         <hasSyntacticFrame>
            <SyntacticFrame rdf:ID="eat1SynFrame">
               <hasSelf>
                  <Self rdf:ID="eat1Self">
                     <headedBy rdf:resource=
                    "http://www.cs.vassar.edu/~ide/rdf/isle-datcats/Phrases#Vauxhave"/>
                  </Self></hasSelf>
               <hasConstruction rdf:resource=
          "http://www.cs.vassar.edu/~ide/rdf/isle-datcats/Constructions#TransIntrans"/>
               <hasFrequency rdf:value="8788" mlc:corpus="PAROLE"/>
            </SyntacticFrame></hasSyntacticFrame></SynU></hasSynu></Entry></rdf:RDF>
Appendix B: DCR definitions
Sample DCR entries specifying enumerated values for SynFeatureName, etc. The specification uses the
Ontology Web Language (OWL) to list valid values for objects of the defined class.
<!-- Enumerated classes for ISLE lexical entries v0.1 2002/10/23 Author: Nancy Ide  -->
<rdf:RDF xmlns:rdf="http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#"
         xmlns:rdfs="http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#"
         xmlns:owl ="http://www.w3.org/2002/07/owl#
         xmlns:isle ="http://www.cs.vassar.edu/~ide/rdf/isle-schema-v.6#">
<rdfs:Class rdf:about=
            "http://www.cs.vassar.edu/~ide/rdf/isle-enumerated-classes#FunctionType">
<owl:oneOf>
   <rdf:Seq>
      <rdf:li>Subj</rdf:li>
      <rdf:li>Obj</rdf:li>
      <rdf:li>Comp</rdf:li>
      <rdf:li>Arg</rdf:li>
      <rdf:li>Iobj</rdf:li>
</rdf:Seq></owl:oneOf></rdfs:Class>
<rdfs:Class rdf:about=
     "http://www.cs.vassar.edu/~ide/rdf/isle-enumerated-classes#SynFeatureName">
<owl:oneOf>
   <rdf:Seq>
      <rdf:li>tense</rdf:li>
      <rdf:li>gender</rdf:li>
      <rdf:li>control</rdf:li>
      <rdf:li>person</rdf:li>
      <rdf:li>aux</rdf:li>
</rdf:Seq></owl:oneOf> </rdfs:Class>
<rdfs:Class rdf:about=
     "http://www.cs.vassar.edu/~ide/rdf/isle-enumerated-classes#SynFeatureValue">
<owl:oneOf>
   <rdf:Seq>
      <rdf:li>have</rdf:li>
      <rdf:li>be</rdf:li>
      <rdf:li>subject_control</rdf:li>
      <rdf:li>object_control</rdf:li>
      <rdf:li>masculine</rdf:li>
      <rdf:li>feminine</rdf:li>
</rdf:Seq></owl:oneOf></rdfs:Class></rdf:RDF>
Sample LDCR entry for two Phrase objects
<rdf:RDF xmlns:rdf="http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#"
         xmlns:rdfs="http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#"
         xmlns:mlc="http://www.cs.vassar.edu/~ide/rdf/isle-schema-v.6#">
<Phrase rdf:ID="NP" rdfs:label="NP"/>
<Phrase rdf:ID="Vauxhave">
   <hasSynFeature>
     <SynFeature>
        <hasSynFeatureName rdf:value="aux"/>
        <hasSynFeatureValue rdf:value="have"/>
      </SynFeature></hasSynFeature></Phrase></rdf:RDF>
Sample LDCR entry for a Construction object
<rdf:RDF xmlns:rdf="http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#"
          xmlns:rdfs="http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#"
          xmlns="http://www.cs.vassar.edu/~ide/rdf/isle-schema-v.6#">
<Construction rdf:ID="TransIntrans">
    <slot>
       <SlotRealization rdf:ID="NPsubj">
          <hasFunction rdf:value="Subj"/>
          <filledBy rdf:resource=
                   "http://www.cs.vassar.edu/~ide/rdf/isle-datcats/Phrases#NP"/>
    </SlotRealization></slot>
    <slot>
       <SlotRealization rdf:ID="NPobj">
          <hasFunction rdf:value="Obj"/>
          <filledBy rdf:resource=
                  "http://www.cs.vassar.edu/~ide/rdf/isle-datcats/Phrases#NP"/>
</SlotRealization></slot></Construction></rdf:RDF>
Senseval-3: The Italian All-words Task 
Marisa ULIVIERI 
ILC-CNR 
Via Moruzzi 1  
Pisa, Italy, 56124 
marisa.ulivieri@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Francesca BERTAGNA 
ILC-CNR 
Via Moruzzi 1 
Pisa, Italy, 56124 
francesca.bertagna@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Elisabetta GUAZZINI 
ILC-CNR 
Via Moruzzi 1 
Pisa, Italy, 56124 
elisabetta.guazzini@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Nicoletta CALZOLARI 
ILC-CNR 
Via Moruzzi 1 
Pisa, Italy, 56124 
glottolo@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes the Italian all-words 
sense disambiguation task for Senseval-3. The 
annotation procedure and criteria together with 
the encoding of multiwords are presented. 
1 Introduction 
This paper describes the Italian all-words sense 
disambiguation task for Senseval-3: about 5000 
words were manually disambiguated according to 
the ItalWordNet (IWN) word senses. The first 
section briefly describes of the corpus and the 
lexical reference resource. The second section 
contains some general criteria adopted for the 
annotation of the corpus and illustrated by a series 
of examples. Issues connected to the treatment of 
phenomena typically found in corpora, e.g. 
abbreviations, foreign words, jargon, locutions are 
discussed. Furthermore, the encoding of 
compounds, metaphorical usages, and multiword 
units is described. Problems connected with i) the 
high granularity of sense distinctions in the lexical 
resource and ii) unsolvable ambiguities of the 
contexts are dealt with. Finally, it is evidenced how 
the annotation exercise can be of help in updating 
or tuning IWN, by adding missing senses and/or 
entries. 
2 The Corpus and the Lexical Resource 
The Italian all-words corpus consists of about 
13600 word tokens, extracted from the SI-TAL 1, 
Italian Syntactic Semantic Treebank (ISST). The 
                                                     
1 SI-TAL (Integrated System for the Automatic 
treatment of Language)  was a National Project devoted 
to the creation of large linguistic resources and software 
tools for Italian written and spoken language processing. 
ISST (Montemagni et al 2003) consists of i) a 
generic corpus of about 215,000 tokens, extracted 
from different periodicals and newspaper articles 
(La Repubblica, Il Corriere della Sera) and ii) a 
specialised corpus of about 90,000 tokens, with 
texts belonging to the financial domain (Il Sole-
24Ore). The annotated corpus consists of about 
5000 words and comprises a selection of Italian 
newspaper articles about various topics: politics, 
sport, news, etc. The common data format is XML. 
The reference lexical resource used for the 
Senseval-3 sense tagging task is the lexical-
semantic database IWN, developed within the 
framework of two different research projects: 
EuroWordNet (Vossen 1999) and SI-TAL, during 
which IWN was extended by the insertion of 
adjectives, adverbs and a subset of proper nouns. 
The IWN database contains about 64,000 word 
senses corresponding to about 50,000 synsets. It 
has inherited the EWN linguistic model (Alonge et 
al., 1998) which provides a rich set of semantic 
relations, and the first nucleus of verbs and nouns. 
IWN was structured around the notion of synset, a 
set of synonymous word meanings, and the 
information is encoded in the form of lexical-
semantic relations between pairs of synsets. The 
IWN database comprises also an Interlingual Index 
(ILI), based on the Princeton WordNet 1.5 used to 
link wordnets of different languages so that it is 
possible to go from the Italian words to similar 
words in English language. IWN has also inherited 
from EWN the Top Ontology (TO), a hierarchical 
structure of language-independent concepts, 
reflecting fundamental semantic distinctions. Via 
the ILI, all the concepts in the wordnet are linked 
to the Top Ontology. 
                                             Association for Computational Linguistics
                        for the Semantic Analysis of Text, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004
                 SENSEVAL-3: Third International Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems
3 Annotation Procedure and Criteria 
For the Italian all-words task , the annotation 
was carried out manually, word by word following 
the text. For each word, annotators were supplied 
with information about The tagging operation 
consisted in the assignment of a sense number to 
each full word or sequence of words corresponding 
to a single unit of sense, such as compounds, 
idioms, metaphorical usages, etc. The sense 
number which refers to a specific synset was 
assigned by the annotators according to the lexical 
resource IWN. The assignment of a sense number 
allows tagged words to inherit a series of semantic 
information ranging from meronymy, synonymy, 
hyperonymy, etc. up to the fundamental semantic 
distinctions of the Top Ontology. 
The annotation of the corpus was restricted to 
nouns (2583), verbs (1858), adjectives (748), a 
group of multiword expressions (97 ? verb phrases, 
adjectival phrases and noun phrases) and a set of 
general proper nouns (163). Two linguists 
disambiguated the texts. The annotators made 
every effort to match a text word to a IWN sense, 
but sometimes this could not be done, since the 
required sense was not present in the reference 
resource. Cases of difficult sense attribution and of 
disagreement between annotators were marked and 
left to further discussion and refinement. 
Frequently, a tight interaction between the IWN 
developers and the annotators was needed. By the 
way, this collaboration produced a double-sided 
effect: on the one side, the lexical resource gained 
in coverage, being enlarged through the addition of 
missing entries and/or senses and, on the other 
side, the corpus encoding has been made possible. 
3.1 Non-annotated cases 
Notwithstanding this, some cases have been left 
?empty?. They are in particular terms with not 
standard meaning, often absent from dictionaries2 
as, for example: i) abbreviations (C.T. 
Commissario Tecnico, Technical Officer); ii) 
foreign words (e.g. off limits); iii) jargon (e.g. 
fumantino adj. una persona fumantina, an irascible 
person); iv) terms semantically modified through 
evaluative suffixation (e.g. vetturetta, small car); 
v) locutions (e.g. per carit?!, for goodness? sake!; 
ci mancherebbe, that?s all we need); vi) words, or 
sequences of words, indicating human association 
groups (Caschi blu, the Blue Berets, Croce Rossa, 
Red Cross, etc.), vii) nicknames (Scarpa d'oro, lit. 
Gold Shoe ? to say a good football player, Primula 
                                                     
2 Some of them are very technical-specialistic terms 
or expressions extracted, in particular, from the soccer 
domain, e.g. andare in percussione/in sovrapposizione 
(lit. to go in percussion/in overlapping). 
Rossa, the Scarlet Pimpernel, a mafioso boss, etc.); 
viii) neologisms (e.g. komeinista berlusconiano, 
concerning Khomeini, Berlusconi). 
This type of specific neologisms or idiomatic 
expressions have a high frequency in corpora. 
Corpus texts are extracted from newspaper articles 
about politics, sports, news, etc. in which a high 
number of words currently used in the everyday 
language of media appear. Rarely a lexical 
resource contains this new-born expressions hence 
not completely meeting the requirements of 
semantic annotation. 
3.2 Fully-compositional Expressions 
It may be the case that annotators had to deal 
with complex expressions where the meaning is 
compositional, e.g. Ministero della Difesa 
(Department of Defence). Even if this sequence of 
words could be perceived by native speakers as a 
single multiword expression, the reference lexical 
resource did not present it as an independent entry. 
This is a case of fully compositional expression, 
whose interpretation depends functionally on the 
interpretation of its constituents. They were, 
therefore, decomposed and annotated according to 
their parts. 
3.3 Metaphorical Usages 
Figurative and metaphorical usages were hard to 
map to the correct sense: sometimes, it has been 
necessary to accept for them, at least, a 
compromise solution. Consider the following 
context (where bold marks the figurative usage): 
 
due lavoratori su tre sono a casa = essere 
disoccupato 
 
out of three workers, two are at home = to be 
unemployed) 
 
The interpretation of the context presupposes an 
extra-linguistic knowledge, which cannot be 
encoded at the lexical-semantic level of 
description, even if the collocation with lavoratori 
(workers) allows to correctly disambiguate. In this 
case a (at home) represents an instance of a non 
lexicalised metaphor, therefore it was not possible 
to assign the appropriate figurative sense. A 
compromise solution was adopted and the 
individual components of the phrase were 
annotated, even if the correct semantic contribution 
of the multiword expression was lost. 
Another interesting case is provided by the 
occurrences of some metaphoric uses of verbs. 
Consider these examples: 
 
? ? andata male in Spagna e non si ? 
qualificata alle ?, lit. in Spain it went badly and 
did not qualify for the 
 
? il rapporto and? avanti fino alle nozze, lit. 
the relationship went ahead until wedding 
In the first example, even if the verb is 
frequently used with this meaning, it was not 
possible to attribute a correct sense number, since 
it was not accounted for in the lexical resource. 
In the second case, the verbal locution andare 
avanti was not present in IWN. In this context, 
andare has been annotated with andare11, ?to 
progress?, which incorporates the meaning 
provided by andare plus the adverb avanti (to go 
ahead). 
All the above mentioned cases of non-annotation 
or compromise annotation evidence the 
divergences between lexicon encoding, on the one 
hand, in which senses are by necessity 
?decontextualised? to be able to capture 
generalizations (Calzolari et al 2002) and corpus 
annotation, on the other, where ?contextualization? 
plays a predominant role and, consequently, 
figurative senses, idioms, metaphorical usages, 
multiwords, are highly frequent. 
3.4 High granularity of sense distinctions 
One of the main reasons for disagreement 
between annotators could arise from the high IWN 
granularity in sense distinction. Often, when 
deciding a sense, too subtle distinctions could turn 
out to be a disadvantage for the annotators. 
Consider the verb sentire (to hear): IWN makes a 
very fine-grained distinction, where exactly 17 
senses are available. Some of them overlap or are 
so close each other to be undistinguishable for 
human annotators and may be problematic for 
systems. In the following example: 
Passano pochissimi secondi e qualcuno sente un 
urlo= ? and someone hears a cry 
 
In IWN, two senses of the verb are overlapping: 
 
sentire 1 ? percepire con l'orecchio (to hear) 
 
sentire 2 ? essere in grado di percepire suoni con 
l'orecchio (to be able to hear sounds) 
 
These distinctions are too subtle to be used in 
corpus annotation. The annotator has chosen 
sense1, but (in order to allow for the coarse-
grained scoring of automatic annotation) a 
sensemap of words, a table where the overlapping 
senses are accounted for, was provided. 
3.5 Context Ambiguity 
Corpus annotation strategy allowed to handle 
cases where synsets are numerous and present fine-
grained distinctions, not easily mappable to the 
corpus contexts or cases in which the context could 
raise a double interpretation. Annotators were not 
forced to make a totally subjective choice and 
could assign multiple senses (?and? operator). 
Lo Zaire ? uno dei paesi pi? pericolosi di tutta 
l'Africa = The Zaire is one of the most dangerous 
countries of Africa 
 
In IWN, sense distinctions are as follows: 
 
Paese1?  territorio con un governo sovrano e una 
propria organizzazione politica e amministrativa, 
(territory with its own political and administrative 
organization) 
 
Paese3? insieme di individui legati da stesse 
tradizioni storiche, lingua, costumi, (group of 
people with same historical traditions, languages 
and customs) 
 
Since annotators could not achieve a satisfactory 
disambiguation, they take into account both senses, 
sense1 and sense3. It was not clear, indeed, if the 
dangerousness refers to the country (sense1) or to 
the people (sense3). During the annotation, 
multiple senses have been assigned to about 90 
lemmas, that appeared arbitrary or impossible to 
disambiguate. 
3.6 Multiwords annotation 
The main difference between Senseval-3 and 
Senseval-2 is that in the all-words annotation task 
annotators are faced with complex lexical items 
coined, generally, with many technical terms, 
collocations, idioms, compounds, frozen 
expressions or multiwords, which were not present 
in the lexical-sample task. With the term 
multiwords we refer to all sequences of words 
whose meaning cannot be built compositionally 
from the meanings of its component words. The 
semantic contribution of individual components if 
annotated separately does not give reason of the 
final meaning of the expression which can be 
considered a sort of ?new concept?, e.g. farla 
franca (to get away with it), prendere parte (to 
take part), muro a secco (dry-stone wall). 
In IWN a set of lexicalised expressions were 
already included and the correct sense to assign 
was, hence, available: perdere i sensi (to faint), 
fare fuoco (to fire), passare in rivista (to review) 
etc. Many multiword expressions found in the 
corpus were added to IWN as semantically 
complex units, e.g. vedersela brutta (to have a 
narrow escape), essere in corso (to be in progress) 
etc. The annotation task has given, hence, the 
opportunity to establish a strong interaction 
between annotators and lexicographers in deciding 
what kind of sequences were real multiword 
expressions and, above all, which were worthwhile 
from a linguistic point of view to introduce in the 
lexical resource. 
The multiword expressions (about 60) were 
annotated with the following information: 
multiword ID; Part_of_Speech lemma; function of 
the components words: head, satellite. 
The individuation of the headword of the 
sequence has been made on the basis of a lexical 
criterion: for noun-phrases, the head of the 
sequence was considered the noun, the adjective 
for adjectival?phrases, the verb for verb-phrases. 
Once recognized the head, the other constituents 
play the role of satellites and the whole sequence 
receives the part-of-speech of the head. 
Here is an example encoded in XML: 
 
<head id="cs.morph074.mw_704" 
sats="cs.morph074.mw_706 
cs.morph074.mw_707"> 
uscita</head>clamorosamente 
<sat id="cs.morph074.mw_706">di</sat> 
<sat id="cs.morph074.mw_707">scena</sat> 
<answer head="cs.morph074.mw_704" 
senseid="uscire di scena.V.1"/> 
 
Our intention was only to provide an 
examplification of the methodology we adopted 
when trying to handle multiword expressions. 
Even if the recognition and treatment of poly- 
lexical units is obviously one of the most important 
issues emerging in the process of context 
interpretation, in this paper we did not address 
theoretical issues concerning their exact 
identification. 
References  
Alonge Antonietta, Nicoletta Calzolari, Piek 
Vossen, Laura Bloksma, Irene Castellon, Maria 
Antonia Marti and Wim Peters. 1998. The 
Linguistic Design of the EuroWordNet Database. 
Special Issue on EuroWordNet. Computers and 
the Humanities, Vol.32, N. 2-3: pag.91-115. 
Calzolari Nicoletta, Claudia Soria, Francesca 
Bertagna and Francesco Barsotti. 2002. 
Evaluating Lexical Resources Using Senseval. 
Journal of Natural Language Engineering, 
Special Issue of Senseval-2, vol.VIII(4), pag. 
375-390. 
Kilgarriff Adam, Rosenzweig Joseph. 2000. 
English Senseval: Report and Results. Proc. 
Second Conf on Language Resources and 
Evaluation Athens,  pag. 1239-1244. 
Montemagni Simonetta, Barsotti Francesco, 
Battista Marco Calzolari Nicoletta, Corazzari 
Ornella, Lenci Alessandro, Pirrelli Vito, 
Zampolli Antonio, Fanciulli Francesca; 
Massetani Maria, Raffaelli Remo, Basili 
Roberto, Pazienza Maria Teresa, Saracino Dario, 
Zanzotto Fabio, Mana Nadia, Pianesi Fabio, 
Delmonte Rodolfo. 2003. The syntactic-semantic 
Treebank of Italian. An Overview. Linguistica 
Computazionale a Pisa vol. I, pag.461-492. 
Vossen Piek (ed.) 1999. EuroWordNet General 
Document. The EWN CD-ROM (see also: 
http://www.hum.uva.nl/ ). 
 
Proceedings of the Workshop on Multilingual Language Resources and Interoperability, pages 1?8,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
LEXICAL MARKUP FRAMEWORK (LMF)  
FOR NLP MULTILINGUAL RESOURCES 
Gil Francopoulo1, Nuria Bel2, Monte George3, Nicoletta Calzolari4, 
Monica Monachini5, Mandy Pet6, Claudia Soria7
 
1INRIA-Loria: gil.francopoulo@wanadoo.fr 
2UPF: nuria.bel@upf.edu 
3ANSI: dracalpha@earthlink.net 
4CNR-ILC: glottolo@ilc.cnr.it 
5CNR-ILC: monica.monachini@ilc.cnr.it 
6MITRE: mpet@mitre.org 
7CNR-ILC: claudia.soria@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Abstract 
Optimizing the production, maintenance 
and extension of lexical resources is one 
the crucial aspects impacting Natural 
Language Processing (NLP). A second 
aspect involves optimizing the process 
leading to their integration in applica-
tions. With this respect, we believe that 
the production of a consensual specifica-
tion on multilingual lexicons can be a 
useful aid for the various NLP actors. 
Within ISO, one purpose of LMF (ISO-
24613) is to define a standard for lexi-
cons that covers multilingual data. 
1 Introduction 
Lexical Markup Framework (LMF) is a model 
that provides a common standardized framework 
for the construction of Natural Language Proc-
essing (NLP) lexicons. The goals of LMF are to 
provide a common model for the creation and 
use of lexical resources, to manage the exchange 
of data between and among these resources, and 
to enable the merging of a large number of indi-
vidual electronic resources to form extensive 
global electronic resources. 
Types of individual instantiations of LMF can 
include monolingual, bilingual or multilingual 
lexical resources. The same specifications are to 
be used for both small and large lexicons. The 
descriptions range from morphology, syntax, 
semantic to translation information organized as 
different extensions of an obligatory core pack-
age. The model is being developed to cover all 
natural languages. The range of targeted NLP 
applications is not restricted. LMF is also used to 
model machine readable dictionaries (MRD), 
which are not within the scope of this paper. 
2 History and current context 
In the past, this subject has been studied and de-
veloped by a series of projects like GENELEX 
[Antoni-Lay], EAGLES, MULTEXT, PAROLE, 
SIMPLE, ISLE and MILE [Bertagna]. More re-
cently within ISO1 the standard for terminology 
management has been successfully elaborated by 
the sub-committee three of ISO-TC37 and pub-
lished under the name "Terminology Markup 
Framework" (TMF) with the ISO-16642 refer-
ence. Afterwards, the ISO-TC37 National dele-
gations decided to address standards dedicated to 
NLP. These standards are currently elaborated as 
high level specifications and deal with word 
segmentation (ISO 24614), annotations 
(ISO 24611, 24612 and 24615), feature struc-
tures (ISO 24610), and lexicons (ISO 24613) 
with this latest one being the focus of the current 
paper. These standards are based on low level 
specifications dedicated to constants, namely 
data categories (revision of ISO 12620), lan-
guage codes (ISO 639), script codes 
(ISO 15924), country codes (ISO 3166), dates 
(ISO 8601) and Unicode (ISO 10646). 
 
This work is in progress. The two level organiza-
tion will form a coherent family of standards 
with the following simple rules: 
1) the low level specifications provide standard-
ized constants; 
                                                 
1 www.iso.org 
1
2) the high level specifications provide struc-
tural elements that are adorned by the standard-
ized constants. 
3 Scope and challenges 
The task of designing a lexicon model that satis-
fies every user is not an easy task. But all the 
efforts are directed to elaborate a proposal that 
fits the major needs of most existing models. 
In order to summarise the objectives, let's see 
what is in the scope and what is not. 
 
LMF addresses the following difficult chal-
lenges: 
? Represent words in languages where 
multiple orthographies (native scripts or 
transliterations) are possible, e.g. some 
Asian languages. 
? Represent explicitly (i.e. in extension) 
the morphology of languages where a de-
scription of all inflected forms (from a list 
of lemmatised forms) is manageable, e.g. 
English. 
? Represent the morphology of languages 
where a description in extension of all in-
flected forms is not manageable (e.g. Hun-
garian). In this case, representation in in-
tension is the only manageable issue. 
? Easily associate written forms and spo-
ken forms for all languages. 
? Represent complex agglutinating com-
pound words like in German. 
? Represent fixed, semi-fixed and flexible 
multiword expressions. 
? Represent specific syntactic behaviors, 
as in the Eagles recommendations. 
? Allow complex argument mapping be-
tween syntax and semantic descriptions, as 
in the Eagles recommendations. 
? Allow a semantic organisation based on 
SynSets (like in WordNet) or on semantic 
predicates (like in FrameNet). 
? Represent large scale multilingual re-
sources based on interlingual pivots or on 
transfer linking. 
LMF does not address the following topics: 
? General sentence grammar of a language 
? World knowledge representation 
In other words, LMF is mainly focused on the 
linguistic representation of lexical information. 
4 Key standards used by LMF 
LMF utilizes Unicode in order to represent the 
orthographies used in lexical entries regardless of 
language. 
Linguistic constants, like /feminine/ or 
/transitive/, are not defined within LMF but are 
specified in the Data Category Registry (DCR) 
that is maintained as a global resource by 
ISO TC37 in compliance with ISO/IEC 11179-
3:2003. 
The LMF specification complies with the 
modeling principles of Unified Modeling Lan-
guage (UML) as defined by OMG2 [Rumbaugh 
2004]. A model is specified by a UML class dia-
gram within a UML package: the class name is 
not underlined in the diagrams. The various ex-
amples of word description are represented by 
UML instance diagrams: the class name is under-
lined.  
5 Structure and core package 
LMF is comprised of two components: 
1) The core package consists of a structural 
skeleton that describes the basic hierarchy of in-
formation in a lexical entry. 
2) Extensions to the core package are ex-
pressed in a framework that describes the reuse 
of the core components in conjunction with addi-
tional components required for the description of 
the contents of a specific lexical resource. 
In the core package, the class called Database 
represents the entire resource and is a container 
for one or more lexicons. The Lexicon class is 
the container for all the lexical entries of the 
same language within the database. The Lexicon 
Information class contains administrative infor-
mation and other general attributes. The Lexical 
Entry class is a container for managing the top 
level language components. As a consequence, 
the number of representatives of single words, 
multi-word expressions and affixes of the lexicon 
is equal to the number of lexical entries in a 
given lexicon. The Form and Sense classes are 
parts of the Lexical Entry. Form consists of a text 
string that represents the word. Sense specifies or 
identifies the meaning and context of the related 
form. Therefore, the Lexical Entry manages the 
relationship between sets of related forms and 
their senses. If there is more than one orthogra-
                                                 
2 www.omg.org 
2
phy for the word form (e.g. transliteration) the 
Form class may be associated with one to many 
Representation Frames, each of which contains a 
specific orthography and one to many data cate-
gories that describe the attributes of that orthog-
raphy. 
The core package classes are linked by the re-
lations as defined in the following UML class 
diagram: 
 
Representation Frame
Lexicon Information
Form Sense
Entry Relation
Sense Relation
Lexical Entry
Database
Lexicon
0..* 0..*
0..*1
0..* 0..*
0..*1
1
0..*
1
1
1
0..*
1
1..*
1
0..*
1
1..*
1..*
1
 
 
Form class can be sub-classed into Lemmatised 
Form and Inflected Form class as follows: 
 
Lemmatised Form Inflected Form
Form
 
 
A subset of the core package classes are ex-
tended to cover different kinds of linguistic data. 
All extensions conform to the LMF core package 
and cannot be used to represent lexical data in-
dependently of the core package. From the point 
of view of UML, an extension is a UML pack-
age. Current extensions for NLP dictionaries are: 
NLP Morphology3, NLP inflectional paradigm, 
NLP Multiword Expression pattern, NLP Syntax, 
NLP Semantic and Multilingual notations, which 
is the focus of this paper. 
6 NLP Multilingual Extension 
The NLP multilingual notation extension is 
dedicated to the description of the mapping be-
tween two or more languages in a LMF database. 
The model is based on the notion of Axis that 
links Senses, Syntactic Behavior and examples 
pertaining to different languages. "Axis" is a 
                                                 
3 Morphology, Syntax and Semantic packages are 
described in [Francopoulo]. 
3
term taken from the Papillon4 project [S?rasset 
2001] 5 . Axis can be organized at the lexicon 
manager convenience in order to link directly or 
indirectly objects of different languages.  
 
6.1 Considerations for standardizing multi-
lingual data  
The simplest configuration of multilingual 
data is a bilingual lexicon where a single link is 
used to represent the translation of a given 
form/sense pair from one language into another. 
But a survey of actual practices clearly reveals 
other requirements that make the model more 
complex. Consequently, LMF has focused on the 
following ones: 
 
(i) Cases where the relation 1-to-1 is impos-
sible because of lexical differences among lan-
guages. An example is the case of English word 
?river? that relates to French words ?rivi?re? and 
?fleuve?, where the latter is used for specifying 
that the referent is a river that flows into the sea. 
The bilingual lexicon should specify how these 
units relate. 
 
(ii) The bilingual lexicon approach should 
be optimized to allow the easiest management of 
large databases for real multilingual scenarios. In 
order to reduce the explosion of links in a multi-
bilingual scenario, translation equivalence can be 
managed through an intermediate "Axis". This 
object can be shared in order to contain the num-
ber of links in manageable proportions. 
 
(iii) The model should cover both transfer 
and pivot approaches to translation, taking also 
into account hybrid approaches. In LMF, the 
pivot approach is implemented by a ?Sense 
Axis?. The transfer approach is implemented by 
a ?Transfer Axis?. 
 
(iv) A situation that is not very easy to deal 
with is how to represent translations to languages 
that are similar or variants. The problem arises, 
for instance, when the task is to represent transla-
tions from English to both European Portuguese 
and Brazilian Portuguese. It is difficult to con-
                                                 
4 www.papillon-dictionary.org  
5 To be more precise, Papillon uses the term "axie" 
from "axis" and "lexie". In the beginning of the LMF 
project, we used the term "axie" but after some bad 
comments about using a non-English term in a stan-
dard, we decided to use the term "axis". 
sider them as two separate languages. In fact, one 
is a variant of the other. The differences are mi-
nor: a certain number of words are different and 
some limited phenomena in syntax are different. 
Instead of managing two distinct copies, it is 
more effective to manage one lexicon with some 
objects that are marked with a dialectal attribute. 
Concerning the translation from English to Por-
tuguese: a limited number of specific Axis in-
stances record this variation and the vast major-
ity of Axis instances is shared. 
 
(v) The model should allow for representing 
the information that restricts or conditions the 
translations. The representation of tests that 
combine logical operations upon syntactic and 
semantic features must be covered. 
6.2 Structure 
The model is based on the notion of Axis that 
link Senses, Syntactic Behavior and examples 
pertaining to different languages. Axis can be 
organized at the lexicon manager convenience in 
order to link directly or indirectly objects of dif-
ferent languages. A direct link is implemented by 
a single axis. An indirect link is implemented by 
several axis and one or several relations. 
The model is based on three main classes: 
Sense Axis, Transfer Axis, Example Axis. 
6.3 Sense Axis 
Sense Axis is used to link closely related 
senses in different languages, under the same 
assumptions of the interlingual pivot approach, 
and, optionally, it can also be used to refer to one 
or several external knowledge representation sys-
tems.  
The use of the Sense Axis facilitates the repre-
sentation of the translation of words that do not 
necessarily have the same valence or morpho-
logical form in one language than in another. For 
example, in a language, we can have a single 
word that will be translated by a compound word 
into another language: English ?wheelchair? to 
Spanish ?silla de ruedas?. Sense Axis may have 
the following attributes: a label, the name of an 
external descriptive system, a reference to a spe-
cific node inside an external description. 
6.4 Sense Axis Relation 
Sense Axis Relation permits to describe the 
linking between two different Sense Axis in-
stances. The element may have attributes like 
label, view, etc. 
4
6.6 Transfer Axis Relation 
Transfer Axis Relation links two Transfer Axis 
instances. The element may have attributes like: 
label, variation. 
The label enables the coding of simple inter-
lingual relations like the specialization of 
?fleuve? compared to ?rivi?re? and ?river?. It is 
not, however, the goal of this strategy to code a 
complex system for knowledge representation, 
which ideally should be structured as a complete 
coherent system designed specifically for that 
purpose. 
6.7 Source Test and Target Test 
Source Test permits to express a condition on 
the translation on the source language side while 
Target Test does it on the target language side. 
Both elements may have attributes like: text and 
comment. 
6.5 Transfer Axis 
Transfer Axis is designed to represent multi-
lingual transfer approach. Here, linkage refers to 
information contained in syntax. For example, 
this approach enables the representation of syn-
tactic actants involving inversion, such as (1): 
6.8 Example Axis  
Example Axis supplies documentation for 
sample translations. The purpose is not to record 
large scale multilingual corpora. The goal is to 
link a Lexical Entry with a typical example of 
translation. The element may have attributes like: 
comment, source. 
 
(1) fra:?elle me manque? => 
eng:?I miss her? 
 
Due to the fact that a lexical entry can be a 
support verb, it is possible to represent transla-
tions that start from a plain verb to a support verb 
like (2) that means "Mary dreams": 
6.9 Class Model Diagram 
The UML class model is an UML package. The 
diagram for multilingual notations is as follows:  
(2)  fra:?Marie r?ve? =>  
  jpn:"Marie wa yume wo miru"  
Transfer Axis Relation
Sense Axis Relation
Syntactic Behavior
SenseExample
Transfer Axis
Example Axis
Source Test
Sense Axis
Target Test
SynSet
Sense
0..*
0..*
0..*
0..*
1
0..*
0..* 0..*
0..*
0..*
1
0..*
1
0..1
1
0..*
0..1
1
1
0..*
1
0..*
1
0..*
5
7 Three examples 
7.1 First example 
The first example is about the interlingual ap-
proach with two axis instances to represent a 
near match between "fleuve" in French and 
"river" in English. In the diagram, French is lo-
cated on the left side and English on the right 
side. The axis on the top is not linked directly to 
any English sense because this notion does not 
exist in English.  
: Sense Axis Relation
comment = flows into the sea
label = more precise
: Sense
label = eng:riverlabel = fra:rivi?re
: Sense
: Sense
label = fra:fleuve
: Sense Axis
: Sense Axis
 
 
7.2 Second example 
Let's see now an example about the transfer 
approach about slight variations between vari-
ants. The example is about English on one side 
and European Portuguese and Brazilian on the 
other side. Due to the fact that these two last 
variants have a very similar syntax, but with 
some local exceptions, the goal is to avoid a full 
and dummy duplication. For instance, the nomi-
native forms of the third person clitics are largely 
preferred in Brazilian rather than the oblique 
form as in European Portuguese. The transfer 
axis relations hold a label to distinguish which 
axis to use depending on the target object. 
 
: Transfer Axis Relation
label = European Portuguese
: Transfer Axis Relation
label = Brazilian
: Syntactic Behavior
label = let me see
: Syntactic Behavior
label = Deixa eu ver
: Syntactic Behavior
label = Deixa-me ver
: Transfer Axis
: Transfer Axis
: Transfer Axis
 
7.3 Third example 
A third example shows how to use the Trans-
fer Axis relation to relate different information in 
a multilingual transfer lexicon. It represents the 
translation of the English ?develop? into Italian 
and Spanish. Recall that the more general sense 
links ?eng:develop? and ?esp:desarrollar?. Both, 
Spanish and Italian, have restrictions that should 
6
be tested in the source language: if the second 
argument of the construction refers to certain 
elements (picture, mentalCreation, building) it 
should be translated into specific verbs.  
 
: Source Test
semanticRestriction = eng:mentalCreation
syntacticArgument = 2
: Source Test
semanticRestriction = eng:picture
syntacticArgument = 2
: Source Test
semanticRestriction = eng:building
syntacticArgument = 2
: Transfer Axis Relation
: Transfer Axis Relation
: Transfer Axis Relation
: Syntactic Behavior
label = esp:revelar
: Syntactic Behavior
label = ita:sviluppare
: Syntactic Behavior
label = ita:costruire
: Syntactic Behavior
label = eng:develop
: Syntactic Behavior
label = esp:construir
: Syntactic Behavior
label = esp:desarrollar
: Transfer Axis
: Transfer Axis
: Transfer Axis
: Transfer Axis
 
8 LMF in XML  
During the last three years, the ISO group fo-
cused on the UML specification. In the last ver-
sion of the LMF document [LMF 2006] a DTD 
has been provided as an informative annex. The 
following conventions are adopted: 
? each UML attribute is transcoded as a 
DC (for Data Category) element 
? each UML class is transcoded as an 
XML element 
? UML aggregations are transcoded as 
content inclusion 
? UML shared associations (i.e. associa-
tions that are not aggregations) are 
transcoded as IDREF(S) 
The first example (i.e. "river") can be represented 
with the following XML tags: 
 
 
<Database> 
<!?   French section ? 
<Lexicon> 
<LexiconInformation 
<DC att="name" val=?French Extract?/> 
<DC att="language" val="fra"/> 
</LexiconInformation> 
<LexicalEntry > 
<DC att="partOfSpeech" val=?noun?/> 
<LemmatisedForm> 
<DC att="writtenForm" val=?fleuve?/> 
</LemmatisedForm> 
<Sense id=?fra.fleuve1?> 
 <SemanticDefinition> 
                  <DC att="text" 
val=?Grande rivi?re lorsqu'elle aboutit ? la mer?/> 
<DC att="source" val=?Le Petit Robert 2003?/> 
</SemanticDefinition> 
</Sense> 
</LexicalEntry> 
<LexicalEntry> 
<DC att="partOfSpeech" val=?noun?/> 
<LemmatisedForm> 
  <DC att="writtenForm" val=?rivi?re?/> 
</LemmatisedForm> 
<Sense id=?fra.riviere1?> 
 <SemanticDefinition> 
<DC att="text"  
val=?Cours d'eau naturel de moyenne importance?/> 
<DC att="source" val=?Le Petit Robert 2003?/> 
</SemanticDefinition> 
</Sense> 
</LexicalEntry> 
</Lexicon> 
<!?                                                 Multilingual section ? 
<SenseAxis id=?A1? senses="fra.fleuve1"> 
7
<SenseAxisRelation targets="A2"> 
 <DC att="comment" val="flows into the sea"/> 
 <DC att="label" val="more precise"/> 
</SenseAxisRelation> 
</SenseAxis> 
<SenseAxis id=?A2? senses="fra.riviere1 eng.river1"/> 
<!?                                                English section ? 
<Lexicon> 
<LexiconInformation> 
<DC att="name" val=?English Extract?/> 
<DC att="language" val="eng"/> 
</LexiconInformation> 
<LexicalEntry> 
<DC att="partOfSpeech" val=?noun?/> 
<LemmatisedForm> 
<DC att="writtenForm" val=?river?/> 
</LemmatisedForm> 
<Sense id=?eng.river1?> 
 <SemanticDefinition> 
<DC att="text" 
val=?A natural and continuous flow of water in a long 
line across a country into the sea?/> 
<DC att="source" val=?Longman DCE 2005?/> 
</SemanticDefinition> 
</Sense> 
</LexicalEntry> 
</Lexicon> 
</Database> 
 
 
9 Comparison 
A serious comparison with previously existing 
models is not possible in this current paper due 
to the lack of space. We advice the interested 
colleague to consult the technical report "Ex-
tended examples of lexicons using LMF" located 
at:  "http://lirics.loria.fr" in the document area. 
The report explains how to use LMF in order to 
represent OLIF-2, Parole/Clips, LC-Star, Word-
Net, FrameNet and BD?f. 
10 Conclusion 
In this paper we presented the results of the 
ongoing research activity of the LMF ISO stan-
dard. The design of a common and standardized 
framework for multilingual lexical databases will 
contribute to the optimization of the use of lexi-
cal resources, specially their reusability for dif-
ferent applications and tasks. Interoperability is 
the condition of a effective deployment of usable 
lexical resources. 
In order to reach a consensus, the work done 
has paid attention to the similarities and differ-
ences of existing lexicons and the models behind 
them. 
Acknowledgements 
The work presented here is partially funded by 
the EU eContent-22236 LIRICS project 6 , par-
tially by the French TECHNOLANGUE 7 + 
OUTILEX8 programs. 
References 
Antoni-Lay M-H., Francopoulo G., Zaysser L. 1994 
A generic model for reusable lexicons: the 
GENELEX project. Literary and linguistic comput-
ing 9(1) 47-54 
Bertagna F., Lenci A., Monachini M., Calzolari N. 
2004 Content interoperability of lexical resources, 
open issues and MILE perspectives LREC Lisbon 
Francopoulo G., George M., Calzolari N., Monachini 
M., Bel N., Pet M., Soria C. 2006 Lexical Markup 
Framework (LMF) LREC Genoa. 
LMF 2006 Lexical Markup Framework ISO-
CD24613-revision-9, ISO Geneva 
Rumbaugh J., Jacobson I.,Booch G. 2004 The unified 
modeling language reference manual, second edi-
tion, Addison Wesley 
S?rasset G., Mangeot-Lerebours M. 2001 Papillon 
Lexical Database project: monolingual dictionaries 
& interlingual links NLPRS Tokyo 
                                                 
6 http://lirics.loria.fr 
7 www.technolangue.net 
8 www.at-lci.com/outilex/outilex.html 
8
Proceedings of the Workshop on Multilingual Language Resources and Interoperability, pages 17?24,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Towards Agent-based Cross-lingual Interoperability of Distributed    
Lexical Resources 
Claudia Soria* Maurizio Tesconi? Andrea Marchetti?
Francesca Bertagna* Monica Monachini*
Chu-Ren Huang?    Nicoletta Calzolari*
*CNR-ILC and ?CNR-IIT 
Via Moruzzi 1, 56024 Pisa 
Italy 
{firstname.lastname@ilc.cnr.it} 
{firstname.lastname@iit.cnr.it} 
?Academia Sinica  
Nankang, Taipei  
Taiwan 
churen@gate.sinica.edu.tw 
 
  
 
Abstract 
In this paper we present an application 
fostering the integration and interopera-
bility of computational lexicons, focusing 
on the particular case of mutual linking 
and cross-lingual enrichment of two wor-
dnets, the ItalWordNet and Sinica BOW 
lexicons. This is intended as a case-study 
investigating the needs and requirements 
of semi-automatic integration and inter-
operability of lexical resources. 
1 Introduction 
In this paper we present an application fostering 
the integration and interoperability of computa-
tional lexicons, focusing on the particular case of 
mutual linking and cross-lingual enrichment of 
two wordnets. The development of this applica-
tion is intended as a case-study and a test-bed for 
trying out needs and requirements posed by the 
challenge of semi-automatic integration and en-
richment of practical, large-scale multilingual 
lexicons for use in computer applications. While 
a number of lexicons already exist, few of them 
are practically useful, either since they are not 
sufficiently broad or because they don?t cover 
the necessary level of detailed information. 
Moreover, multilingual language resources are 
not as widely available and are very costly to 
construct: the work process for manual develop-
ment of new lexical resources or for tailoring 
existing ones is too expensive in terms of effort 
and time to be practically attractive.  
The need of ever growing lexical resources for 
effective multilingual content processing has 
urged the language resource community to call 
for a radical change in the perspective of lan-
guage resource creation and maintenance and the 
design of a ?new generation? of LRs: from static, 
closed and locally developed resources to shared 
and distributed language services, based on open 
content interoperability standards. This has often 
been called a ?change in paradigm? (in the sense 
of Kuhn, see Calzolari and Soria, 2005; Calzolari 
2006). Leaving aside the tantalizing task of 
building on-site resources, the new paradigm 
depicts a scenario where lexical resources are 
cooperatively built as the result of controlled co-
operation of different agents, adopting the para-
digm of accumulation of knowledge so success-
ful in more mature disciplines, such as biology 
and physics (Calzolari, 2006).  
According to this view (or, better, this vision), 
different lexical resources reside over distributed 
places and can not only be accessed but choreo-
graphed by agents presiding the actions that can 
be executed over them. This implies the ability to 
build on each other achievements, to merge re-
sults, and to have them accessible to various sys-
tems and applications. 
At the same time, there is another argument in 
favor of distributed lexical resources: language 
resources, lexicons included, are inherently dis-
tributed because of the diversity of languages 
distributed over the world. It is not only natural 
that language resources to be developed and 
maintained in their native environment. Since 
language evolves and changes over time, it is not 
possible to describe the current state of the lan-
17
guage away from where the language is spoken. 
Lastly, the vast range of diversity of languages 
also makes it impossible to have one single uni-
versal centralized resource, or even a centralized 
repository of resources. 
Although the paradigm of distributed and in-
teroperable lexical resources has largely been 
discussed and invoked, very little has been made 
in comparison for the development of new meth-
ods and techniques for its practical realization. 
Some initial steps are made to design frame-
works enabling inter-lexica access, search, inte-
gration and operability. An example is the Lexus 
tool (Kemps-Snijders et al, 2006), based on the 
Lexical Markup Framework (Romary et al, 
2006), that goes in the direction of managing the 
exchange of data among large-scale lexical re-
sources. A similar tool, but more tailored to the 
collaborative creation of lexicons for endangered 
language, is SHAWEL (Gulrajani and Harrison, 
2002). However, the general impression is that 
little has been made towards the development of 
new methods and techniques for attaining a con-
crete interoperability among lexical resources. 
Admittedly, this is a long-term scenario requiring 
the contribution of many different actors and ini-
tiatives (among which we only mention stan-
dardisation, distribution and international coop-
eration).  
Nevertheless, the intent of our project is to 
contribute to fill in this gap, by exploring in a 
controlled way the requirement and implications 
posed by new generation multilingual lexical 
resources. The paper is organized as follows: 
section 2 describes the general architectural de-
sign of our project; section 3 describes the mod-
ule taking care of cross-lingual integration of 
lexical resources, by also presenting a case-study 
involving an Italian and Chinese lexicons. Fi-
nally, section 4 presents our considerations and 
lessons learned on the basis of this exploratory 
testing. 
2 An Architecture for Integrating Lexi-
cal Resources 
 LeXFlow (Soria et al, 2006) was developed 
having in mind the long-term goal of lexical re-
source interoperability. In a sense, LeXFlow is 
intended as a proof of concept attempting to 
make the vision of an infrastructure for access 
and sharing of linguistic resources more tangible. 
LeXFlow is an adaptation to computational 
lexicons of XFlow, a cooperative web applica-
tion for the management of document workflows 
(DW, Marchetti et al, 2005). A DW can be seen 
as a process of cooperative authoring where a 
document can be the goal of the process or just a 
side effect of the cooperation. Through a DW, a 
document life-cycle is tracked and supervised, 
continually providing control over the actions 
leading to document compilation. In this envi-
ronment a document travels among agents who 
essentially carry out the pipeline receive-process-
send activity.  
There are two types of agents: external agents 
are human or software actors performing activi-
ties dependent from the particular Document 
Workflow Type; internal agents are software 
actors providing general-purpose activities useful 
for many DWTs and, for this reason, imple-
mented directly into the system. Internal agents 
perform general functionalities such as creat-
ing/converting a document belonging to a par-
ticular DW, populating it with some initial data, 
duplicating a document to be sent to multiple 
agents, splitting a document and sending portions 
of information to different agents, merging du-
plicated documents coming from multiple agents, 
aggregating fragments, and finally terminating 
operations over the document. External agents 
basically execute some processing using the 
document content and possibly other data; for 
instance, accessing an external database or 
launching an application.  
LeXFlow was born by tailoring XFlow to 
management of lexical entries; in doing so, we 
have assumed that each lexical entry can be 
modelled as a document instance, whose behav-
iour can be formally specified by means of a 
lexical workflow type (LWT). A LWT describes 
the life-cycle of a lexical entry, the agents al-
lowed to act over it, the actions to be performed 
by the agents, and the order in which the actions 
are to be executed. Embracing the view of coop-
erative workflows, agents can have different 
rights or views over the same entry: this nicely 
suits the needs of lexicographic work, where we 
can define different roles (such as encoder, anno-
tator, validator) that can be played by either hu-
man or software agents. Other software modules 
can be inserted in the flow, such as an automatic 
acquirer of information from corpora or from the 
web. Moreover, deriving from a tool designed 
for the cooperation of agents, LeXFlow allows to 
manage workflows where the different agents 
can reside over distributed places.  
LeXFlow thus inherits from XFlow the gen-
eral design and architecture, and can be consid-
ered as a specialized version of it through design 
18
of specific Lexical Workflow Types and plug-in 
of dedicated external software agents. In the next 
section we briefly illustrate a particular Lexical 
Workflow Type and the external software agents 
developed for the purpose of integrating different 
lexicons belonging to the same language. Since it 
allows the independent and coordinated sharing 
of actions over portions of lexicons, LeXFlow 
naturally lends itself as a tool for the manage-
ment of distributed lexical resources. 
Due to its versatility, LeXFlow is both a gen-
eral framework where ideas on automatic lexical 
resource integration can be tested and an infra-
structure for proving new methods for coopera-
tion among lexicon experts. 
2.1 Using LeXFlow for Lexicon Enrichment 
In previous work (Soria et al, 2006),  the LeX-
Flow framework has been tested for integration 
of lexicons with differently conceived lexical 
architectures and diverging formats. It was 
shown how interoperability is possible between 
two Italian lexicons from the SIMPLE and 
WordNet families, respectively, namely the 
SIMPLE/CLIPS (Ruimy et al, 2003) and Ital-
WordNet (Roventini et al, 2003) lexicons.  
In particular, a Lexical Workflow Type was 
designed where the two different monolingual 
semantic lexicons interact by reciprocally enrich-
ing themselves and moreover integrate informa-
tion coming from corpora. This LWT, called 
?lexicon augmentation?, explicitly addresses dy-
namic augmentation of semantic lexicons. In this 
scenario, an entry of a lexicon A becomes en-
riched via basically two steps. First, by virtue of 
being mapped onto a corresponding entry be-
longing to a lexicon B, the entryA inherits the 
semantic relations available in the mapped en-
tryB. Second, by resorting to an automatic appli-
cation that acquires information about semantic 
relations from corpora, the acquired relations are 
integrated into the entry and proposed to the hu-
man encoder. 
B
An overall picture of the flow is shown in 
Figure 1, illustrating the different agents partici-
pating in the flow. Rectangles represent human 
actors over the entries, while the other figures 
symbolize software agents: ovals are internal 
agents and octagons external ones. The two ex-
ternal agents involved in this flow are the ?rela-
tion calculator? and the ?corpora extractor?. The 
first is responsible for the mapping between the 
sets of semantic relations used by the different 
lexicons. The ?corpora extractor? module in-
vokes an application that acquires information 
about part-of relations by identifying syntactic 
constructions in a vast Italian corpus. It then 
takes care of creating the appropriate candidate 
semantic relations for each lemma that is pro-
posed by the application. 
Figure 1. Lexicons Augmentation Workflow 
Type. 
A prototype of LeXFlow has been imple-
mented with an extensive use of XML technolo-
gies (XML Schema, XSLT, XPath, XForms, 
SVG) and open-source tools (Cocoon, Tomcat, 
mySQL). It is a web-based application where 
human agents interact with the system through 
an XForms browser that displays the document 
to process as a web form whereas software 
agents interact with the system via web services. 
3 Multilingual WN Service 
In the Section above we have illustrated the gen-
eral architecture of LeXFlow and showed how a 
Lexical Workflow Type can be implemented in 
order to enrich already existing lexicons belong-
ing to the same language but realizing different 
models of lexicon encoding. In this section we 
move to a cross-lingual perspective of lexicon 
integration. We present a module that similarly 
addresses the issue of lexicon augmentation or 
enrichment focusing on mutual enrichment of 
two wordnets in different languages and residing 
at different sites. 
This module, named ?multilingual WN Ser-
vice? is responsible for the automatic cross-
lingual fertilization of lexicons having a Word-
19
Net-like structure. Put it very simply, the idea 
behind this module is that a monolingual word-
net can be enriched by accessing the semantic 
information encoded in corresponding entries of 
other monolingual wordnets.  
Since each entry in the monolingual lexicons 
is linked to the Interlingual Index (ILI, cf. Sec-
tion 3.1), a synset of a WN(A) is indirectly 
linked to another synset in another WN(B). On 
the basis of this correspondence, a synset(A) can 
be enriched by importing the relations that the 
corresponding synset(B) holds with other syn-
sets(B), and vice-versa. Moreover, the enrich-
ment of WN(A) will not only import the relations 
found in WN(B), but it will also propose target 
synsets in the language(A) on the basis of those 
found in language(B). 
The various WN lexicons reside over distrib-
uted servers and can be queried through web ser-
vice interfaces. The overall architecture for mul-
tilingual wordnet service is depicted in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2. Multilingual Wordnet Service Archi-
tecture. 
 
Put in the framework of the general LeXFlow 
architecture, the Multilingual wordnet Service 
can be seen as an additional external software 
agent that can be added to the augmentation 
workflow or included in other types of lexical 
flows. For instance, it can be used not only to 
enrich a monolingual lexicon but to bootstrap a 
bilingual lexicon. 
3.1 Linking Lexicons through the ILI  
The entire mechanism of the Multilingual WN 
Service is based on the exploitation of Interlin-
gual Index (Peters et al, 1998), an unstructured 
version of WordNet used in EuroWordNet 
(Vossen et al, 1998) to link wordnets of different 
languages; each synset in the language-specific 
wordnet is linked to at least one record of the ILI 
by means of a set of equivalence relations 
(among which the most important is the 
EQ_SYNONYM, that expresses a total, perfect 
equivalence between two synsets).  
Figure 6 describes the schema of a WN lexical 
entry. Under the root ?synset? we find both in-
ternal relations (?synset relations?) and ILI Rela-
tions, which link to ILI synsets. 
Figure 3 shows the role played by the ILI as 
set of pivot nodes allowing the linkage between 
concepts belonging to different wordnets.  
 
 
Figure 3. Interlingual Linking of Language-
specific Synsets. 
 
In the Multilingual WN Service, only equiva-
lence relations of type EQ_SYNONYM and 
EQ_NEAR_SYNONYM have been taken into ac-
count, being them the ones used to represent a 
translation of concepts and also because they are 
the most exploited (for example, in IWN, they 
cover about the 60% of the encoded equivalence 
relations). The EQ_SYNONYM relation is used to 
realize the one-to-one mapping between the lan-
guage-specific synset and the ILI, while multiple 
EQ_NEAR_SYNONYM relations (because of their 
nature) might be encoded to link a single lan-
guage-specific synset to more than one ILI re-
cord. In Figure 4 we represented the possible 
relevant combinations of equivalence relations 
that can realize the mapping between synsets 
belonging to two languages. In all the four cases, 
a synset ?a? is linked via the ILI record to a syn-
set ?b? but a specific procedure has been fore-
seen in order to calculate different ?plausibility 
scores? to each situation. The procedure relies on 
different rates assigned to the two equivalence 
relations (rate ?1? to EQ_NEAR_SYNONYM rela-
tion and rate ?0? to the EQ_SYNONYM). In this 
way we can distinguish the four cases by assign-
ing respectively a weight of ?0?, ?1?, ?1? and 
?2?. 
20
  
Figure 4. Possible Combinations of Relations 
between two Lexicons A and B and the ILI. 
 
The ILI is a quite powerful yet simple method 
to link concepts across the many lexicons be-
longing to the WordNet-family. Unfortunately, 
no version of the ILI can be considered a stan-
dard and often the various lexicons exploit dif-
ferent version of WordNet as ILI 1 . This is a 
problem that is handled at web-service level, by 
incorporating the conversion tables provided by 
(Daud? et al, 2001). In this way, the use of dif-
ferent versions of WN does not have to be taken 
into consideration by the user who accesses the 
system but it is something that is resolved by the 
system itself2. This is why the version of the ILI 
is a parameter of the query to web service (see 
Section below). 
3.2 Description of the Procedure 
On the basis of ILI linking, a synset can be en-
riched by importing the relations contained in the 
corresponding synsets belonging to another 
wordnet. 
In the procedure adopted, the enrichment is 
performed on a synset-by-synset basis. In other 
words, a certain synset is selected from a word-
net resource, say WN(A). The cross-lingual mod-
ule identifies the corresponding ILI synset, on 
the basis of the information encoded in the syn-
set. It then sends a query to the WN(B) web ser-
vice providing the ID of ILI synset together with 
the ILI version of the starting WN. The WN(B) 
web service returns the synset(s) corresponding 
to the WN(A) synset, together with reliability 
scores. If WN(B) is based on a different ILI ver-
sion, it can carry out the mapping between ILI 
versions (for instance by querying the ILI map-
ping web service). The cross-lingual module then 
analyzes the synset relations encoded in the 
                                                 
1 For example, the Chinese and the Italian wordnets consid-
ered as our case-study use respectively versions 1.6 and 1.5. 
2 It should be noted, however, that the conversion between 
different WN versions could not be accurate so the mapping 
is always proposed with a probability score.
WN(B) synset and for each of them creates a 
new synset relation for the WN(A) synset. 
If the queried wordnets do not use the same set 
of synset relations, the module must take care of 
the mapping between different relation sets. In  
our case-study no mapping was needed, since the 
two sets were completely equivalent.   
Each new relation is obtained by substituting 
the target WN(B)  synset  with the corresponding 
synset WN(A), which again is found by querying 
back the WN(A) web service (all these steps 
through the ILI). The procedure is formally de-
fined by the following formula: 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Finding New Relations. 
 
Every local wordnet has to provide a web ser-
vice API  with the following methods: 
 
1. GetWeightedSynsetsByIli(ILIid, ILIversion) 
2. GetSynsetById(sysnsetID) 
3. GetSynsetsByLemma(lemma) 
 
21
The returned synsets of each method must be 
formatted in XML following the schema de-
picted in Figure 6: 
 
Figure 6. Schema of Wordnet Synsets Returned 
by WN Web Services. 
 
The scores returned by the method ?Get-
WeightedSynsetsByIli? are used by our module 
to calculate the reliability rating for each new 
proposed relation. 
3.3 A Case Study: Cross-fertilization be-
tween Italian and Chinese Wordnets. 
We explore this idea with a case-study involving 
the ItalianWordNet (Roventini et al, 2003) and 
the Academia Sinica Bilingual Ontological 
Wordnet (Sinica BOW, Huang et al, 2004).  
The BOW integrates three resources: Word-
Net, English-Chinese Translation Equivalents 
Database (ECTED), and SUMO (Suggested Up-
per Merged Ontology). With the integration of 
these three key resources, Sinica BOW functions 
both as an English-Chinese bilingual wordnet 
and a bilingual lexical access to SUMO. Sinica 
Bow currently has two bilingual versions, corre-
sponding to WordNet 1.6. and 1.7. Based on 
these bootstrapped versions, a Chinese Wordnet 
(CWN, Huang et al 2005) is under construction 
with handcrafted senses and lexical semantic re-
lations. For the current experiment, we have used 
the version linking to WordNet 1.6. 
ItalWordNet was realized as an extension of 
the Italian component of EuroWordNet. It com-
prises a general component consisting of about 
50,000 synsets and terminological wordnets 
linked to the generic wordnet by means of a spe-
cific set of relations. Each synset of ItalWordNet 
is linked to the Interlingual-Index (ILI). 
The two lexicons refer to different versions of 
the ILI (1.5 for IWN and 1.6 for BOW), thus 
making it necessary to provide a mapping be-
tween the two versions. On the other hand, no 
mapping is necessary for the set of synset rela-
tions used, since both of them adopt the same set. 
For the purposes of evaluating the cross-
lingual module, we have developed two web-
services for managing a subset of the two re-
sources.  
The following Figure shows a very simple ex-
ample where our procedure discovers and pro-
poses a new meronymy relation for the Italian 
synset {passaggio,strada,via}. This synset is 
equivalent to the ILI ?road,route? that is ILI-
connected with BOW synset ???,? ,?? (da-
o_lu, dao, lu) (Figure 7, A) . The Chinese synset 
has a meronymy relation with the synset ???
??? (wan) (B). This last  synset is equivalent 
to the ILI ?bend, crook, turn? that is ILI-
connected with Italian WordNet synset ?curva-
tura, svolta, curva? (C). Therefore the procedure 
will propose a new candidate meronymy relation 
between the two Italian WordNet synsets (D). 
 
 
Figure 7. Example of a New Proposed Mero-
nymy Relation for Italian. 
3.4 Considerations and Lessons Learned 
Given the diversity of the languages for which 
wordnets exist, we note that it is difficult to im-
plement an operational standard across all typo-
logically different languages. Work on enriching 
and merging multilingual resources presupposes 
that the resources involved are all encoded with 
the same standard. However, even with the best 
efforts of the NLP community, there are only a 
small number of language resources encoded in 
any given standard. In the current work, we pre-
suppose a de-facto standard, i.e. a shared and 
conventionalized architecture, the WordNet one. 
Since the WordNet framework is both conven-
tionalized and widely followed, our system is 
22
able to rely on it without resorting to a more sub-
stantial and comprehensive standard. In the case, 
for instance, of integration of lexicons with dif-
ferent underlying linguistic models, the availabil-
ity of the MILE (Calzolari et al, 2003) was an 
essential prerequisite of our work. Nevertheless, 
even from the perspective of the same model, a 
certain degree of standardization is required, at 
least at the format level. 
From a more general point of view, and even 
from the perspective of a limited experiment 
such as the one described in this paper, we must 
note that the realization of the new vision of dis-
tributed and interoperable language resources is 
strictly intertwined with at least two prerequi-
sites. On the one side, the language resources 
need to be available over the web; on the other, 
the language resource community will have to 
reconsider current distribution policies, and to 
investigate the possibility of developing an 
?Open Source? concept for LRs. 
4 Conclusion 
Our proposal to make distributed wordnets inter-
operable has the following applications in proc-
essing of lexical resources: 
 
? Enriching existing resources: informa-
tion is often not complete in any given 
wordnet: by making two wordnets inter-
operable, we can bootstrap semantic rela-
tions and other information from other 
wordnets. 
? Creation of new resources: multilingual 
lexicons can be bootstrapped by linking 
different language wordnets through ILI. 
? Validation of existing resources: seman-
tic relation information and other synset 
assignments can be validated when it is re-
inforced by data from a different wordnet. 
In particular, our work can be proposed as a 
prototype of a web application that would sup-
port the Global WordNet Grid initiative 
(www.globalwordnet.org/gwa/gwa_grid.htm).  
Any multilingual process, such as cross-
lingual information retrieval, must involve both 
resources and tools in a specific language and 
language pairs. For instance, a multilingual query 
given in Italian but intended for querying Eng-
lish, Chinese, French, German, and Russian 
texts, can be send to five different nodes on the 
Grid for query expansion, as well as performing 
the query itself. In this way, language specific 
query techniques can be applied in parallel to 
achieve best results that can be integrated in the 
future. As multilingualism clearly becomes one 
of the major challenges of the future of web-
based knowledge engineering, WordNet emerges 
as one leading candidate for a shared platform 
for representing a lexical knowledge model for 
different languages of the world. This is true 
even if it has to be recognized that the wordnet 
model is lacking in some important semantic in-
formation (like, for instance, a way to represent 
the semantic predicate). However, such knowl-
edge and resources are distributed. In order to 
create a shared multi-lingual knowledge base for 
cross-lingual processing based on these distrib-
uted resources, an initiative to create a grid-like 
structure has been recently proposed and pro-
moted by the Global WordNet Association, but 
until now has remained a wishful thinking. The 
success of this initiative will depend on whether 
there will be tools to access and manipulate the 
rich internal semantic structure of distributed 
multi-lingual WordNets. We believe that our 
work on LeXFlow offers such a tool to provide 
inter-operable web-services to access distributed 
multilingual WordNets on the grid. 
This allows us to exploit in a cross-lingual 
framework the wealth of monolingual lexical 
information built in the last decade. 
5 References 
Nicoletta Calzolari, Francesca Bertagna, Alessandro 
Lenci and Monica Monachini, editors. 2003. Stan-
dards and Best Practice for Multilingual Computa-
tional Lexicons. MILE (the Multilingual ISLE 
Lexical Entry). ISLE CLWG Deliverable D2.2 & 
3.2. Pisa. 
Nicoletta Calzolari and Claudia Soria. 2005. A New 
Paradigm for an Open Distributed Language Re-
source Infrastructure: the Case of Computational 
Lexicons. In Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Sym-
posium ?Knowledge Collection from Volunteer 
Contributors (KCVC05)?, pages 110-114, Stan-
ford, CA. 
Nicoletta Calzolari. 2006. Technical and Strategic 
issues on Language Resources for a Research In-
frastructure In Proceedings of the International 
Symposium on Large-scale Knowledge Resources 
(LKR2006), pages 53-58, Tokyo, Tokyo Institute 
of Technology. 
Jordi Daud?, Lluis Padr? and German Rigau. 2001. A 
Complete WN1.5 to WN1.6 Mapping. In Proceed-
ings of NAACL Workshop "WordNet and Other 
Lexical Resources: Applications, Extensions and 
23
Customizations", pages 83-88, Pittsburg, PA, USA, 
Association for Computational Linguistics.  
Greg Gulrajani and David Harrison. 2002. SHAWEL: 
Sharable and Interactive Web-Lexicons. In Pro-
ceedings of the LREC2002 Workshop on Tools and 
Resources in Field Linguistics, pages 1-4, Las 
Palmas, Canary Islands, Spain. 
Chu-Ren Huang, Ru-Yng Chang,  and Shiang-Bin 
Lee. 2004. Sinica BOW (Bilingual Ontological 
Wordnet): Integration of Bilingual WordNet and 
SUMO. In Proceedings of LREC2004, pages 1553-
1556, Lisbon, Portugal. 
Chu-Ren Huang, Chun-Ling Chen, Cui-Xia Weng, 
Hsiang-Ping Lee, Yong-Xiang Chen and Keh-jiann 
Chen. 2005. The Sinica Sense Management Sys-
tem: Design and Implementation. Computational 
Linguistics and Chinese Language Processing. 
10(4): 417-430. 
Marc Kemps-Snijders, Mark-Jan Nederhof, and Peter 
Wittenburg. 2006. LEXUS, a web-based tool for 
manipulating lexical resources. Accepted for publi-
cation in Proceedings of LREC2006, Genoa, Italy. 
Andrea Marchetti, Maurizio Tesconi, and Salvatore 
Minutoli. 2005. XFlow: An XML-Based Docu-
ment-Centric Workflow. In Proceedings of 
WISE?05, pages 290-303, New York, NY, USA. 
Wim Peters, Piek Vossen, Pedro Diez-Orzas, and 
Geert Adriaens. 1998. Cross-linguistic Alignment 
of Wordnets with an Inter-Lingual-Index. In Nancy 
Ide, Daniel Greenstein, and Piek Vossen, editors, 
Special Issue on EuroWordNet, Computers and the 
Humanities, 32(2-3): 221-251. 
Laurent Romary, Gil Francopoulo, Monica Monachi-
ni, and Susanne Salmon-Alt 2006. Lexical Markup 
Framework (LMF): working to reach a consensual 
ISO standard on lexicons. Accepted for publication 
in Proceedings of LREC2006, Genoa, Italy. 
Adriana Roventini, Antonietta Alonge, Francesca 
Bertagna, Nicoletta Calzolari, Christian Girardi, 
Bernardo Magnini, Rita Marinelli, and Antonio 
Zampolli. 2003. ItalWordNet: Building a Large 
Semantic Database for the Automatic Treatment of 
Italian. In Antonio Zampolli, Nicoletta Calzolari, 
and Laura Cignoni, editors, Computational Lingui-
stics in Pisa, IEPI, Pisa-Roma, pages 745-791. 
Nilda Ruimy, Monica Monachini, Elisabetta Gola, 
Nicoletta Calzolari, Cristina Del Fiorentino, Marisa 
Ulivieri, and Sergio Rossi. 2003. A Computational 
Semantic Lexicon of Italian: SIMPLE. In Antonio 
Zampolli, Nicoletta Calzolari, and Laura Cignoni, 
editors, Computational Linguistics in Pisa, IEPI, 
Pisa-Roma, pages 821-864. 
Claudia Soria, Maurizio Tesconi, Francesca Bertagna, 
Nicoletta Calzolari, Andrea Marchetti, and Monica 
Monachini. 2006. Moving to Dynamic Computa-
tional Lexicons with LeXFlow. Accepted for pu-
blication in Proceedings of LREC2006, Genova, I-
taly.  
Piek Vossen. 1998. Introduction to EuroWordNet. In 
Nancy Ide, Daniel Greenstein, and Piek Vossen, 
editors, Special Issue on EuroWordNet, Computers 
and the Humanities, 32(2-3): 73-89. 
 
 
 
 
24
Proceedings of the Third Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 178?181,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
The SILT and FlaReNet International Collaboration for Interoperability
Nancy Ide
Department of Computer Science
Vassar College
Poughkeepsie, New York USA
ide@cs.vassar.edu
James Pustejovsky
Department of Computer Science
Brandeis University
Waltham, Massachusetts USA
jamesp@cs.brandeis.edu
Nicoletta Calzolari
CNR-ILC
Pisa, Italy
glottolo@ilc.cnr.it
Claudia Soria
CNR-ILC
Pisa, Italy
claudia.soria@ilc.cnr.it
Abstract
Two major projects in the U.S. and Eu-
rope have joined in a collaboration to work
toward achieving interoperability among
language resources. In the U.S., a project
entitled ?Sustainable Interoperability for
Language Technology? (SILT) has been
funded by the National Science Founda-
tion under the INTEROP program, and in
Europe, FLaReNet Fostering Language
Resources Network has been funded
by the European Commission under the
eContentPlus framework. This interna-
tional collaborative effort involves mem-
bers of the language processing commu-
nity and others working in related ar-
eas to build consensus regarding the shar-
ing of data and technologies for language
resources and applications, to work to-
wards interoperability of existing data,
and, where possible, to promote standards
for annotation and resource building. In
addition to broad-based US and European
participation, we are seeking the partici-
pation of colleagues in Asia. This pre-
sentation describing the projects and their
goals will, we hope, serve to involve mem-
bers of the community who may not have
been aware of the effort before, in particu-
lar colleagues in Asia.
1 Overview
One of today?s greatest challenges is the develop-
ment of language processing capabilities that will
enable easy and natural access to computing facil-
ities and information. Because natural language
processing (NLP) research relies heavily on such
resources to provide training data to develop lan-
guage models and optimize statistical algorithms,
language resources?including (usually large) col-
lections of language data and linguistic descrip-
tions in machine readable form, together with
tools and systems (lemmatizers, parsers, summa-
rizers, information extractors, speech recognizers,
annotation development software, etc.)? are criti-
cal to this development.
Over the past two decades, the NLP commu-
nity has invested substantial effort in the creation
of computational lexicons and compendia of se-
mantic information (e.g., framenets, ontologies,
knowledge bases) together with language corpora
annotated for all varieties of linguistic features,
which comprise the central resource for current
NLP research. However, the lack of a thorough,
well-articulated longer-term vision for language
processing research has engendered the creation of
a disjointed set of language resources and tools,
which exist in a wide variety of (often incom-
patible) formats, are often unusable with systems
other than those for which they were developed,
and utilize linguistic categories derived from dif-
ferent theoretical frameworks. Furthermore, these
expensive investments are often produced only for
one of several relatively isolated subfields (e.g.,
NLP, information retrieval, machine translation,
speech processing), or even worse, for one appli-
cation in one subfield. In addition, the high cost of
resource development has prevented the creation
of reliable, large-scale language data and anno-
tations for many phenomena, and for languages
other than English.
Interoperability of resources, tools, and frame-
works has recently come to be recognized as per-
haps the most pressing current need for language
processing research. Interoperability is especially
178
critical at this time because of the widely recog-
nized need to create and merge annotations and
information at different linguistic levels in order
to study interactions and interleave processing at
these different levels. It has also become criti-
cal because new data and tools for emerging and
strategic languages such as Chinese and Arabic as
well as minor languages are in the early stages of
development.
Two major projects in the U.S. and Europe have
joined in a collaboration to work toward achiev-
ing interoperability among language resources. In
the U.S., a project entitled ?Sustainable Interoper-
ability for Language Technology? (SILT) has been
funded by the National Science Foundation under
the INTEROP program, and in Europe, FLaReNet
Fostering Language Resources Network has been
funded by the European Commission under the
eContentPlus framework. This international col-
laborative effort involves members of the lan-
guage processing community and others working
in related areas to build consensus regarding the
sharing of data and technologies for language re-
sources and applications, to work towards inter-
operability of existing data, and, where possible,
to promote standards for annotation and resource
building. In addition to broad-based US and Eu-
ropean participation, we are seeking the participa-
tion of colleagues in Asia.
To ensure full community involvement and con-
solidation of effort, SILT and FLaReNet are estab-
lishing ties with major ongoing projects and con-
sortia, including the International Standards Orga-
nization TC37 SC4 (Language Resource Manage-
ment)1, The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C),
the Text Encoding Initiative, the ACL Special In-
terest Group on Annotation (SIGANN)2, and oth-
ers. The ultimate goal is to create an Open Lan-
guage Infrastructure (OLI) that will provide free
and open access to resources, tools, and other in-
formation that support work in the field, in order to
facilitate collaboration, accessibility for all mem-
bers of the community, and convergence toward
interoperability.
The following sections outline the goals of SILT
and FLaReNet.
1http://www.tc37sc4.org
2http://www.cs.vassar.edu/sigann
2 SILT
The creation and use of language resources spans
several related but relatively isolated disciplines,
including NLP, information retrieval, machine
translation, speech, and the semantic web. SILT?s
goal is to turn existing, fragmented technology and
resources developed within these groups in rela-
tive isolation into accessible, stable, and interop-
erable resources that can be readily reused across
several fields.
The major activities of the effort are:
? carefully surveying the field to identify the
resources, tools, and frameworks in order to
examine what exists and what needs to be
developed, and to identify those areas for
which interoperability would have the broad-
est impact in advancing research and devel-
opment and significant applications depen-
dent on them;
? identifying the major efforts on standards de-
velopment and interoperable system design
together with existing and developing tech-
nologies, and examining ways to leverage
their results to define an interoperablity in-
frastructure for both tools and data;
? analyzing innovative methods and techniques
for the creation and maintenance of language
resources in order to reduce the high costs,
increase productivity, and enable rapid devel-
opment of resources for languages that cur-
rently lack them;
? implementing proposed annotation standards
and best practices in corpora currently under
development (e.g., American National Cor-
pus3, TimeBank4) to evaluate their viability
and feed into the process of further standards
development, testing, and use of interoper-
ability frameworks (e.g., GATE5, UIMA6)
and implementation of processing modules,
and distributing all software, data, and anno-
tations.
? ensuring the broadest possible community
engagement in the development of consensus
and agreement on strategies, priorities, and
3http://www.anc.org
4http://www.timeml.org/site/timebank/timebank.html
5http://gate.ac.uk
6http://www.oasis-open.org/committees/uima/
179
best approaches for achieving broad interop-
erability by means of sessions, open meet-
ings, and special workshops at major confer-
ences in the field, together with active main-
tenance of and involvement in open web fo-
rums and Wikis;
? providing the technical expertise necessary to
turn consensus and agreement into robust in-
teroperability frameworks along with the ap-
propriate tools and resources for their broad
use and implementation by means of tutorials
and training workshops, especially for under-
graduate and graduate students in the field.
3 FLaReNet
The multilingual Europe urgently needs language
technologies in order to bridge its language bar-
riers. In order to achieve better quality and fast
development of language technologies that seam-
lessly work on all devices, for spoken and written
language alike, the European scenario now needs a
coherent and unified effort. The demand for cross-
lingual technologies is pressing, the expectations
are high, and at the same time, the field is suf-
fering from fragmentation, lack of vision and di-
rection. The main objective of FLaReNet is to
steer the process that in the near future will de-
fine the actors, the overall direction and the prac-
tical forms of collaboration in language technolo-
gies and their ?raw material?, language resources.
Under this respect, the goals of FLaReNet lie at
a higher level than those of SILT, as they are ori-
ented towards consolidating a community around
a number of key topics that, in the end, will allow
networking of language technology professionals
and their clients, as well as easy sharing of data,
corpora, language resources and tools.
From this perspective, FLaReNet has three
main lines of action:
The creation and mobilization of a unified
and committed community in the field of Lan-
guage Resources and Technologies. To this end,
FLaReNet is bringing together leading experts of
research institutions, academies, companies, fund-
ing agencies, public and private bodies, both at
European and international level, with the spe-
cific purpose of creating consensus around short,
medium and long-term strategic objectives. The
Network is currently composed of around 200 in-
dividuals belonging to academia, research insti-
tutes, industries and government.
The identification of a set of priority themes
on which to stimulate action, under the form of a
roadmap for Language Resources and Technolo-
gies. In order to avoid scattered or conflicting ef-
forts, the major players in the field of Language
Resources and Technologies need to consensually
work together and indicate a clear direction of ac-
tion and a shared policy for the next years. This
will take the form of identification of priorities of
intervention as well as short, medium, and long-
term strategic objectives at all levels, from re-
search directions to implementation choices, from
distribution and access policies to the landscape
of languages, domain and modalities covered by
Language Resources and Technologies.
The elaboration of a blueprint of priority ar-
eas for actions in the field and a coherent set of
recommendations for the policy-makers (funding
agencies especially), the business community and
the public at large. Whatever action cannot be im-
plemented on a long term without the help of the
necessary financial and political framework to sus-
tain them. This is even most true for actions re-
garding Language Resources that typically imply
a sustained effort at national level. To this end,
the FLaReNet Network will propose the priority
themes under the form of consensual recommen-
dations and a plan of action for EC Member States,
other European-wide decision makers, companies,
as well as non-EU and International organizations.
The following Thematic Areas are currently
covered by FLaReNet:
? The Chart for the area of LRs and LT in its
different dimensions
? Methods and models for LR building, reuse,
interlinking, and maintenance
? Harmonisation of formats and standards
? Definition of evaluation and validation proto-
cols and procedures
? Methods for the automatic construction and
processing of Language Resources
FLaReNet builds upon years of research and de-
velopment in the field of standards and language
resources, as well as on the achievements (both
in terms of results and community awareness),
of past EU projects such as EAGLES7, ISLE8,
7http://www.ilc.cnr.it/EAGLES/home.html
8http://www.ilc.cnr.it/EAGLES/isle/ISLE Home Page.htm
180
INTERA9, and LIRICS10. Close collaboration is
also established with many relevant ongoing EU
projects, such as CLARIN11.
9http://www.elda.org/intera
10http://lirics.loria.fr/
11http://www.clarin.eu
181
Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 145?152,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Query Expansion using LMF-Compliant Lexical Resources
Tokunaga Takenobu
Tokyo Inst. of Tech.
Dain Kaplan
Tokyo Inst. of Tech.
Nicoletta Calzolari
ILC/CNR
Monica Monachini
ILC/CNR
Claudia Soria
ILC/CNR
Virach Sornlertlamvanich
TCL, NICT
Thatsanee Charoenporn
TCL, NICT
Xia Yingju
Fujitsu R&D Center
Chu-Ren Huang
The Hong Kong Polytec. Univ.
Shu-Kai Hsieh
National Taiwan Normal Univ.
Shirai Kiyoaki
JAIST
Abstract
This paper reports prototype multilin-
gual query expansion system relying on
LMF compliant lexical resources. The
system is one of the deliverables of a
three-year project aiming at establish-
ing an international standard for language
resources which is applicable to Asian
languages. Our important contributions
to ISO 24613, standard Lexical Markup
Framework (LMF) include its robustness
to deal with Asian languages, and its ap-
plicability to cross-lingual query tasks, as
illustrated by the prototype introduced in
this paper.
1 Introduction
During the last two decades corpus-based ap-
proaches have come to the forefront of NLP re-
search. Since without corpora there can be no
corpus-based research, the creation of such lan-
guage resources has also necessarily advanced
as well, in a mutually beneficial synergetic re-
lationship. One of the advantages of corpus-
based approaches is that the techniques used
are less language specific than classical rule-
based approaches where a human analyses the
behaviour of target languages and constructs
rules manually. This naturally led the way
for international resource standardisation, and in-
deed there is a long standing precedent in the
West for it. The Human Language Technol-
ogy (HLT) society in Europe has been particu-
larly zealous in this regard, propelling the cre-
ation of resource interoperability through a se-
ries of initiatives, namely EAGLES (Sanfilippo et
al., 1999), PAROLE/SIMPLE (Lenci et al, 2000),
ISLE/MILE (Ide et al, 2003), and LIRICS1. These
1http://lirics.loria.fr/
continuous efforts have matured into activities in
ISO-TC37/SC42, which aims at making an inter-
national standard for language resources.
However, due to the great diversity of languages
themselves and the differing degree of technolog-
ical development for each, Asian languages, have
received less attention for creating resources than
their Western counterparts. Thus, it has yet to be
determined if corpus-based techniques developed
for well-computerised languages are applicable on
a broader scale to all languages. In order to effi-
ciently develop Asian language resources, utilis-
ing an international standard in this creation has
substantial merits.
We launched a three-year project to create an
international standard for language resources that
includes Asian languages. We took the following
approach in seeking this goal.
? Based on existing description frameworks,
each research member tries to describe sev-
eral lexical entries and find problems with
them.
? Through periodical meetings, we exchange
information about problems found and gen-
eralise them to propose solutions.
? Through an implementation of an application
system, we verify the effectiveness of the pro-
posed framework.
Below we summarise our significant contribution
to an International Standard (ISO24613; Lexical
Markup Framework: LMF).
1st year After considering many characteristics
of Asian languages, we elucidated the shortcom-
ings of the LMF draft (ISO24613 Rev.9). The
draft lacks the following devices for Asian lan-
guages.
2http://www.tc37sc4.org/
145
(1) A mapping mechanism between syntactic
and semantic arguments
(2) Derivation (including reduplication)
(3) Classifiers
(4) Orthography
(5) Honorifics
Among these, we proposed solutions for (1) and
(2) to the ISO-TC37 SC4 working group.
2nd year We proposed solutions for above the
(2), (3) and (4) in the comments of the Committee
Draft (ISO24613 Rev. 13) to the ISO-TC37 SC4
working group. Our proposal was included in DIS
(Draft International Standard).
(2?) a package for derivational morphology
(3?) the syntax-semantic interface resolving the
problem of classifiers
(4?) representational issues with the richness of
writing systems in Asian languages
3rd year Since ISO 24613 was in the FDIS stage
and fairly stable, we built sample lexicons in Chi-
nese, English, Italian, Japanese, and Thai based
on ISO24613. At the same time, we implemented
a query expansion system utilising rich linguis-
tic resources including lexicons described in the
ISO 24613 framework. We confirmed that a sys-
tem was feasible which worked on the tested lan-
guages (including both Western and Asian lan-
guages) when given lexicons compliant with the
framework. ISO 24613 (LMF) was approved by
the October 2008 ballot and published as ISO-
24613:2008 on 17th November 2008.
Since we have already reported our first 2 year
activities elsewhere (Tokunaga and others, 2006;
Tokunaga and others, 2008), we focus on the
above query expansion system in this paper.
2 Query expansion using
LMF-compliant lexical resources
We evaluated the effectiveness of LMF on a mul-
tilingual information retrieval system, particularly
the effectiveness for linguistically motivated query
expansion.
The linguistically motivated query expansion
system aims to refine a user?s query by exploiting
the richer information contained within a lexicon
described using the adapted LMF framework. Our
lexicons are completely complaint with this inter-
national standard. For example, a user inputs a
keyword ?ticket? as a query. Conventional query
expansion techniques expand this keyword to a
set of related words by using thesauri or ontolo-
gies (Baeza-Yates and Ribeiro-Neto, 1999). Using
the framework proposed by this project, expand-
ing the user?s query becomes a matter of following
links within the lexicon, from the source lexical
entry or entries through predicate-argument struc-
tures to all relevant entries (Figure 1). We focus
on expanding the user inputted list of nouns to rel-
evant verbs, but the reverse would also be possible
using the same technique and the same lexicon.
This link between entries is established through
the semantic type of a given sense within a lexical
entry. These semantic types are defined by higher-
level ontologies, such as MILO or SIMPLE (Lenci
et al, 2000) and are used in semantic predicates
that take such semantic types as a restriction ar-
gument. Since senses for verbs contain a link to
a semantic predicate, using this semantic type, the
system can then find any/all entries within the lexi-
con that have this semantic type as the value of the
restriction feature of a semantic predicate for any
of their senses. As a concrete example, let us con-
tinue using the ?ticket? scenario from above. The
lexical entry for ?ticket? might contain a semantic
type definition something like in Figure 2.
<LexicalEntry ...>
<feat att="POS" val="N"/>
<Lemma>
<feat att="writtenForm"
val="ticket"/>
</Lemma>
<Sense ...>
<feat att="semanticType"
val="ARTIFACT"/>
...
</Sense>
...
</LexicalEntry>
Figure 2: Lexical entry for ?ticket?
By referring to the lexicon, we can then derive
any actions and events that take the semantic type
?ARTIFACT? as an argument.
First all semantic predicates are searched for ar-
guments that have an appropriate restriction, in
this case ?ARTIFACT? as shown in Figure 3, and
then any lexical entries that refer to these predi-
cates are returned. An equally similar definition
would exist for ?buy?, ?find? and so on. Thus,
by referring to the predicate-argument structure of
related verbs, we know that these verbs can take
146
<LexicalEntry ...>
  <feat att="POS" val="Noun"/>
  <Lemma>
    <feat att="writtenForm" val="ticket"/>
  </Lemma>
  <Sense ...>
    <feat att="semanticType" val="ARTIFACT"/>
    ...
  </Sense>
  ...
</LexicalEntry>
User Inputs
ticket
<Sense>
<SemanticFeature>
Semantic Features of type 
"restriction" that take 
Sense's semanticType
All senses for 
matched nouns
<SemanticPredicate 
  id="pred-sell-1">
  <SemanticArgument>
    <feat att="label" val="X"/>
    <feat att="semanticRole" val="Agent"/>
    <feat att="restriction" val="Human"/>
  </SemanticArgument>
  ...
  <SemanticArgument>
    <feat att="label" val="Z"/>
    <feat att="semanticRole" val="Patient"/>
    <feat att="restriction" 
          val="ARTIFACT,LOCATION"/>
  </SemanticArgument>
</SemanticPredicate>
All Semantic Predicates 
that contain matched 
Semantic Features
<Sense>
Senses that use matched 
Semantic Predicates
<LexicalEntry ...>
  <feat att="POS" val="Verb"/>
  <Lemma>
    <feat att="writtenForm" val="sell"/>
  </Lemma>
  <Sense id="sell-1" ...>
    ...
    <PredicativeRepresentation
      predicate="pred-sell-1" ...>
  </Sense>
</LexicalEntry>
<LexicalEntry>
<SemanticPredicate>
<LexicalEntry>
System outputs
"sell", ...
For each <Sense> find all 
<SemanticArgument> that 
take this semanticType as 
a feature of type 
"restriction"
Find all verbs <LexicalEntry> 
that use these 
<SemanticPredicate>
All verbs that have 
matched Senses
Figure 1: QE Process Flow
147
<LexicalEntry ...>
<feat att="POS" val="V"/>
<Lemma>
<feat att="writtenForm"
val="sell"/>
</Lemma>
<Sense id="sell-1" ...>
<feat att="semanticType"
val="Transaction"/>
<PredicativeRepresentation
predicate="pred-sell-1"
correspondences="map-sell1">
</Sense>
</LexicalEntry>
<SemanticPredicate id="pred-sell-1">
<SemanticArgument ...>
...
<feat att="restriction"
val="ARTIFACT"/>
</SemanticArgument>
</SemanticPredicate>
Figure 3: Lexical entry for ?sell? with its semantic
predicate
?ticket? in the role of object. The system then re-
turns all relevant entries, here ?buy?, ?sell? and
?find?, in response to the user?s query. Figure 1
schematically shows this flow.
3 A prototype system in detail
3.1 Overview
To test the efficacy of the LMF-compliant lexi-
cal resources, we created a system implementing
the query expansion mechanism explained above.
The system was developed in Java for its ?com-
pile once, run anywhere? portability and its high-
availability of reusable off-the-shelf components.
On top of Java 5, the system was developed us-
ing JBoss Application Server 4.2.3, the latest stan-
dard, stable version of the product at the time of
development. To provide fast access times, and
easy traversal of relational data, a RDB was used.
The most popular free open-source database was
selected, MySQL, to store all lexicons imported
into the system, and the system was accessed, as a
web-application, via any web browser.
3.2 Database
The finalised database schema is shown in Fig-
ure 4. It describes the relationships between en-
tities, and more or less mirrors the classes found
within the adapted LMF framework, with mostly
only minor exceptions where it was efficacious for
querying the data. Due to space constraints, meta-
data fields, such as creation time-stamps have been
left out of this diagram. Since the system also al-
lows for multiple lexicons to co-exist, a lexicon id
resides in every table. This foreign key has been
highlighted in a different color, but not connected
via arrows to make the diagram easier to read. In
addition, though in actuality this foreign key is not
required for all tables, it has been inserted as a con-
venience for querying data more efficiently, even
within join tables (indicated in blue). Having mul-
tiple lexical resources co-existing within the same
database allows for several advantageous features,
and will be described later. Some tables also con-
tain a text id, which stores the original id attribute
for that element found within the XML. This is
not used in the system itself, and is stored only for
reference.
3.3 System design
As mentioned above, the application is deployed
to JBoss AS as an ear-file. The system it-
self is composed of java classes encapsulating
the data contained within the database, a Pars-
ing/Importing class for handling the LMF XML
files after they have been validated, and JSPs,
which contain HTML, for displaying the inter-
face to the user. There are three main sections
to the application: Search, Browse, and Config-
ure. Explaining last to first, the Configure section,
shown in Figure 5, allows users to create a new
lexicon within the system or append to an exist-
ing lexicon by uploading a LMF XML file from
their web browser, or delete existing lexicons that
are no longer needed/used. After import, the data
may be immediately queried upon with no other
changes to system configuration, from within both
the Browse and Search sections. Regardless of
language, the rich syntactic/semantic information
contained within the lexicon is sufficient for car-
rying out query expansion on its own.
The Browse section (Figure 6) allows the user to
select any available lexicon to see the relationships
contained within it, which contains tabs for view-
ing all noun to verb connections, a list of nouns, a
list of verbs, and a list of semantic types. Each has
appropriate links allowing the user to easily jump
to a different tab of the system. Clicking on a noun
takes them to the Search section (Figure 7). In this
section, the user may select many lexicons to per-
form query extraction on, as is visible in Figure 7.
148
semantic_link 
VARCHAR (64)
sense
sense_id
PRIMARY KEY
synset_id
FOREIGN KEY
syn_sem_correspondence_id
FOREIGN KEY
semantic_predicate_id
FOREIGN KEY
semantic_type
VARCHAR (64)
lexicon_id
FOREIGN KEY
text_id
VARCHAR (64)
lexicon_id
FOREIGN KEY
text_id
VARCHAR (100)
semantic_predicate_id
PRIMARY KEY
semantic_predicate
lexicon_id
FOREIGN KEY
text_id
VARCHAR (64)
semantic_argument_id
PRIMARY KEY
semantic_argument
value
VARCHAR (100)
attribute
VARCHAR (100)
lexicon_id
FOREIGN KEY
semantic_feature_id
PRIMARY KEY
semantic_feature
lexicon_id
FOREIGN KEY
semantic_argument_id
FOREIGN KEY
semantic_predicate_id
FOREIGN KEY
semantic_predicate_to_argument
lexicon_id
FOREIGN KEY
semantic_feature_id
FOREIGN KEY
semantic_argument_id 
FOREIGN KEY
semantic_argument_to_feature
description
TEXT
lexicon_id
FOREIGN KEY
text_id
VARCHAR (64)
synset_id
PRIMARY KEY
synset
written_form
VARCHAR (64) NOT NULL
part_of_speech
ENUM( 'Verb', 'Noun' , 'Unknown')
lexical_entry
text_id
VARCHAR (64)
entry_id 
PRIMARY KEY
lexicon_id 
FOREIGN KEY
semantic_feature
FOREIGN KEY
syntactic_feature
FOREIGN KEY
lexicon_id
FOREIGN KEY
argument_map_id
PRIMARY KEY
syn_sem_argument_map
lexicon_id
FOREIGN KEY
argument_map_id
FOREIGN KEY
syn_sem_correspondence_id 
FOREIGN KEY
syn_sem_correspondence_to_map
lexicon_id
FOREIGN KEY
text_id
VARCHAR (64)
syn_sem_correspondence_id
PRIMARY KEY
syn_sem_correspondence
lexicon_id
FOREIGN KEY
sense_id
FOREIGN KEY
entry_id
FOREIGN KEY
lexical_entry_to_sense
lexicon_id
FOREIGN KEY
text_id
VARCHAR (100)
frame_id
PRIMARY KEY
subcat_frame
lexicon_id
FOREIGN KEY
frame_id
FOREIGN KEY
sense_id
FOREIGN KEY
entry_id
FOREIGN KEY
lexical_entry_to_subcat_frame
lexicon_id
FOREIGN KEY
text_id
VARCHAR (64)
syntactic_argument_id
PRIMARY KEY
syntactic_argument
value
VARCHAR (100)
attribute
VARCHAR (100)
lexicon_id
FOREIGN KEY
syntactic_feature_id
PRIMARY KEY
syntactic_feature
lexicon_id
FOREIGN KEY
syntactic_argument_id
FOREIGN KEY
frame_id
FOREIGN KEY
subcat_frame_to_argument
lexicon_id
FOREIGN KEY
syntactic_feature_id
FOREIGN KEY
syntactic_argument_id 
FOREIGN KEY
syntactic_argument_to_feature
description
VARCHAR(128)
language
VARCHAR(64)
lexicon_id
PRIMARY KEY
lexicon
relation_type 
VARCHAR (64)
lexicon_id
FOREIGN KEY
related_sense_id
FOREIGN KEY
sense_id
FOREIGN KEY
sense_relation
Figure 4: Database schema
Figure 5: QE System - Configure Figure 6: QE System - Browse
149
Figure 7: QE System - Search
3.4 Semantic information
This new type of query expansion requires rich
lexical information. We augmented our data using
the SIMPLE ontology for semantic types, using
the same data for different languages. This had
the added benefit of allowing cross-language ex-
pansion as a result. In steps two and three of Fig-
ure 1 when senses are retrieved that take specific
semantic types as arguments, this process can be
done across all (or as many as are selected) lex-
icons in the database. Thus, results such as are
shown in Figure 7 are possible. In this figure the
Japanese word for ?nail? is entered, and results for
both selected languages, Japanese and Italian, are
returned. This feature requires the unification of
the semantic type ontology strata.
3.5 Possible extension
Next steps for the QE platform are to explore the
use of other information already defined within the
adapted framework, specifically sense relations.
Given to the small size of our sample lexicon, data
sparsity is naturally an issue, but hopefully by ex-
ploring and exploiting these sense relations prop-
erly, the system may be able to further expand a
user?s query to include a broader range of selec-
tions using any additional semantic types belong-
ing to these related senses. The framework also
contains information about the order in which syn-
tactic arguments should be placed. This informa-
tion should be used to format the results from the
user?s query appropriately.
4 An Additional Evaluation
We conducted some additional query expansion
experiments using a corpus that was acquired from
Chinese LDC (No. ?2004-863-009?) as a base (see
below). This corpus marked an initial achievement
in building a multi-lingual parallel corpus for sup-
porting development of cross-lingual NLP appli-
cations catering to the Beijing 2008 Olympics.
The corpus contains parallel texts in Chinese,
English and Japanese and covers 5 domains that
are closely related to the Olympics: traveling, din-
ing, sports, traffic and business. The corpus con-
sists of example sentences, typical dialogues and
articles from the Internet, as well as other language
teaching materials. To deal with the different lan-
guages in a uniform manner, we converted the cor-
pus into our proposed LMF-compliant lexical re-
sources framework, which allowed the system to
expand the query between all the languages within
the converted resources without additional modifi-
cations.
As an example of how this IR system func-
tioned, suppose that Mr. Smith will be visiting
Beijing to see the Olympic games and wants to
know how to buy a newspaper. Using this system,
he would first enter the query ?newspaper?. For
this query, with the given corpus, the system re-
turns 31 documents, fragments of the first 5 shown
below.
(1) I?ll bring an English newspaper immediately.
(2) Would you please hand me the newspaper.
(3) There?s no use to go over the newspaper ads.
(4) Let?s consult the newspaper for such a film.
(5) I have little confidence in what the newspa-
pers say.
Yet it can be seen that the displayed results are not
yet useful enough to know how to buy a newspa-
per, though useful information may in fact be in-
cluded within some of the 31 documents. Using
the lexical resources, the query expansion module
suggests ?buy?, ?send?, ?get?, ?read?, and ?sell?
as candidates to add for a revised query.
Mr. Smith wants to buy a newspaper, so he se-
lects ?buy? as the expansion term. With this query
the system returns 11 documents, fragments of the
first 5 listed below.
(6) I?d like some newspapers, please.
150
(7) Oh, we have a barber shop, a laundry, a store,
telegram services, a newspaper stand, table
tennis, video games and so on.
(8) We can put an ad in the newspaper.
(9) Have you read about the Olympic Games of
Table Tennis in today?s newspaper, Miss?
(10) newspaper says we must be cautious about
tidal waves.
This list shows improvement, as information about
newspapers and shopping is present, but still ap-
pears to lack any documents directly related to
how to buy a newspaper.
Using co-occurrence indexes, the IR system
returns document (11) below, because the noun
?newspaper? and the verb ?buy? appear in the
same sentence.
(11) You can make change at some stores, just buy
a newspaper or something.
From this example it is apparent that this sort
of query expansion is still too naive to apply to
real IR systems. It should be noted, however, that
our current aim of evaluation was in confirming
the advantage of LMF in dealing with multiple
languages, for which we conducted a similar run
with Chinese and Japanese. Results of these tests
showed that in following the LMF framework in
describing lexical resources, it was possibile to
deal with all three languages without changing the
mechanics of the system at all.
5 Discussion
LMF is, admittedly, a ?high-level? specification,
that is, an abstract model that needs to be fur-
ther developed, adapted and specified by the lex-
icon encoder. LMF does not provide any off-the-
shelf representation for a lexical resource; instead,
it gives the basic structural components of a lexi-
con, leaving full freedom for modeling the partic-
ular features of a lexical resource. One drawback
is that LMF provides only a specification manual
with a few examples. Specifications are by no
means instructions, exactly as XML specifications
are by no means instructions on how to represent
a particular type of data.
Going from LMF specifications to a true instan-
tiation of an LMF-compliant lexicon is a long way,
and comprehensive, illustrative and detailed ex-
amples for doing this are needed. Our prototype
system provides a good starting example for this
direction. LMF is often taken as a prescriptive
description, and its examples taken as pre-defined
normative examples to be used as coding guide-
lines. Controlled and careful examples of conver-
sion to LMF-compliant formats are also needed to
avoid too subjective an interpretation of the stan-
dard.
We believe that LMF will be a major base
for various SemanticWeb applications because it
provides interoperability across languages and di-
rectly contributes to the applications themselves,
such as multilingual translation, machine aided
translation and terminology access in different lan-
guages.
From the viewpoint of LMF, our prototype
demonstrates the adaptability of LMF to a rep-
resentation of real-scale lexicons, thus promoting
its adoption to a wider community. This project
is one of the first test-beds for LMF (as one of
its drawbacks being that it has not been tested on
a wide variety of lexicons), particularly relevant
since it is related to both Western and Asian lan-
guage lexicons. This project is a concrete attempt
to specify an LMF-compliant XML format, tested
for representative and parsing efficiency, and to
provide guidelines for the implementation of an
LMF-compliant format, thus contributing to the
reduction of subjectivity in interpretation of stan-
dards.
From our viewpoint, LMF has provided a for-
mat for exchange of information across differently
conceived lexicons. Thus LMF provides a stan-
dardised format for relating them to other lexical
models, in a linguistically controlled way. This
seems an important and promising achievement in
order to move the sector forward.
6 Conclusion
This paper described the results of a three-year
project for creating an international standard for
language resources in cooperation with other ini-
tiatives. In particular, we focused on query expan-
sion using the standard.
Our main contribution can be summarised as
follows.
? We have contributed to ISO TC37/SC4 ac-
tivities, by testing and ensuring the portabil-
ity and applicability of LMF to the devel-
opment of a description framework for NLP
lexicons for Asian languages. Our contribu-
tion includes (1) a package for derivational
151
morphology, (2) the syntax-semantic inter-
face with the problem of classifiers, and (3)
representational issues with the richness of
writing systems in Asian languages. As of
October 2008, LMF including our contribu-
tions has been approved as the international
standard ISO 26413.
? We discussed Data Categories necessary
for Asian languages, and exemplified sev-
eral Data Categories including reduplication,
classifier, honorifics and orthography. We
will continue to harmonise our activity with
that of ISO TC37/SC4 TDG2 with respect to
Data Categories.
? We designed and implemented an evaluation
platform of our description framework. We
focused on linguistically motivated query ex-
pansion module. The system works with lexi-
cons compliant with LMF and ontologies. Its
most significant feature is that the system can
deal with any language as far as the those lex-
icons are described according to LMF. To our
knowledge, this is the first working system
adopting LMF.
In this project, we mainly worked on three
Asian languages, Chinese, Japanese and Thai, on
top of the existing framework which was designed
mainly for European languages. We plan to dis-
tribute our results to HLT societies of other Asian
languages, requesting for their feedback through
various networks, such as the Asian language re-
source committee network under Asian Federation
of Natural Language Processing (AFNLP)3, and
the Asian Language Resource Network project4.
We believe our efforts contribute to international
activities like ISO-TC37/SC45 (Francopoulo et al,
2006).
Acknowledgments
This research was carried out through financial
support provided under the NEDO International
Joint Research Grant Program (NEDO Grant).
References
R. Baeza-Yates and B. Ribeiro-Neto. 1999. Modern
Information Retrieval. Addison-Wesley.
3http://www.afnlp.org/
4http://www.language-resource.net/
5http://www.tc37sc4.org/
G. Francopoulo, G. Monte, N. Calzolari, M. Mona-
chini, N. Bel, M. Pet, and C. Soria. 2006. Lex-
ical markup framework (LMF). In Proceedings of
LREC2006.
N. Ide, A. Lenci, and N. Calzolari. 2003. RDF in-
stantiation of ISLE/MILE lexical entries. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL 2003 Workshop on Linguistic
Annotation: Getting the Model Right, pages 25?34.
A. Lenci, N. Bel, F. Busa, N. Calzolari, E. Gola,
M. Monachini, A. Ogonowsky, I. Peters, W. Peters,
N. Ruimy, M. Villegas, and A. Zampolli. 2000.
SIMPLE: A general framework for the development
of multilingual lexicons. International Journal of
Lexicography, Special Issue, Dictionaries, Thesauri
and Lexical-Semantic Relations, XIII(4):249?263.
A. Sanfilippo, N. Calzolari, S. Ananiadou,
R. Gaizauskas, P. Saint-Dizier, and P. Vossen.
1999. EAGLES recommendations on semantic
encoding. EAGLES LE3-4244 Final Report.
T. Tokunaga et al 2006. Infrastructure for standard-
ization of Asian language resources. In Proceedings
of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Conference Poster
Sessions, pages 827?834.
T. Tokunaga et al 2008. Adapting international stan-
dard for asian language technologies. In Proceed-
ings of the Sixth International Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC?08).
152
Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 161?164,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
The FLaReNet Thematic Network: A Global Forum for Cooperation 
 
 
Nicoletta Calzolari 
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche  
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale 
?A. Zampolli? 
nicoletta.calzolari@ilc.cnr.it 
Claudia Soria 
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche  
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale 
?A. Zampolli? 
claudia.soria@ilc.cnr.it 
 
  
 
Abstract 
 
The aim of this short paper is to present the 
FLaReNet Thematic Network for Language 
Resources and Language Technologies to the 
Asian Language Resources Community. 
Creation of a wide and committed community 
and of a shared policy in the field of Language 
Resources is essential in order to foster a 
substantial advancement of the field. This 
paper presents the background, overall 
objectives and methodology of work of the 
project, as well as a set of preliminary results. 
1 Introduction 
The field of Language Resources and 
Technologies has been developing for years to 
reach now a stable and consolidated status, 
attaining the right to be considered a discipline in 
itself, and as testified by the number of 
conferences and publications explicitly dedicated 
to the topic. Even if Language Resources (in the 
widest sense, i.e. spoken, written and multi-
modal resources and basic related tools) have a 
rather short history, they are nowadays 
recognized as one of the pillars of NLP. The 
availability of adequate Language Resources for 
as many languages as possible is a pre-requisite 
for the development of a truly multilingual 
Information Society. 
At the same time, however, the discipline has 
seen considerable fragmentation during those 
years of fast and enthusiast development, and the 
landscape is now composed by a kaleidoscope of 
different, often conflicting initiatives that vary as 
for research directions, theoretical approaches, 
implementation choices, distribution and access 
policies, languages, domain and modalities 
covered, etc. 
The growth of the field in the last years should 
be now complemented by a common reflection 
and by an effort that identifies synergies and 
overcomes fragmentation. The consolidation of 
the area is a pre-condition to enhance 
competitiveness at EU level and worldwide. 
There is the need of working together to define 
common strategies and to identify priorities for 
the field to advance. Multiple concurring signs 
are now indicating that time is ripe for 
establishing an open language infrastructure, 
something that many of us have been pushing 
since some time and that is now increasingly 
recognized in the community at large as a 
necessary step for building on each other 
achievements. 
Such an open infrastructure can only be 
realized if the Language Resources community is 
cohesive enough to be able to focus on a number 
or priority targets and collectively work towards 
them, and, at the same time, whether it is 
powerful enough to permeate the user 
community, the industry, and the policy-makers. 
2 Why FLaReNet  
Creation of the necessary conditions for the 
development of such an infrastructure cannot 
rely on research activities only and even more 
cannot rely on the initiative of individual groups. 
Instead, strategic actions are crucial, such as 
making contacts with and involving all interested 
parties, sensitize the policy makers and 
institutional bodies, involve associations and 
consortia, disseminating widely the results of 
common efforts. Only by mobilizing this wide 
and heterogeneous panorama of actors can such 
an ambitious goal be attained. 
FLaReNet ? Fostering Language Resources 
Network ? is a Thematic Network funded by the 
161
European Commission under the eContentPlus 
framework (ECP-2007-LANG-617001) 1 . The 
FLaReNet Thematic Network was born with the 
specific aim ? as required by the European 
Commission itself ? to enhance European 
competitiveness in the field of Language 
Resources and Technologies, especially by 
consolidating a common vision and fostering a 
European strategy for the future. A major, long-
term objective ? as well as a powerful means for 
community creation ? is creating the preparatory 
environment for making an open language 
infrastructure a reality. 
3 Objectives 
The objectives of FLaReNet are threefold: 
? The creation and mobilization of a 
unified and committed community in the 
field of Language Resources and 
Technologies; 
? The identification of a set of priority 
themes on which to stimulate action, under 
the form of a roadmap for Language 
Resources and Technologies; 
? The elaboration of a blueprint of priority 
areas for actions in the field and a 
coherent set of recommendations for the 
policy-makers (funding agencies 
especially), the business community and 
the public at large. 
3.1 Creation of a community  
FLaReNet has the challenging task of creating a 
network of people around the notion of 
Language Resources and Technologies. To this 
end, FLaReNet is bringing together leading 
experts of research institutions, academies, 
companies, funding agencies, with the specific 
purpose of creating consensus around short, 
medium and long-term strategic objectives. It is 
of foremost importance that the FLaReNet 
Network be composed of the as widest as 
possible representation of experiences, practices, 
research lines, industrial and political strategies; 
this in order to derive an overall picture of the 
field of Language Resources and Technologies 
that is not limited to the European scenario, but 
can also be globally inspired. The Network is 
currently composed of around 200 individuals 
belonging to academia, research institutes, 
industries and government. Such a community 
                                               
1 http://www.flarenet.eu 
also needs to be constantly increased in a 
concentric way that starts from the core 
disciplines but gradually projects itself towards 
?neighboring? ones, such as cognitive science, 
semantic web, etc. 
3.2 Identification of priority themes 
Language technologies and language resources 
are the necessary ingredients for the development 
of applications that will help bridging language 
barriers in a global single information space, in a 
variety of means (the Web as well as 
communication devices) and for a variety of 
channels (spoken and written language alike). It 
is of utmost importance, however, to identify 
priorities as well as short, medium, and long-
term strategic objectives in order to avoid 
scattered or conflicting efforts. 
The major players in the field of Language 
Resources and Technologies need to 
consensually work together and indicate a clear 
direction and priorities for the next years. 
3.3 Elaboration of a blueprint of actions 
However, whatever action cannot be 
implemented on a long term without the help of 
the necessary financial and political framework 
to sustain them. This is even most true for 
actions regarding Language Resources that 
typically imply a sustained effort at national 
level. To this end, the FLaReNet Network must 
propose the priority themes under the form of 
consensual recommendations and a plan of 
action for EC Member States, other European-
wide decision makers, companies, as well as 
non-EU and International organizations. 
 FLaReNet goals are very ambitious and its 
objectives are to be seen in a more global 
framework. Although they are shaped by the 
European landscape of the field of LR&T, its 
mission is therefore inherently cross-boundary: 
in order to attain such goals getting a global view 
is fundamental. 
To this end, it is important that FLaReNet is 
known by the Asian community, and it knows 
the Asian community. Some Asian community 
players are already members of the Network. 
4 How FLaReNet works 
Work in FLaReNet is inherently collaborative.  
Its means are the following: 
? Working groups 
? Organization of workshops and meetings 
162
? External liaisons 
4.1 Working Groups 
Working Groups are intended as ?think-tanks? of 
experts (researchers and users) who jointly 
reflect on selected topics and come up with 
conclusions and recommendations. The Working 
Groups are clustered in thematic areas and carry 
out their activities through workshops, meetings, 
and via a collaborative Wiki platform. The 
FLaReNet Thematic Areas are: 
? The Chart for the area of Language 
Resources and Technologies in its 
different dimensions 
? Methods and models for Language 
Resource building, reuse, interlinking, 
maintenance, sharing, and distribution 
? Harmonization of formats and standards 
? Definition of evaluation and validation 
protocols and procedures 
? Methods for the automatic construction 
and processing of Language Resources. 
4.2 Organization of workshops and 
meetings 
Meetings and events lie at the core of FLaReNet 
action plan and dissemination strategies. They 
can either be specifically oriented to the 
dissemination of results and recommendations 
(content-pushing events) or, rather, to their 
elicitation (content-pulling events). Three types 
of meetings are envisaged: 
? Annual Workshops, such as the 
?European Language Resources and 
Technologies Forum? held in Vienna, 
February 2009 
? Thematic Workshops related to the work 
of Working Groups 
? Liaison meetings (e.g. those with NSF-
SILT, CLARIN, ISO and other projects as 
the need may arise). 
Annual workshops are targeted to gather the  
broad FLaReNet community together. They are 
conceived as big events, and they aim at 
becoming major events in the Language 
Resources and Technology community of the 
kind able to attract a considerable audience. 
Given the success of the formula exploited for 
the FLaReNet ?Vienna Event?2, it is likely that 
Annual workshops will be organized along the 
same lines. However, this type of event cannot 
be repeated on a frequent schedule. At the same 
time, more focused events centered on specific 
topics and with extensive time allocated for 
discussion are essential. 
To this end, Annual Workshops will be 
complemented by many Thematic workshops, 
i.e. more focused, dedicated meetings with a 
more restricted audience. These are directly 
linked to the work being carried out by the 
various Working Groups and are organized in a 
de-centralized manner, by direct initiative of the 
Working Group or Work package Leaders. In an 
attempt to increase FLaReNet sensitivity to hot 
issues, selection of topics and issues to be 
addressed will be also based on a bottom-up 
approach: FLaReNet members and subscribers 
are invited to submit topics of interest either 
freely or as a consequence of ?Call for topics? 
related to particular events. 
Finally, liaison meetings are those elicited by 
FLaReNet to make contact and create synergies 
with national and international projects that are 
partially overlapping with FLaReNet in either 
their objectives or the target audience. Examples 
of these are the FLaReNet-CLARIN and the 
FLaReNet-SILT liaison meetings. 
4.3 External liaisons  
For a Network like FLaReNet, whose aim is the 
development of strategies and recommendations 
for the field of Language Resources and 
Technologies, coordination of actions at a 
worldwide level is of utmost importance. To this 
end, FLaReNet is planning to establish contacts 
and liaisons with national and international 
associations and consortia, such as LDC, ISO, 
ALTA, AFNLP, W3C, TEI, COCOSDA, 
Oriental-COCOSDA. Specific actions of this 
kind have started already, such as the 
International Cooperation Round Table that took 
place in Vienna. The members of the 
International Cooperation Round Table will form 
the initial nucleus of the FLaReNet International 
Advisory Board. 
5 First results and recommendations 
More than a hundred players worldwide gathered 
at the latest FLaReNet Vienna Forum, with the 
                                               
2 http://www.flarenet.eu/?q=Vienna09, see the Event 
Program to get an idea of the event structure. 
163
specific purpose of setting up a brainstorming 
force to make emerge the technological, market 
and policy challenges to be faced in a 
multilingual digital Europe. 
Over a two-day programme, the participants to 
the Forum had the opportunity to start assessing 
the current conditions of the LR&T field and to 
propose emerging directions of intervention. 
Some messages recurred repeatedly across the 
various sessions, as a sign both of a great 
convergence around these ideas and also of their 
relevance in the field. A clear set of priorities 
thus emerged for fostering the field of Language 
Resources and Language Technology. 
Language Resource Creation. The effort 
required to build all needed language resources 
and common tools should impose on all players a 
strong cooperation at the international level and 
the community should define how to enhance 
current coordination of language resource 
collection between all involved agencies and 
ensure efficiency (e.g. through interoperability).  
With data-driven methods dominating the 
current paradigms, language resource building, 
annotation, cataloguing, accessibility, 
availability is what the research community is 
calling for. Major institutional translation 
services, holding large volumes of useful data, 
seem to be ready to share their data and 
FLaReNet could possibly play a facilitating role.  
More efforts should be devoted to solve how to 
automate the production of the large quantity of 
resources demanded, and of enough quality to 
get acceptable results in industrial environments. 
Standards and Interoperability. In the long 
term, interoperability will be the cornerstone of a 
global network of language processing 
capabilities. The time and circumstances are ripe 
to take a broad and forward-looking view in 
order to establish and implement the standards 
and technologies necessary to ensure language 
resource interoperability in the future. This can 
only be achieved through a coordinated, 
community-wide effort that will ensure both 
comprehensive coverage and widespread 
acceptance. 
Coordination of Language Technology 
Evaluation. Looking at the way forward, it 
clearly appears that language technology 
evaluation needs coordination at international 
level: in order to ensure the link between 
technologies and applications, between 
evaluation campaigns and projects, in order to 
conduct evaluation campaigns (for ensuring 
synchrony or for addressing the influence of a 
component on a system on the same data), in 
order to produce language resources from 
language technology evaluation, or to port an 
already evaluated language technology to other 
languages (best practices, tools, metrics, 
protocols?), in order to avoid ?reinventing the 
wheel?, while being very cautious that there are 
language and cultural specificities which have to 
be taken into account (tone languages, oral 
languages with no writing system, etc). 
Availability of Resources, Tools and 
Information. Infrastructure building seems to be 
one of the main messages for FLaReNet. For a 
new worldwide language infrastructure the issue 
of access to Language Resources and 
Technologies is a critical one that should involve 
? and have impact on ? all the community. There 
is the need to create the means to plug together 
different Language Resources & Language 
Technologies, in an internet-based resource and 
technology grid, with the possibility to easily 
create new workflows. Related to this is 
openness and availability of information. The 
related issues of access rights and IPR also call 
for cooperation. 
6 Join FLaReNet 
In order to constantly increase the community of 
people involved in FLaReNet, as well as to 
ensure their commitment to the objectives of the 
Network, a recruiting campaign is always open. 
People wishing to join the Network can do so by 
filling an appropriate web form available on the 
FLaReNet web site. The FLaReNet Network is 
open to participation by public and private, 
research and industrial organizations. 
7 Conclusions 
The field of Language Resources and 
Technologies needs a strong and coherent 
international cooperation policy to become more 
competitive and play a leading role globally. It is 
crucial to discuss future policies and priorities 
for the field of Language Resources and 
Technologies ? as in the mission of FLaReNet ? 
not only on the European scene, but also in a 
worldwide context. Cooperation is an issue that 
needs to be prepared. FLaReNet may become 
one of the privileged places where these ? and 
future ? initiatives get together to discuss and 
promote collaboration actions. 
164
Encoding information on adjectives in a lexical-semantic net 
for computational applications 
Antonietta ALONGE 
Istituto di Linguistica 
Computazionale, CNR 
Area della Ricerca di Pisa 
Via Alfieri 1, Loc. S. Cataldo 
Ghezzano 56010 (PI) - ITALY 
antoalonge@libero.it 
Francesca BERTAGNA 
Consorzio Pisa Ricerche 
Via S. Maria 40 
Pisa 56100 - ITALY 
F.Bertagna@ilc.pi.cnr.it 
Nicoletta CALZOLARI 
Istituto di Linguistica 
Computazionale, CNR 
Area della Ricerca di Pisa 
Via Alfieri 1, Loc. S. Cataldo 
Ghezzano 56010 (PI) - ITALY 
glottolo@ilc.pi.cnr.it 
Adriana ROVENTINI 
Istituto di Linguistica 
Computazionale, CNR 
Area della Ricerca di Pisa 
Via Alfieri 1, Loc. S. Cataldo 
Ghezzano 56010 (PI) - ITALY 
adriana@ilc.pi.cnr.it 
Antonio ZAMPOLLI 
Istituto di Linguistica 
Computazionale, CNR 
Area della Ricerca di Pisa 
Via Alfieri 1, Loc. S. Cataldo 
Ghezzano 56010 (PI) - ITALY 
pisa@ilc.pi.cnr.it 
Abstract 
The goal of this paper is to describe how the 
EuroWordNet framework for representing 
lexical meaning is being modified within an 
Italian National Project in order to include 
information on adjectives. The focus is on 
the 'new' semantic relations being encoded 
and on the revisions we have made to the 
EuroWordNet Top Ontology structure. We 
also briefly discuss the utility of the 
information which is being encoded for 
computational pplications. 
Int roduct ion 
The Princeton WordNet (henceforth WN) is a 
lexical semantic network in which the meanings 
of words are represented in terms of their 
conceptual and lexical relations to other words. 
The basic notion around which it is developed is
that of a synset (synonyms et), i.e. a set of 
words with the same Part-of-Speech (PoS) that 
can be interchanged in a certain context. Various 
conceptual and lexical relations are then 
encoded between synsets of the same PoS: e.g., 
hyponymy, antonymy, meronymy, etc. (Miller et 
al. 1990; Fellbaum 1998b). 
Within the EuroWordNet (henceforth EWN) 
project I a similar (multilingual) lexical resource 
was developed, retaining the basic underlying 
design of WN, but enriching the set of lexical- 
semantic relations to be encoded for nouns and 
verbs in various ways 2, in order to obtain a 
maximally re-usable resource for computational 
applications. Thus, a) cross-PoS (xPos) relations 
were added so that different surface realizations 
of similar concepts within and across languages 
could be matched (e.g., the noun research and 
the verb to research could be linked as 
1 EWN was a project in the EC Language 
Engineering (LE-4003 and LE-8328) programme. In 
a first phase, the partners involved were the 
University of Amsterdam (coordinator); the Istituto 
di Linguistica Computazionale, CNR, Pisa; the 
Fundacion Universidad Empresa (a cooperation of 
UNED, Madrid, Politecnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, 
and the University of Barcelona); the University of 
Sheffield; and Novell Linguistic Development 
(Antwerp), changed to Lemout & Hauspie during the 
project. In a further phase, the database was extended 
with German, French, Estonian and Czech. Complete 
information on EWN can be found at its web site: 
http://www.hum.uva.nl/~ewn/. 
2 Adjectives and adverbs were encoded in EWN only 
as targets of relations from nouns and verbs. 
&9 42
'XPOS NEAR__SYNONYMS' in EWN); b) some 
relations were identified which provide detailed 
information on semantic omponents lexicalized 
within word roots (e.g., to hammer could be 
linked to the noun hammer by means of an 
'INVOLVED_INSTRUMENT' relation); c) some 
labels were distinguished which could be added 
to relations to make their semantic entailments 
more explicit and precise (cf. Alonge et al 
1998). The links among the wordnets of 
different languages were realized by means of an 
Interlingual-Index (ILI), constituted by an 
unstructured list of the Princeton WN (version 
1.5) synsets. In addition, a hierarchy of 
language-independent concepts, reflecting 
fundamental semantic distinctions (e.g., Object 
and Substance, Dynamic and Static, Cause, 
Manner, etc.), was built: the Top Ontology 
(TO). The TO consists of language-independent 
features which may (or may not) be lexicalized 
in various ways, or according to different 
patterns, in different languages (Rodriguez et al 
1998). Via the ILI, all the concepts in the 
monolingual wordnets are directly or indirectly 
linked to the TO. The following picture shows 
the EWN data structure (see also Vossen 1999): 
While in WN all PoSs are represented, in EWN 
detailed information was encoded only for nouns 
and verbs and no analysis was carried out with 
respect to lexical-semantic relations which could 
be used to describe the semantics of adjectives 
and adverbs. In an Italian National Project we 
are building a large wordnet, ltalWordNet 
(henceforth IWN) 3, by extending the network 
built for Italian in EWN. Thus, we are both 
increasing the coverage for nouns and verbs and 
adding adjectives and some adverbs 4.To be able 
to encode information on adjectives we have 
enriched the set of the EWN lexical-semantic 
relations, aiming at encoding data which can be 
useful for computational applications. Moreover, 
we have revised the TO in order to account for 
the semantics of the new lexical categories being 
encoded. 
In this paper we describe the main changes made 
to the EWN framework in order to encode 
information on adjectives in IWN. Firstly, we 
provide a brief overview of the WN treatment of 
adjectives. Then, we discuss the set of relations 
being encoded for this category in IWN. Finally, 
we show the integration made to the EWN TO. 
We then conclude the paper by adding some 
remarks on the utility of the data being encoded 
for computational applications. 
1 Adjectives in WN 
In WN adjectives are divided into two major 
classes: descriptive adjectives and relational 
adjectives. A descriptive adjective is "one that 
ascribes a value of an attribute to a noun" 
(Fellbaum et al 1993:27). Descriptive adjectives 
combine with nouns to express ome qualities of 
the thing, person or concept they designate. 
Typically, in this group we find adjectives that 
designate the physical dimension of an object, 
its weight, abstract values etc. Besides these 
referent-modifying adjectives, we also find 
reference-modifying adjectives (cf. Bolinger 
1967; Chierchia & McConnel-Ginet 1990 name 
them intensional adjectives). Typical examples 
of the latter are former, future, present. 
3 ItalWordNet will be the reference l xical resource 
among various integrated language resources and 
software tools for the automatic treatment of he 
Italian written and spoken language which are being 
developed within the SI-TAL ('Integrated System for 
the Automatic Treatment of Language') National 
Project. 
4 Actually, we shall only encode adverbs derived 
from adjectives by adding the suffix -mente, for 
which a derivation relation with an adjective will be 
encoded. 
43
Relational adjectives, on the other hand, mean 
something like "relating/pertaining to, associated 
with", and usually have a morphologically 
strong link with a noun. Typical examples are 
musical, atomic, chemical 5. 
Synonymy is the basic relation encoded for all 
the PoSs (since it is used to build synsets). 
While in WN the noun and verb networks are 
then mainly developed around the superordinate 
(hyper/hyponymy) relationship, the organization 
of descriptive adjectives can "be visualized in 
terms of barbell-like structures, with a direct 
antonym in the centre of each disk surrounded 
by its semantically similar adjectives (which 
constitute the indirect antonyms of the adjectives 
in the opposed disk)" (Fellbaum 1998a: 212). 
The main relation encoded for these adjective 
synsets is antonymy, claimed to be the most 
prominent relation, both from a psycholinguistic 
point of view and from a more strictly lexical- 
semantic one, in the definition of the semantics 
of descriptive adjectives. Hyponymy is 
substituted by a 'similarity' relation. 
Relational adjectives, on the contrary, are not 
organized in this way, because their semantics 
cannot be described by using these relations. 
Indeed, they only point to the noun to which 
they pertain (e.g. atomic is linked to atom). 
Finally, information on the selectional 
preferences of both descriptive and relational 
adjectives is sometimes encoded (e.g., between 
high and degree), by using an 'is_attribute_of' 
relation. 
2 The IWN relations for adjectives 
As for the other lexical categories, also in IWN 
the basic relation encoded for adjectives is 
synonymy, on the basis of which synsets are 
built. Following EWN, we also encode a 
NEAR._SYNONYMY relation when two synsets are 
very close in meaning but their members cannot 
be put in the same synset (and no other relation 
results appropriate to link them; see Alonge et 
s Note that some adjectives have both a descriptive 
sense and a relational one. For example, musicale 
(musical) can modify the noun voce (voice) when we 
want to say that a voice is sweet-sounding and 
melodious, but can also be combined with the noun 
strumento (instrument) when we want to indicate that 
an instrument can be used to produce music. 
al. 1998 for a discussion of this relation, and 
Alonge et al, in prep., for a complete and 
detailed discussion of the linguistic design of 
IWN). Then, we encode a number of additional 
relations, which have been identified by taking 
into consideration i) theoretical works; ii) the 
EAGLES recommendations on semantic 
encoding (cf. Sanfilippo et al 1999); iii) the data 
available in our sources; iv) possible use of data 
encoded in computational pplications. 
2.1 Hyponymy 
Together with synonymy, the hyponymy relation 
constitutes the 'bone structure' of both WN and 
EWN. However, as we have seen, in WN the 
possibility of encoding hyponymy for adjectives 
is denied and the basic relation encoded for 
adjectives is antonymy, while EWN did not 
really deal with adjectives and a complete 
network for them was not built. 
Within IWN we have reconsidered the 
possibility of encoding hyponymy for adjectives. 
By analysing data coming from machine- 
readable dictionaries we find subsets of 
adjectives which have a genus + differentia 
definition, like nouns or verbs. That is, these 
adjectives seem to be organised into classes 
sharing a superordinate. This is the case, e.g., of 
adjectives indicating a 'containing' property 
(acquoso - watery; alcalino - alkaline), or a 
'suitable-for' property (difensivo - defensive; 
educativo - educational), etc. In IWN we have 
decided, therefore, to encode hyponymy also for 
these sets of adjectives. The taxonomies which 
can be built on the basis of this relation are 
different from those built for nouns or verbs, 
since they are generally very flat, consisting 
almost always of two levels only (an exception 
is the color adjectives taxonomy). However, by 
encoding a hyponymy relation for these 
adjectives, we obtain classes for which it will be 
possible to make various inferences. For 
instance, it will be possible to infer semantic 
preferences of certain classes: e.g., all the 
adjectives occurring in the taxonomy of 
contenente (containing) will occur as attributes 
of concrete nouns; adjectives found in the 
taxonomy of affetto (affected by an illness) will 
never be predicated of nouns referring to 
objects, etc. Furthermore, it will also be possible 
to infer information on syntactic haracteristics 
/I/11 44
of adjectives found in the same taxonomy: e.g., 
the hyponyrns of atto (suitable for) are always 
found in predicative position (and do not accept 
any complements); the hyponyms of privo 
(lacking) may occur both in attributive and in 
predicative position (and may take certain 
prepositional complements), etc. 
As it was done for all the relations identified in 
EWN, we have built substition tests or 
diagnostic frames based on normality 
judgements (cf. Cruse 1986). Inserting two 
words in the test sentences built evokes a 
'normality'/ 'abnormality' judgement on the 
basis of which each relation can be determined. 
These tests are used by encoders both to verify 
the existence of relations between synsets and to 
encode them in a consistent way (for a complete 
lists of the tests built see Alonge et al, in prep.) 
2.2 Antonymy 
As in WN, also in IWN the antonymy relation 
remains an important relation to describe the 
semantics of various adjectives. Following 
theoretical work (Lyons 1977; Cruse 1986), we 
have further distinguished between 
COMPLEMENTARY ANTONYMY and GRADABLE 
ANTONYMY 6. The former relation links 
adjectives referring to opposing properties/ 
concepts: when one holds the other is excluded 
(alive~dead). The latter relation is used for those 
antonym pairs which refer to gradable properties 
(long~short). In case it is not clear if two 
opposing adjectives refer to complementary or
gradable properties, we can still use an 
underspecified ANTONYMY relation. Also this 
information can be useful for computational 
applications ince word pairs presenting one of 
the two kinds of opposition may occur in 
different contexts (cf. Cruse 1986). 
2.3 Other  relations 
In WN a relation between adjectives and nouns 
is encoded for relational adjectives which point 
to a noun to which they 'pertain': atomic~atom, 
industrial~industry, etc. This relation will be 
encoded also in IWN, by using the label 
PERTAINS TO. 
Another relation 'inherited' from WN can be 
useful to distinguish both adjective senses and 
their semantic preferences7: 
altol (tall) IS A VALUE OF statura (stature) 
alto2 (high) IS_A_VALUEOF altezza (height). 
Other relations are then being encoded which are 
not in WN, but are encoded for nouns and verbs 
in EWN. In WN each PoS forms a separate 
system of language-internal relations and 
conceptually close concepts are totally separated 
only because they differ in PoS. In EWN, instead 
of using as main classificatory criterion the 
traditional distinction among PoSs, drawn upon 
heterogeneous criteria, a purely semantic 
distinction was adopted (following Lyons 1977). 
Thus, a distinction was drawn among I st order 
entities (loes - referred to by concrete nouns), 
2 "d order entities (2oes - referred to by verbs, 
adjectives or nouns indicating properties, states, 
processes or events), and 3 rd order entities (3oes 
referred to by abstract nouns indicating 
propositions existing independently of time and 
space). By drawing this distinction it was 
possible to relate lexical items that, either within 
a language or across different languages, refer to 
close concepts, although they belong to different 
PoSs. Thus, as said above, the possibility to 
encode 'near-synonymy' between synsets of the 
same order (but different PoSs) was provided. 
Furthermore, other cross-PoS relations were 
identified which allow to obtain a better 
description of word meanings. In IWN we 
maintain the same distinction among semantic 
orders and encode for adjectives ome relations 
which can be encoded for the other 2oes. In 
particular, we encode the 'INVOLVED' and 
'CAUSE' relations. 
The INVOLVED relation links a 2oes with a loe  
or 3oe referring to a concept incorporated within 
6 A similar distinction is also made within the 
SIMPLE EC project (LE-8346), whose goal is adding 
semantic information to the set of harmonized 
lexicons built within the PAROLE project for twelve 
European languages. Of course, the sub-classification 
ofantonymy can also be used for nouns and verbs. 
7 Furthermore, these relations being encoded between 
an adjectival synset and a nominal or verbal one are 
also useful to distinguish adjective classes as 
described by Dixon (1991), and reported in 
Sanfilippo et al (1999). Indeed, such classes are 
often indicated by the nouns linked to adjectives. 
45 45
the meaning of the 2oe 8. Examples for adjectives 
are given in the following: 
filoso (= pieno di fili) (thready, filamentous) 
HAS_HYPERONYM pieno (full) 
INVOLVED filo (thread) 
imberbe (= privo di barba) (beardless) 
HAS_HYPERONYM privo (lacking) 
INVOLVED barba (beard). 
Another relation which can be encoded is the 
CAUSE relation: 
depuratorio (= atto a depurare) (depurative, 
purifying) 
HAS_HYPERONYM atto, adatto 
(suitable for) 
CAUSES non-factive 9 depurare 
(to purify) 
compensativo (= che serve a compensare) 
(compensatory) 
HAS._HYPERONYM alto, adatto 
(suitable for) 
CAUSES non-factive compensare 
(to compensate) 
A new relation, not present either in WN or in 
EWN, will be encoded for a class of adjectives 
indicating the possibility of some events 
occurring: 
giudicabile (= che pub essere giudicato) (triable) 
LIABLE_TO giudicare (to judge) 
inaccostabile, inavvicinabile (= che non pub essere 
avvicinato) (which cannot be approached) 
LIABLETO awicinare, accostare 
(to approach) negative. 
8 E.g., to lapidate has as INVOLVED_INSTRUMENT 
stone; to work has as INVOLVED_AGENT worker (see 
Alonge et al 1998). 
9 As said above, in EWN various features were 
encoded to make implications of relations explicit: 
conjunction and disjunction (for multiple relations of 
the same kind encoded for a synset); non-factivity (to 
indicate that a causal relation does not necessarily 
apply); intention (added to a cause relation to indicate 
intention to cause a certain result); negation (to 
explicitly encode the impossibility of a relation 
occurring). These features are also used in IWN. 
The table below gives an overview of the main 
relations being encoded for adjectives in IWN 
(for the other relations being encoded for 
adjectives ee Alonge et al, in prep.): 
GRAD ANTONYMY 
COMP ANTONYMY 
HYPONYMY 
PERTAINS TO 
IS A VALUE_OF 
INVOLVED 
CAUSE 
LIABLE_TO 
adj/adj 
adj/adj 
adj/adj 
adj/noun 
adj/noun 
adj/noun 
adj/verb; 
adj/noun 
adj/verb; 
adj/noun 
beautiful/u~ly 
alive/dead 
watery/containing 
chemical/chemistry 
tail/stature 
dental/tooth 
depurative/ 
to depurate 
triable/to judge 
3 The IWN Top Ontology 
In the EWN TO all the entities belonging to the 
2 nd order have been organized into two different 
classification schemes, which represent the first 
division below 2 nd Order Entity: 
? Situation Type: the event-structure or 
Aktionsart (or lexical aspect) of a situation; 
? Situation Components: the most salient 
semantic components that characterize 
situations. 
The Situation Types provide a classification of 
2oes in terms of the event-structure (or 
Aktionsart) of the situation they refer to: a basic 
distinction was drawn between Static and 
Dynamic. The Situation Components represent a 
more conceptual and intuitive classification of 
word meanings because they can be viewed like 
the most salient semantic components of a 
concept. Examples of Situation Components 
are: Manner, Existence, Communication, Cause. 
Situation Type represents disjoint features that 
cannot be combined, whereas it is possible to 
assign any combination of Situation 
Components to a word meaning. Here below the 
Top Concepts identified for 2oes are shown: 
46 46
2 ND ORDER ENTITY 
SITUATION COMPONENT 
Cause 
Communication 
Condition 
Existence 
Experience 
Location 
Manner 
Mental 
Modal 
Physical 
Possession 
Purpose 
Quantity 
Social 
Time 
SITUATION TYPE 
Dynamic 
BoundedEvent 
UnboundedEvent 
Static 
Property 
Relation 
In order to be able to draw generalizations on 
adjective meanings by using the TO, we 
partially modified this scheme. First of all, we 
moved the PROPERTY and RELATION nodes 
under the SITUATION COMPONENT node. This 
was done for two interconnected reasons: first of 
all, because this distinction is not directly linked 
to Aktionsart (lexical aspect), while the 
distinctions under SITUATION TYPE are 
Aktionsart distinctions, i.e. they are connected 
with the "the procedural characteristics (i.e. the 
'phasal structure', time extension' and 'manner 
of development') ascribed to any given situation 
referred to by a verb phrase" (Bache 1982: 70) ~?. 
Secondly, adjectives may refer to PROPERTIES or 
RELATIONS, but they may be either stative or not 
(cfr. e.g. Lakoff 1966; Quirk et al 1985; Peters 
et al 1999). Thus, in our system it has to be 
possible to specify that an adjective xpresses a 
PROPERTY while being DYNAMIC. In any case, 
since many adjectives may have both a 
DYNAMIC sense and a STATIC one, we have also 
the possibility to under-specify this information 
Io Of course, in EWN all 2oes (and therefore also 
nouns or adjectives) can be classified according to 
their Aktionsart. 
by linking adjectives directly to the SITUATION 
TYPE node. 
Adjectives may indicate many different types of 
properties: temporal (passeggiata mattutina -
morning walk), psychological (canzone triste - 
sad song), social (uomo ricco - rich man), 
physical (superficie legnosa - wooden surface), 
physiological (bambino magro - thin child), 
perceptive (minestra calda hot soup), 
quantitative (magra r icompensa - poor reward) 
and intensity properties (vino for te  - strong 
wine). In the EWN TO there are already nodes 
which may be used to represent these 
distinctions (TIME, MENTAL, SOCIAL, PHYSICAL, 
QUANTITY) but we needed to better specify or 
also add some features. For example, we have 
added, under the already present node 
PHYSICAL, the node MATERIAL, to represent, 
among others, some Italian adjectives ending in 
-oso  (for example legnoso - wooden, acquoso -
watery) which indicate the property of 
containing a certain material. Moreover, we 
added the node PHYSIOLOGICAL (to classify 
adjectives corresponding to tired, hungry, sick, 
etc.) under PHYSICAL. For adjectives denoting an 
intensity, we then added the node INTENSITY 
directly under the SITUATION COMPONENT node. 
One of the main problem we had was that no 
Top Concept in the EWN TO could be used to 
classify the reference-modifying adjectives (cf. 
above). These are a very particular kind of 
adjectives, because they do not indicate a 
property of the referent of the noun they modify. 
So, aiming at showing the distinction between 
referent-modifiers and reference-modifiers, we 
created two new Top Concepts under the node 
PROPERTY: ATTRIBUTE and FUNCTIONAL, where 
the latter can be used for reference-modifying 
adjectives (according to the definition provided 
by Chierchia & McConnel-Ginet 1990 for the 
category referred to by these adjectives: "a 
function f rom propert ies to properties"). 
Like all descriptive adjectives, also the 
reference-modifiers classified under the node 
FUNCTIONAL can be linked to other SITUATION 
COMPONENTS. Functional adjectives for which 
the temporal aspect prevails (ex former, 
presente - present) can be classified under the 
node TIME; adjectives referring to some 
'epistemological' property (potenziale 
potential, necessario - necessary) can be linked 
&7 47
tO MODAL 11; etc. A particular case of functional 
adjectives are the 'argumental' ones. They 
introduce a comparison between different 
entities (e.g., simile - similar, diverso - different, 
etc.). A comparison presupposes a relation 
between different entities o these adjectives can 
be linked to both PROPERTY and RELATION. 
Since in the EWN TO these two Top Concepts 
were two different kinds of SITUATION TYPE, 
they were mutually exclusive; now, in the IWN 
revised TO they can be conjoined. 
Here below the IWN Top Concepts for 2 "a Order 
Entities are shown: 
2 N? ORDER ENTITY 
SITUATION COMPONENT 
Cause 
Communication 
Condition 
Existence 
Experience 
Location 
Manner 
Mental 
Modal 
Physical 
Material 
Physiological 
Possession 
Purpose 
Quantity 
Social 
Time 
Intensity 
Property 
Attribute 
Functional 
Relation 
SITUATION TYPE 
Dynamic 
BoundedEvent 
UnboundedEvent 
Static 
Concluding remarks 
Although the ANTONYMY, PERTAINS_TO, and 
ISATTRIBUTEOF relations, already encoded in 
the Princeton WN, are fundamental relations to 
describe the adjective semantics, and they can be 
11 Since this node is used for situations involving the 
possibility or likelihood of other situations. 
useful for computational applications which 
exploit our resource, we believe that the 'new' 
relations being encoded may provide equally 
relevant information, especially because many 
adjectives cannot be defined by means of the 
WN relations. Let's take into consideration just 
a few examples. 
The adjective depresso is ambiguous in that it 
has (at least) three readings: 
1) which has been lowered, flattened (said of a 
land); 
2) being in bad physical or moral conditions (said 
of an area, a country); 
3) affected by depression (said of a person). 
For these three senses of the adjective we would 
encode different relations, extractable from our 
sources: 
depressol IS_CAUSEDBY deprimere (to lower) 
IS A VALUE_OF terreno (land) 
depresso2 
depress% 
HAS_HYPERONYM colpito (affected) 
IS_CAUSEDBY depressionel 
(depression - economic sense) 
HAS_HYPERONYM affetto 
(affected, suffering from sthg.) 
IS_CAUSED_BY depressione2 
(depression - medical sense) 
The relations encoded could, e.g., help 
disambiguate he occurrences of the adjective in 
contexts uch as: Gianni era depresso (Gianni 
was depressed) or Quella regione ~ depressa 
(That area is depressed). Indeed, by checking the 
semantic information encoded for the two senses 
of depressione linked to depresso, it's possible 
to provide the right interpretation for the 
sentences under analysis; on the other hand, the 
first sense of the adjective would be excluded 
because of the IS A VALUE OF relation 
encoded. In this case, also the TO links could be 
helpful: actually, depresso2 would be linked to 
SOCIAL and CONDITION, while depresso3 would 
be linked to MENTAL and EXPERIENCE. 
Many adjectives found in our sources do not 
seem to have (lexicalized) antonyms, nor cannot 
be defined by using the PERTAINS_TO or 
IS A VALUE OF relations. These are often 
linked to nouns or verbs, by various relations: 
/ IQ  48
piumato = coperto di piume (plumed = covered with 
plumage) 
HAS HYPERONYM coperto 
INVOLVED piuma 
distillabile =che pub essere distillato (distillable = 
which can be distilled) 
LIABLE TO distillare. 
For these and many other adjectives the 'new' 
relations identified in IWN are necessary, given 
that we often cannot encode other relations for 
them. The relations encoded provide 
fundamental semantic information on them, 
which can, for instance, be used to infer 
semantic preferences (e.g., only certain loes can 
be modified by piumato, etc.). The inclusion of 
this information in a large database which is 
mainly intended for computational pplications 
can be very useful, mainly because it may help 
in resolving ambiguities and may be used to 
draw inferences of different nature. 
References 
Alonge A., Calzolari N., Vossen P., Bloksma L., 
CasteUon I., Marti T., Peters W. (1998) The 
Linguistic Design of the EuroWordNet Database. 
In "Special Issue on EuroWordNet. Computers and 
the Humanities" N. Ide, D. Greenstein, P. Vossen 
(eds.), 32, 2-3, pp. 91-115. 
Alonge A., Bertagna F., Calzolari N., Magnini B., 
Roventini A. (in prep.) ItalWordNet: a Large 
Semantic Database for Italian. 
Bache C. (1982) Aspect and Aktionsart: towards a 
Semantic Distinction. Journal of Linguistics, 18, 1. 
Bolinger D. (1967)Adjectives in English: Attribution 
and Predication. Lingua, 18, pp. 1-34. 
Chierchia G. and McConnel-Ginet S. (1990) An 
Introduction to Semantics. The MIT Press, 
Cambridge. 
Cruse D. A. (1986) Lexical Semantics. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
Dixon R. M. W. (1991) A new Approach to English 
Grammar on Semantic Principles. Clarendon 
Press, Oxford. 
Fellbaum C. (1998a) A Semantic Network of English: 
the Mother of all WordNets. In "Special Issue on 
EuroWordNet. Computers and the Humanities" N. 
Ide, D. Greenstein, P. Vossen (eds.), 32, 2-3, pp. 
209-220. 
Fellbaum C. (1998b) WordNet, An Electronic Lexical 
Database, The MIT Press, Cambridge. 
Fellbaum C., Gross D., Miller K.J. (1993)Adjectives 
in WordNet, Five Papers on WordNet. 
Lakoff G. (1966) Stative Adjectives and Verbs in 
English. Computation Laboratory, Harvard 
University Report No. NSF-17. 
Lyons J. (1977) Semantics. Cambridge University 
Press, London. 
Miller G., Beckwith R., Fellbaum C., Gross D., 
Miller K.J (1990) Introduction to WordNet: An On- 
line Lexical Database. International Journal of 
Lexicography, Vol 3, No.4, pp. 235-244. 
Quirk R., Greenbaum S., Leech G. Svartvik J. (1985) 
A Comprehensive Grammar of the English 
Language. Longman, London. 
Peters I., Peter W. and Gaizauskas R. (1999) The 
Representation f Adjectives in SIMPLE. Ms. 
Richardson S. D., Dolan W. B., Vanderwende L. 
(1998) MindNet : Acquiring and Structuring 
Semantic Information from Text. In "COLING- 
ACL Proceedings", Montreal, pp. 1098-1102. 
Rodriguez H., Climent S., Vossen P., Bloksma L., 
Roventini A., Bertagna F., Alonge A., Peters W. 
(1998) The Top-Down Strategy for Building 
Euro WordNet: Vocabulary Coverage, Base 
Concepts and Top Ontology. In "Special Issue on 
EuroWordNet. Computers and the Humanities", N. 
Ide, D. Greenstein, P. Vossen (eds.), 32, 2-3, pp. 
117-152. 
Vossen P. (ed.) (1999) EuroWordNet General 
Document. In "The EWN CD-Rom" (see also: 
http://www.hum.uva.nl/~ewn). 
Sanfilippo A., Calzolari N., Ananiadou S., 
Gaizauskas R., Saint-Dizier P., Vossen P. (eds.) 
(1999) Preliminary Recommendations  Lexical 
Semantic Encoding. EAGLES LE3-4244 Final 
Report. 
49 49
International Standards for Multilingual Resource Sharing: The
ISLE Computational Lexicon Working Group
Nicoletta Calzolari, Alessandro Lenci, Antonio Zampolli
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale, CNR, Pisa
Consorzio Pisa Ricerche
Universit? di Pisa, Dipartimento di Linguistica
[glottolo,lenci,eagles]@ilc.pi.cnr.it
Abstract
The ISLE project is a continuation
of the long standing EAGLES
initiative, carried out under the Human
Language Technology (HLT)
programme in collaboration between
American and European groups in the
framework of the EU-US International
Research Co-operation, supported by
NSF and EC. We concentrate in this
paper on the current position of the
ISLE Computational Lexicon Working
Group. We provide a short description
of the EU SIMPLE lexicons built on
the basis of previous EAGLES
recommendations. We then point at a
few basic methodological principles
applied in previous EAGLES phases,
and describe a few principles to be
followed in the definition of a
Multilingual ISLE Lexical Entry
(MILE).
1 Introduction: the EAGLES
initiative
1.1. What is EAGLES/ISLE?
The ISLE project is a continuation of the
long standing EAGLES initiative (Calzolari et
al., 1996), carried out through a number of
subsequent projects funded by the European
Commission (EC) since 1993. EAGLES stands
for Expert Advisory Group for Language
Engineering Standards and was launched within
EC Directorate General XIII's Linguistic
Research and Engineering (LRE) programme,
continued under the Language Engineering (LE)
programme, and now under the Human
Language Technology (HLT) programme as
ISLE, since January 2000. ISLE stands for
International Standards for Language
Engineering, and is carried out in collaboration
between American and European groups in the
framework of the EU-US International Research
Co-operation, supported by NSF and EC. ISLE
was built on joint preparatory EU-US work of
the previous 2 years towards setting up a
transatlantic standards oriented initiative for
HLT.
The objective of the project is to support
HLT R&D international and national projects,
and HLT industry by developing, disseminating
and promoting widely agreed and urgently
demanded HLT standards and guidelines for
infrastructural language resources (see Zampolli,
1998, and Calzolari, 1998), tools that exploit
them and LE products. The aim of
EAGLES/ISLE is thus to accelerate the
provision of standards, common guidelines, best
practice recommendations for:
? very large-scale language resources (such as
text corpora, computational lexicons, speech
corpora (Gibbon et al, 1997), multimodal
resources);
? means of manipulating such knowledge, via
computational linguistic formalisms, mark-
up languages and various software tools;
? means of assessing and evaluating
resources, tools and products (EAGLES,
1996).
The basic idea behind EAGLES work is for
the group to act as a catalyst in order to pool
concrete results coming from current major
International/ National/industrial projects.
Relevant common practices or upcoming
standards are being used where appropriate as
input to EAGLES/ISLE work, particularly in the
areas of computational lexicons, text, speech,
and multimodal annotation, and evaluation.
Numerous theories, approaches, and systems are
being taken into account, where appropriate, as
any recommendation for harmonisation must
take into account the needs and nature of the
different major contemporary approaches.
EAGLES is also drawing strong inspiration
from the results of major projects whose results
have contributed to advancing our understanding
of harmonisation issues.
1.2 A quick Overview of the ISLE
Work
The current ISLE project (see
http://www.ilc.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/isle/ISLE_H
ome_Page.htm) targets the three areas of
multilingual computational lexicons, natural
interaction and multimodality (NIMM), and
evaluation of HLT systems. These areas were
chosen not only for their relevance to the HLT
call but also for their long-term significance.
? For multilingual computational lexicons,
ISLE is working to: extend EAGLES work
on lexical semantics, necessary to establish
inter-language links; design and propose
standards for multilingual lexicons; develop
a prototype tool to implement lexicon
guidelines and standards; create exemplary
EAGLES-conformant sample lexicons and
tag exemplary corpora for validation
purposes; and develop standardised
evaluation procedures for lexicons.
? For NIMM, a rapidly innovating domain
urgently requiring early standardisation,
ISLE work is targeted to develop guidelines
for: the creation of NIMM data resources;
interpretative annotation of NIMM data,
including spoken dialogue in NIMM
contexts; and annotation of discourse
phenomena.
? For evaluation, ISLE is working on: quality
models for machine translation systems; and
maintenance of previous guidelines - in an
ISO based framework (ISO 9126, ISO
14598).
Three Working Groups, and their sub-
groups, carry out the work, according to the
already proven EAGLES methodology, with
experts from both the EU and US, working and
interacting within a strongly co-ordinated
framework. International workshops are used as
a means of achieving consensus and advancing
work. Results will be widely disseminated and
published, after due validation in collaboration
with EU and US HLT R&D projects, National
projects, and industry.
1.3. The Computational Lexicon
Working Group
We concentrate in the following on the
current position of the ISLE Computational
Lexicon Working Group (CLWG).
EAGLES work towards de facto standards
has already allowed the field of Language
Resources to establish broad consensus on key
issues for some well-established areas ? and
will allow similar consensus to be achieved for
other important areas through the ISLE project
? providing thus a key opportunity for further
consolidation and a basis for technological
advance. EAGLES previous results have already
become de facto standards. To mention several
key examples: the LE PAROLE/SIMPLE
resources (morphological/syntactic/semantic
lexicons and corpora for 12 EU languages,
Ruimy et al, 1998, Lenci et al, 1999, Bel et al,
2000) rely on EAGLES results (Sanfilippo, A. et
al., 1996 and 1999), and are now being enlarged
at the national level through many National
Projects; the ELRA Validation Manuals for
Lexicons (Underwood and Navarretta, 1997)
and Corpora (Burnard et al, 1997) are based on
EAGLES guidelines; morpho-syntactic tagging
of corpora in a very large number of EU,
international and national projects ? and for
more than 20 languages ? is conformant to
EAGLES recommendations (Leech and Wilson,
1996).
The first priority of the CLWG in the first
phase of the ISLE project was to do a
comprehensive survey of existing multilingual
lexicons. To this end the European and the
American members decided, among others, i) to
prepare a grid for lexicon description to classify
the content and structure of the surveyed
resources on the basis of a number of agreed
parameters of description, and ii) to provide a
list of cross-lingual lexical phenomena that
could be used to focus the survey. The inventory
(survey) of what exists and is available
(semantic and bilingual/multilingual lexicons,
printed bilingual dictionaries) is now being
completed, and will be made soon available on
the Web. Each participant engaged for surveying
a number of resources. A list of the main
applications that use lexical resources was also
established, to focus the survey and subsequent
recommendations around them. Each summary
of a particular bilingual or multilingual
dictionary includes: i) a description of the
surveyed dictionary structure (on the basis of the
common grid), ii) for one or two examples from
the cross-lingual lexical phenomena, an
explanation of how these examples are handled
by this dictionary.
2 The structure of the prospective
Multilingual ISLE Lexical Entry
The main goal of the CLWG is the definition
of a Multilingual ISLE Lexical Entry
(henceforth MILE). This is the main focus of the
second year of the project, the so called
?recommendation phase?.
2.1 Basic EAGLES principles
We remind here just a few basic
methodological principles derived from and
applied in previous EAGLES phases. They have
proven useful in the process of reaching
consensual de facto standards in a bottom-up
approach and will be at the basis also of ISLE
work.
The MILE is envisaged as a highly modular
and possibly layered structure, with different
levels of recommendations. Such an architecture
has been proven useful in previous EAGLES
work, e.g in the EAGLES morphosyntactic
recommendations (Monachini and Calzolari,
1996), which embody three levels of linguistic
information: obligatory, recommended and
optional (optional splits furthermore into
language independent and language dependent).
This modularity would enhance: the flexibility
of the representation, the easiness of
customisation and integration of existing
resources (developed under different theoretical
frameworks or for different applications), the
usability by different systems which are in need
of different portions of the encoded data, the
compliance with the proposed standards also of
partially instantiated entries.
The MILE recommendations should also be
very granular, in the sense of reaching a
maximal decomposition into the minimal basic
information units that reflect the phenomena we
are dealing with. This principle was previously
recommended and used to allow easier
reusability or mappability into different
theoretical or system approaches (Heid and
McNaught, 1991): small units can be assembled,
in different frameworks, according to different
(theory/application dependent) generalisation
principles. Such basic notions must be
established before considering any system-
specific generalisations, otherwise our work
may be too conditioned by system-specific
approaches. For example, ?synonymy? can be
taken as a basic notion; however, the notion of
?synset? is a generalisation, closely associated
with the WordNet approach. ?Qualia relations?
are another example of a generalisation, whereas
?semantic relation? is a basic notion. Modularity
is also a means to achieve better granularity.
On the other side, past EAGLES experience
has shown it is useful in many cases to accept
underspecification with respect to
recommendations for the representation of some
phenomenon (and hierarchical structure of the
basic notions, attributes, values, etc.), i) to allow
for agreement on a minimal level of specificity
especially in cases where we cannot reach wider
agreement, and/or ii) enable mappability and
comparability of different lexicons, with
different granularity, at the minimal common
level of specificity (or maximal generality). For
example, the work on syntactic
subcategorisation in EAGLES proved that it was
problematic to reach agreement on a few
notions, e.g. it seemed unrealistic to agree on a
set of grammatical functions. This led to an
underspecified recommendation, but
nevertheless one that was useful.
One of the first objectives of the CLWG will
be to discover and list the (maximal) set of
(minimal/more granular) basic notions needed
to describe the multilingual level. This task will
be facilitated by the survey of existing lexicons,
accompanied by the analysis of the requirements
of a few multilingual applications, and by the
parallel analysis of typical multilingual complex
phenomena. Most or part of these basic notions
should be already included in previous EAGLES
recommendations, and, with different
distribution, in the existing and surveyed
lexicons. We have therefore to revisit earlier
linguistic layers (previous EAGLES work,
essentially monolinguistic) to see what we need
to change/add or what we can reuse for the
multilingual layer. The multilingual layer thus
depends on monolingual layers.
2.2 The MILE architecture
The MILE is intended as a meta-entry, acting
as a common representational layer for
multilingual lexical resources. The key-ideas
underlying the design of a meta-entry can be
summarized as follows. Different theoretical
frameworks appear to impose different
requirements on how lexical information should
be represented. One way of tackling the issue of
theoretical compatibility stems from the
observation that existing representational
frameworks mostly differ in the way pieces of
linguistic information are mutually implied,
rather than in the intrinsic nature of this
information. To give a concrete example, almost
all theoretical frameworks claim that lexical
items have a complex semantic organization, but
some of them try to describe it through a
multidimensional internal structure (cf. the
qualia structure in the Generative Lexicon,
Pustejovsky 1995), others by specifying a
network of semantic relations (cf. WordNet,
Miller et al 1990), and others in terms of
argumental frames (cf FrameNet, Baker et al
1998; Lexical Conceptual Structures, Jackendoff
1992; etc.). A way out of this theoretical
variation is to augment the expressive power of
the lexical representation language both
horizontally, i.e. by distributing the linguistic
information over mutually independent "coding
layers", and vertically, by further specifying the
information conveyed by each such layer. This
solution will contribute to solve the issues raised
by theoretical variation by defining a common
level onto which different types of resources
will be mapped without loss of information.
This appears to be a necessary condition to
guarantee an efficient re-use and interchange of
lexical data, often coming from resources
developed according to very different
architectural and theoretical criteria.
With respect to this issue, the MILE is
designed to meet the following desiderata:
? factor out linguistically independent (but
possibly correlated) primitive units of
lexical information;
? make explicit information which is
otherwise only indirectly accessible by NLP
systems;
? rely on lexical analysis which have the
highest degree of inter-theoretical
agreement;
? avoid framework-specific representational
solutions.
All these requirements serve the main purpose
of making the lexical meta-entry open to task-
and system-dependent parameterization.
The MILE is modular along at least three
dimensions:
? modularity in the macrostructure and
general architecture of MILE
? modularity in the microstructure
? modularity in the specific microstructure of
the MILE word sense.
A. Modularity in the macrostructure and
general architecture of the MILE ? The
following modules should be at least envisaged,
referring to the macrostructure of a multilingual
system:
1. Meta-information - versioning of the
lexicon, languages, updates, status, project,
origin, etc. (see e.g. OLIF (Thurmair, 2000),
GENELEX).
2. Possible architecture(s) of bilingual/
multilingual lexicon(s): we must analyse the
interactions of the different modules, and the
general structure in which they are inserted, both
in the interlingua- and transfer-based
approaches, and in possibly hybrid solutions. An
open issue is also the relation between the
source language (SL) and target language (TL)
portions of a lexicon.
B. Modularity in the microstructure of the
MILE ? The following modules should be at
least envisaged, referring to the global
microstructure of MILE:
1. Monolingual linguistic representation -
this includes the morphosyntactic, syntactic, and
semantic information characterizing the MILE
in a certain language. It generally corresponds to
the typology of information contained in
existing lexicons, such as PAROLE-SIMPLE,
(Euro)WordNet (EWN), COMLEX, and
FrameNet. Following the general organizations
of computational lexicons like PAROLE-
SIMPLE, which in turn instantiates the
GENELEX framework (GENELEX, 1994), at
the monolingual level the MILE sorts out the
linguistic information into three layers,
respectively for morphological, syntactic and
semantic dimensions. Typologies of information
to be part of this module include (not an
exhaustive list):
? Phonological layer
? phonemic transcription
? prosodic information
? Morphological layer
? Grammatical category
? Inflectional class
? Modifications of the lemma
? Mass/count, 'pluralia tantum'
? Syntactic layer
? Idiosyncratic behaviour with respect to
specific syntactic rules (passivisation,
middle, etc.)
? Auxiliary
? Attributive vs. predicative function,
gradability
? Subcategorization frames
? Grammatical functions of the positions
? Morphosyntactic and/or lexical features
? Information on control and raising
properties
? Semantic layer
? Characterization of senses through links
to an ontology
? Domain information
? Argument structure, semantic roles,
selectional preferences on the arguments
? Event type
? Link to the syntactic positions
? Basic semantic relations between word
senses (i.e. synonymy, hyponymy,
meronymy)
? Description of word-sense in terms of
more specific, semantic/world-
knowledge relations among word-senses
(such as EWN relations, SIMPLE
Qualia Structure, FrameNet Frame
Elements, etc.)
? Information about regular polisemous
alternation
? Information concerning cross-part of
speech relations (e.g. intelligent -
intelligence; writer - to write)
The expressive power of the semantic layer is of
the utmost importance for the multilingual layer.
A general issue discussed in ISLE concerns
whether consensus has to be pursued at the
generic level of ?type? of information or also at
the level of its ?values? or actual ways of
representation. The answer may be different for
different notions, e.g. try to reach the more
specific level of agreement also on values for
types of meronymy, but not for types of
ontology.
2. Collocational information - This module
includes more or less typical and/or fixed
syntagmatic patterns including the lexical head
defined by the MILE, which can contribute to
characterise its use, or to perform more subtle
and/or domain specific characterisations. It
includes at least:
? Typical collocates
? Support verb construction
? Phraseological or multiwords constructions
? Compounds
? Corpus-driven examples
This module ? not yet dealt with in the
previous EAGLES - is critical in a multilingual
context both to characterise a word-sense in a
more granular way and to make it possible to
perform a number of operations, such as WSD
or translation in a specific context. Here,
synergies with the NSF-XMELLT project on
multi-word expressions are exploited. First
proposals for the representation of support verbs
and noun-noun compounds in multilingual
computational lexicons are laid out, and now
tested on some language pairs.
3. Multilingual apparatus ? This
represents the focal part of the CLWG activities,
which will concentrate its main effort in
proposing a general framework for the
expression of multilingual transfers. Some of the
main issues at stake here are:
? identify a typology of the most common
cases of problematic transfer (actually this
task has been partially performed during the
survey phase of the project);
? identify which conditions must be
expressible and which transformation
actions are necessary, in order to establish
the correct multilingual mappings;
? select which types of information these
conditions must access in the modules (1)
and (2) above;
? identify the various methods of establishing
SL --> TL equivalence
? examine the variability of granularity
needed when translating in different
languages, and the architectural implications
of this.
C. Modularity in the specific
microstructure of the MILE word-sense (word-
sense is the basic unit at the multilingual level) ?
Senses should also have a modular structure (i.e.
the above distinction between modules (B.1.)
and (B.2.) must be intended at word-sense
level):
1. Coarse-grained (general purpose)
characterisation in terms of prototypical
properties, captured by the formal means in
(B.1.) above, which serves to partition the
meaning space in large areas and is sufficient for
some NLP tasks.
2. Fine-grained (domain or text
dependent) characterisation mostly in terms of
collocational/syntagmatic properties (B.2.),
which is especially useful for specific tasks,
such as WSD and translation. Different types of
information may have a sort of different
operational specialisation.
3 Methodological and organisational
issues
As in previous EAGLES, it is considered
helpful to base the recommendations on the
requirements stemming from a few application
systems. The CLWG agreed to focus on two
major broad categories of application: machine
translation (MT) and cross-lingual information
retrieval (CLIR).
As said above, the CLWG has agreed that we
should base any multilingual description on
monolingual descriptions. MILE should
therefore include previous EAGLES
recommendations for other layers. We must
evaluate the usefulness of these layers with
respect to multilingual tasks, focusing in
particular on MT and CLIR tasks. Obviously an
additional module is needed, where
correspondences between languages are defined,
including conditions on syntactic structures
involving lexical entries. The linking module
(transfer) may not be the same for different
applications: it may be simpler for CLIR, which
may be a subset of the one needed for MT. For
CLIR, an ontology or semantic hierarchy is
however required.
We are also adopting an approach that would
lead to a formalisation of the information
contained in traditional bilingual dictionaries,
such as restrictions on translation, collocations
and examples.
The CLWG agreed the following were
appropriate tasks to concentrate on, in order to
discover basic notions for MILE:
1. Analyse information given to the human
user in bilingual/monolingual dictionaries
that allows selection of correct equivalence.
2. Analyse (if these can be obtained)
instructions/guidelines supplied to
lexicographers for writing bilingual entries.
3. Investigate, in corpus concordances, which
are the clues that allow to
disambiguate/decide on proper sense for
translation.
4. Elaborate a typology of transfer
conditions/actions and investigate lexical
requirements.
5. Look at multilingual lexical requirements
for approaches based on interlingual
concepts/ontologies.
6. Rank our typology in terms of scale of
difficulty of disambiguation
3.1. Types of information to be
addressed
Regarding the various types of information to
be addressed, the following "workflow" was
agreed:
1. notion already exists in previous work
(EAGLES, PAROLE/SIMPLE, EWN, etc.):
? evaluate the notion to see if it is
generally adequate
? evaluate its usefulness for multilingual
purposes
2. notion does not exist as recommendation
and is not otherwise used in applications
(e.g. collocation type), or there are notions
from other layers that we have not already
considered:
? decide which method is needed to do
work on it
? prioritise: what is used already in
multilingual lexicons (but not covered in
EAGLES, e.g. covered in OLIF) and
also then look at what needed in near
future
? record what needs further development.
A starting point will be the previous
EAGLES recommendations, as instantiated in
PAROLE/SIMPLE, for which ? as said above -
there is a unique DTD for all the 12 languages
involved. This will be revised and augmented
after work done on various types of information.
ISLE will also implement a lexicographic tool,
with which a sample of lexical entries will be
encoded according to the MILE structure.
Assignments for in-depth analysis of the
information types were done, and work is now
carried out by the various CLWG members.
Results of on-going work will provide: (i.) a list
of types of information that should be encoded
in each module; (ii.) linguistic specifications and
criteria; (iii.) a format for their representation in
multilingual lexicons; (iv.) their respective
weight/importance in a multilingual lexicon
(towards a layered approach to
recommendations).
4 Conclusions
Lexicon construction is a costly enterprise,
and a major goal is to set up general initiatives
to ease and optimise this process. The crescent
needs of lexical data, both of general and of
domain-specific nature, makes lexicon
development an always incremental and
potentially open effort, often to be carried out in
distributed environments and through the joint
work of multiple actors. It is therefore necessary
to facilitate lexicon versioning and authoring,
the fast integration and scalability of the
resources, the fast integration of domain and
general linguistic knowledge, as well as the
integration of the work of human lexicographers
with the information automatically extracted
from corpora and dictionaries. The main purpose
of the ISLE CLWG is to provide a satisfactory
answer to these needs, by establishing a general
infrastructure for lexical resources sharing. Its
backbone is represented by the MILE, a lexical
meta-entry, whose definition is now the focus of
the CLWG activities. The MILE is a modular
architecture for the representation of
multilingual lexical data, and aims at becoming
a common parlance for the representation and
encoding of lexical data.
References
Baker, Collin F., Fillmore, Charles J., and Lowe,
John B. (1998). "The Berkeley FrameNet project";
in Proceedings of the COLING-ACL, Montreal,
Canada.
Bel N., Busa, F., Calzolari, N., Gola, E., Lenci, A.,
Monachini, M., Ogonowski, A., Peters, I., Peters,
W., Ruimy, N., Villegas, M., Zampolli, A. (2000).
SIMPLE: A General Framework for the
Development of Multilingual Lexicons. LREC
Proceedings, Athens.
Burnard, L., Baker, P., McEnery, A. & Wilson, A.
(1997). An analytic framework for the validation
of language corpora. Report of the ELRA Corpus
Validation Group.
Calzolari, N. (1998). An Overview of Written
Language Resources in Europe: a few Reflections,
Facts, and a Vision, in A. Rubio, N. Gallardo, R.
Castro, A. Tejada (eds.), Proceedings of the First
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation, Granada, pp.217-224.
Calzolari, N., Mc Naught, J., Zampolli, A. (1996).
EAGLES Final Report: EAGLES Editors?
Introduction. EAG-EB-EI, Pisa.
EAGLES (1996). Evaluation of Natural Language
Processing Systems. Final Report, Center for
Sprogteknologi, Copenhagen. Also available at
http://issco-
www.unige.ch/projects/ewg96/ewg96.html.
GENELEX Consortium, (1994). Report on the
Semantic Layer, Project EUREKA GENELEX,
Version 2.1.
Gibbon, D., Moore R., Winski, R. (1997). Handbook
of Standards and Resources for Spoken Language
Systems, Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, New York.
Heid, U., McNaught, J. (1991). EUROTRA-7 Study:
Feasibility and Project Definition Study on the
Reusability of Lexical and Terminological
Resources in Computerised Applications. Final
report.
Jackendoff, R. (1992), Semantic Structures,
Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
Leech, G., Wilson, A. (1996). Recommendations for
the morphosyntactic annotation of corpora, Eag-
tcwg-mac/r, ILC-CNR, Pisa.
Lenci, A., Busa, F., Ruimy, N., Gola, E., Monachini,
M., Calzolari, N., Zampolli, A. (1999). Linguistic
Specifications. SIMPLE Deliverable D2.1. ILC
and University of Pisa.
Miller G.A, Beckwidth R., Fellbaum C., Gross D.,
and Miller K.J. (1990), "Introduction to WordNet:
An On-line Lexical Database", International
Journal of Lexicography, III, No.4: 235-244.
Monachini, M., Calzolari, N. (1996). Synopsis and
comparison of morphosyntactic phenomena
encoded in lexicons and corpora. A common
proposal and applications to European languages,
Eag-clwg-morphsyn/r, ILC-CNR, Pisa.
Pustejovsky, J. (1995). The Generative Lexicon.
Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
Ruimy, N., Corazzari, O., Gola, E., Spanu, A.,
Calzolari, N., Zampolli, A. (1998). The European
LE-PAROLE Project: The Italian Syntactic
Lexicon, in Proceedings of the First International
Conference on Language resources and
Evaluation, Granada: 241-248.
Sanfilippo, A. et al (1996). EAGLES
Subcategorization Standards. See
http://www.icl.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/syntax/syntax.
html
Sanfilippo, A. et al (1999). EAGLES
Recommendations on Semantic Encoding. See
http://www.ilc.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/rep2
Thurmair, G. (2000). OLIF Input Document, June
2000. See http://www.olif.net/main.htm
Underwood, N. & Navarretta, C. (1997). A Draft
Manual for the Validation of Lexica. Final ELRA
Report, Copenhagen.
Zampolli, A. (1998). Introduction, in A. Rubio, N.
Gallardo, R. Castro, A. Tejada (eds.), Proceedings
of the First International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation, Granada.
