A Multi-Document Multi-Lingual Automatic Summarization System 
Mohamad Ali Honarpisheh, Gholamreza Ghassem-Sani, Ghassem Mirroshandel 
Sharif University of Technology, 
Department of Computer Engineering, Tehran, Iran, 
Honarpisheh@ce.sharif.edu, Sani@sharif.ir, Mirroshandel@ce.sharif.edu  
 
 
Abstract 
Abstract. In this paper, a new multi-
document multi-lingual text summarization 
technique, based on singular value decom-
position and hierarchical clustering, is pro-
posed. The proposed approach relies on 
only two resources for any language: a 
word segmentation system and a dictionary 
of words along with their document fre-
quencies. The summarizer initially takes a 
collection of related documents, and trans-
forms them into a matrix; it then applies 
singular value decomposition to the re-
sulted matrix.  After using a binary hierar-
chical clustering algorithm, the most im-
portant sentences of the most important 
clusters form the summary. The appropri-
ate place of each chosen sentence is deter-
mined by a novel technique.  The system 
has been successfully tested on summariz-
ing several Persian document collections. 
1 Introduction 
With the advent of the Internet, different newspa-
pers and news agencies regularly upload their news 
in their sites. This let users to access different 
viewpoints and quotes about a single event. At the 
same time of this explosive growth of the amount 
of textual information, the need of people for quick 
access to information has dramatically increased. 
The solution proposed for dealing with this huge 
amount of information is using Text Summarizers. 
Several systems have been developed with respect 
to this solution (McKeown et. al., 2002; Radev et. 
al., 2001). 
Generally in the process of multi-document text 
summarization, a collection of input documents 
about a particular subject is received from the user 
and a coherent summary without redundant infor-
mation is generated. However, several challenges 
exist in this process the most important of which 
are removing redundant information from the input 
sentences and ordering them properly in the output 
summary. In a new approach to multi-document 
summarization proposed in this paper, Singular 
Value Decomposition (SVD) is used to find the 
most important dimensions and also to remove 
noisy ones. This process makes clustering of simi-
lar sentences easer. In order to determine the level 
of importance of different clusters, the generated 
singular values and singular vector of the SVD 
have been used in a fashion similar to that 
(Steinberger and., Je?ek, 2004). To evaluate gener-
ated summaries the SVD-based method proposed 
in the same paper is used. 
 
2 Text Summarization approaches 
There are different features with which we can 
classify text summarization systems. In (Sparck-
Jones, 1999) these features are divided according 
to the input, purpose, and output of system. With 
respect to this categorization, our proposed system 
is a general multi-document multi-lingual text 
summarizer which generates extracts a summary 
from the input documents. 
Different approaches to text summarization can 
be categorized in different ways according to vari-
ous features of text summarization systems. With  
733
 
 
Fig. 1.Singular Value Decomposition  
 
 
respect to the output of the system, there are two 
categories of extracting and abstracting methods. 
Extraction-based summarization methods are also 
divided into three classes. 
The first group of Extraction-based methods is 
statistical. These methods statistically assign sig-
nificance score to different textual units. The very 
first developed summarization methods were of 
this category (Edmundson and Wyllys, 1961). 
Scoring policy in these systems was based on dif-
ferent features, such as term frequency and place 
of the sentences. Vector Space Models (Salton et. 
al., 1994), compression of sentences with Auto-
matic Translation approaches (Knight and Marcu, 
2000), Hidden Markov Model (Jing and McKe-
own, 2000), Topic Signatures based methods (Lin 
and Hovy, 2000, Lacatusu et al, 2006) are among 
the most popular techniques that have been used in 
the summarization systems of this category. 
The second groups of extraction-based methods, 
shallow understanding approaches use some in-
formation about words or textual units and their 
dependencies to improve the performance of ex-
traction. The understanding can be induced using 
dependencies between words (Barzilay and Elha-
dad, 1997), rhetorical relations (Paice and Johns, 
1993), events (Filatova and Hatzivassiloglou, 
2004). In all of these methods, the most focused 
dependencies are used as a measure for saliency of 
each textual unit. 
The third group, knowledge-based approaches, 
uses particular domain knowledge in discriminat-
ing the important parts of input documents. This 
knowledge is usually taking some assumptions 
about the working domain. Centrifuger (Elhadad et 
al., 2005) is a good example of systems in this 
category, which operates in medical domains.  
The new approach proposed in this paper uses 
SVD and hierarchical clustering methods. It can 
therefore be categorized in the statistical based 
methods. 
3 SVD based methods 
Methods that use SVD to find salient information 
in the input document are a member of Vector 
Space Models. In such models, each textual unit is 
represented by a vector. Each component of this 
vector is filled with a value which represents both 
the local and global importance of each word. 
The idea of using SVD in summarization was 
first introduced in (Gong and Liu, 2001). In this 
model, the input document is transformed into an 
nm?  sparse matrix, A, where m is the number of 
words and n is the number of the sentences of input 
document. 
The SVD of this nm? matrix, with the assump-
tion nm f , is defined as follows: 
VUA ?= , (1) 
where U=[uij] is an nm? column-orthogonal ma-
trix with columns named as the left singular vec-
tors, )...,,,( 21 ndiag ???=?  is an nn ? diagonal 
matrix with non-negative diagonal elements in de-
scending order, and V=[vij] is an nn ?  row-
orthogonal matrix with rows named as the right 
singular vectors (figure 1 demonstrate application 
of SVD to A). The number of non-zero elements in 
?  is equal to the rank, r, of matrix A. 
734
There are two viewpoints about the result of per-
forming SVD on sentence by the word matrix of 
document (Gong and Liu, 2001). From transforma-
tion viewpoint, SVD for each sentence reduces the 
dimensions from m to r. The salience degree of the 
reduced dimension decreases from the first to the 
rth dimension. From the semantic viewpoint, SVD 
derives the hidden latent structure of the input 
document. This structure is represented in r line-
arly independent base vectors (i.e. concepts). SVD 
can capture and model the interrelations between 
concepts and hidden topics, which can be used to 
cluster semantically related words and sentences. 
In SVD-summarization method, for each salient 
concept (singular vector) of matrix V, the sentence 
with the highest value in that dimension is chosen. 
This technique helps us to choose the sentences of 
the summary that best represent the most important 
concepts. For example, the most important sen-
tence of a document in this summarization method 
is the sentence that has the highest value in the first 
row of V.   
However, this method faces two significant 
problems. First, the number of dimensions should 
be less than or at most equal to the number of dis-
covered. Second, in this method just individual 
concept is used to determine their saliency, not 
their combinations. This strategy obviously works 
poor when a sentence that is not the most impor-
tant of any dimension alone may contain concept 
that in combination make it important enough. 
These problems led to the introduction of a new 
summarization method (Steinberger and Je?ek, 
2004). This new approach uses summation of the 
weighted components of singular vectors instead of 
each individual concept alone. The weight of each 
vector's component of each sentence is its corre-
sponding singular value. The reason for such 
weighting is to increase the effect of more impor-
tant singular vectors. Formally, the degree of sali-
ence of each sentence can be computed by using 
the following formula: 
?
=
=
r
i
iikk vs
1
22
, ..?  (2) 
where sk is the salience degree of kth sentence in 
the modified latent vector space, and r is the num-
ber of important dimensions of the new space. Cor-
responding value of each r dimensions is greater 
than half of the first singular value. 
Both of above strategies for text summarization 
were proposed for single document summarization 
only. These approaches do not utilize the clustering 
power of SVD in discovering sentences with close 
meanings. On the other hand, their pure reliance on 
SVD, which does not depend on the characteristics 
of any language, makes them appropriate to be ap-
plied to any language. 
4 Multi-Document SVD based Summari-
zation 
In this paper a new version of the SVD based 
summarization is introduced. After transforming 
all documents into sentence by word matrix, SVD 
is applied to the resultant matrix. To remove re-
dundant sentences from the summary, a hierarchi-
cal bottom-up clustering algorithm is applied to the 
r most important extracted concepts of the input 
sentences. After extracting the clusters, the sali-
ency score of each cluster is determined, and the 
most important clusters are selected. At the same 
time, using a simple ordering method, the appro-
priate place of each sentence in the sorted collec-
tion is determined. In the following sections, each 
of these processes is described in more details.  
Matrix Construction and Application of SVD 
Given a collection of input documents that are re-
lated to a particular subject, the system decom-
poses the documents into sentences and their cor-
responding words. In addition, it computes the to-
tal number of occurrences of each word in all 
documents as the Term Frequency (TF). 
The developed system works on Persian lan-
guage. It is assumed that words are separated by 
spaces. However, some words in Persian are com-
pound words .However this did not cause any 
problem for the developed system; because the 
most meaningful part of such words is usually less 
common than others and thus have an Inverse 
Document Frequency (IDF) that is higher than that 
of more common less meaningful parts. IDF repre-
sents the amount of meaning stored in each word. 
It can be used to reduce the impact of less impor-
tant constituents such as stop words, which usually 
have a high TF but contains little meaning.The 
formula for calculating IDF is as follows: 
)
)(
log()(
termNUMDOC
NUMDOC
termIDF = , (3) 
735
where NUMDOC represents the total number of 
document processed to create IDF dictionary and 
NUMDOC(term) is the number of documents in 
which the term appeared. 
After decomposition, the input sentences along 
with their corresponding words are arranged as a 
matrix. Two different weighting schemes have 
been applied to each element of this matrix: 1) a 
constant value and, 2) each word's associated 
TF*IDF (Salton and Buckley, 1988).  
After constructing the Sentence by word matrix, 
SVD is applied to the resultant matrix. Applying 
SVD removes the effect of unimportant words and 
highlights more salient dimensions. It also reduces 
the number of dimensions for each sentence, re-
sulting in an easer clustering process. This im-
proves the performance of sentence clustering by 
making it faster and less sensible to unimportant 
differences between sentences. 
Clustering 
To cluster reduced dimension sentences, a binary 
hierarchical agglomerative clustering algorithm 
with average group linkage is used. In this algo-
rithm, at first, each sentence is considered as a 
cluster. At each step, two closest clusters are com-
bined into a single cluster. The dimension of this 
new cluster is the average dimensions of the two 
combining ones. These steps are repeated until we 
have only one cluster. So the result of this algo-
rithm is a binary tree. 
The question that needs to be answered at this 
step is "how clusters containing similar sentences 
can be extracted from this binary tree?" Two prop-
erties are required to propose a sub-tree as a possi-
ble cluster of similar sentences: 
1. The number of existing sentences at the current 
node (cluster) should be less than or equal to 
the total number of input documents; because 
it is assumed that there is not much redundant 
information in each document. This assump-
tion is valid with respect to the news docu-
ments in which there might be only little re-
dundancy. 
2. The distance between two children of the cur-
rent cluster should be less than or equal to the 
distance between current cluster and its sibling 
node. This condition has been found empiri-
cally. 
Using these two heuristics, similar clusters are ex-
tracted from the binary tree. 
Finding Salient units 
To select important clusters from the set of ex-
tracted clusters, different clusters are scored based 
on two diffrent methods. In the first method, the 
average of TF*IDF of different words in the each 
sentence in the current cluster are used. The second 
approach was the latest SVD-based approach 
which was proposed by (Steinberger and Je?ek, 
2004) and was described in the section 3. In the 
latter, score of each cluster is found using the fol-
lowing formula: 
||
)(
)(
cluster
sscore
clusterscore clusters
?
?= , (4) 
where |cluster| represent the number of sentences 
in the current cluster. 
Selecting and ordering sentences: 
In this step, the final representation of the sum-
mary will be generated. To this end, from each im-
portant cluster, a sentence should be selected. At 
the same time, the proper order of selected sen-
tences should be determined. To find this order, a 
Representative Document (RD) is selected. The 
RD is the document which includes most sentences 
of the most important clusters. After selecting RD 
the following steps are performed: 
  
1. Starting from the most important cluster, while 
the number of processed words of summary 
sentences does not exceed form the specified 
number: 
a. If no sentence from the current cluster was 
not added to the summary: 
i. If there is a sentence from the RD in this 
cluster, choose this sentence; 
ii. Otherwise find the most important sen-
tence, the current cluster: To find out the 
place of the selected sentence in the 
summary, a search is performed for clus-
ters that contain both sentences from RD 
and neighbors of the selected sentence. 
The place of the sentences from RD that 
co- clustered with neighbors of the se-
lected sentence is chosen as the selected 
sentence boundary.  
iii. If any place has been found for the se-
lected sentence, add it to summary in the 
specified location, and mark that cluster 
as having a sentence in the summary. 
736
2. If it remains any unplaced sentence which 
should be presented in the summary, go to 
step 1 with the remaining number of words. 
5 Experiments 
5.1 Testing Collection 
The proposed summarizer is originally developed 
for the Persian language. In Persian like many 
other languages there is not a standard test collec-
tion, to evaluate the summarizers. To overcome the 
lake of a test collection in Persian, an unsupervised 
approach of evaluating summaries is selected (i.e. 
SVD-based evaluation method proposed in 
(Steinberger and Je?ek, 2004)). In addition to an 
evaluator, a collection of documents was also re-
quired. For this purpose different texts related to a 
single event were collected. The properties of these 
collections are presented in table 1 
5.2 Results and Discussions: 
To find out which term weighting and distance 
measure causes the highest increase in the SVD-
Scores, various combinations of these approaches 
has been used in the summarization approach. To 
find the distance between clusters, Euclidian, 
Hamming, and Chebyshev distances and to deter-
mine the saliency of different clusters, TFIDF and 
SVD-based methods were used. The gained SVD-
Based score using different configurations are rep-
resented in table 2 
As it can be seen in table 2, TFIDF-based meth-
ods score higher than SVD-based methods. Also, 
the most promising distance was the hamming dis-
tance.  It can also be seen that the performance de-
creases substantially when instead of a constant 
value tf*idf scores were used. It was observed that 
using various distance measure the SVD-Score of 
each collection would be different. The SVD-
Scores are in favor of using the boosting methods 
for classification of sentences with different dis-
tance measure for each classifier. Comparing these 
results with the ones proposed in (Steinberger and 
Je?ek, 2004), a significant decrease in evaluated 
SVD-Based scores is observed. One of the reasons 
for this phenomenon is that the distinct words ap-
pearing in multi-documents are more extensive 
than the words appear in a single document. 
6 Conclusions 
This paper presents a new SVD-based multi-
lingual multi-document summarization method 
using agglomerative clustering. In this method, 
first, using SVD, the most important concepts rep-
resenting sentences are extracted into a word by a 
sentence matrix. Then, similar sentences are clus-
tered using a new heuristic method. Finally, impor- 
  
Average number of distinct words in documents 1474 
Average number of sentences in documents 32 
Average number of sentences in subjects 643 
Maximum Number of distinct words in subjects 2189 
Minimum Number of distinct words in subjects 485 
Number of subjects 14 
Table 1. Testing Collections ?Details 
Euclidian Hamming Chebyshev  
Avg Max Min Avg Max Min Avg Max Min 
TFIDF 0.450 0.572 0.286 0.518 0.596 0.343 0.475 0.605 0.264 
SVD-based 0.466 0.632 0.313 0.472 0.650 0.322 0.449 0.620 0.309 
Table 2. Using a constant value for word-sentence matrix 
 
Euclidian Hamming Chebyshev  
Avg Max Min Avg Max Min Avg Max Min 
TFIDF 0.364 0.549 0.109 0.269 0.512 0.113 0.406 0.512 0.283 
SVD-based 0.309 0.134 0.563 0.319 0.499 0.112 0.367 0.518 0.235 
Table 3. Using TF-IDF for each element of the matrix 
 
737
in the summary are extracted from the resulting 
clusters.  Different weighting schemes, distance 
metrics and scoring methods have been experi-
mented. According to our experiments constant 
weighting scheme along with hamming distance is 
superior to other combinations. Since this method 
only needs determination of words and their in-
verse document frequency, it can be applied to any 
language providing these resources. We are now 
trying to improve the performance of the proposed 
algorithm. It seems that applying Principle Direc-
tion Partitioning (Blei, 2002) algorithm in the clus-
tering phase and using Latent Dirichlet Allocation 
method (Boley, 1998) instead of the SVD based 
ones to model sentences can improve the score of 
the proposed method. 
References 
Barzilay, R. and Elhadad. M. 1997. ?Using lexical 
chains for text summarization.? In Proceedings of the 
ACL/EACL'97 Summarization Workshop, Madrid, 
Spain. 
Blei, D., Ng, A., and Jordan M., Latent Dirichlet aloca-
tion. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3:993?
1022, January 2003. (A shorter version appeared in 
NIPS 2002). 
Boley, D.L.: Principal Direction Divisive Partitioning. 
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, Vol. 
2(4):325?344, Dec. 1998. 
Edmundson, H.P. and Wyllys, R.E., Automatic abstract-
ing and indexing - Survey and recommendations, 
Communications of the ACM, Vol. 4, (1961) 226-
234 
Elhadad, N., Kan, M.Y., Klavans, J., McKeown, K.: 
Customization in a unified framework for summariz-
ing medical literature, Artificial Intelligence in Medi-
cine Vol. 33(2): (2005) 179-198. 
Filatova, E., Hatzivassiloglou, V.: Event-based Extrac-
tive summarization, In: Proceedings of ACL 2004 
Workshop on Summarization, (2004) 104-111. 
Gong, Y., Liu, X.: Generic Text Summarization Using 
Relevance Measure and Latent Semantic Analysis. 
Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGIR conference on 
Research and development in information retrieval, 
New Orleans, Louisiana, United States (2001) 19-25 
Jing, H., McKeown, K.: Cut and paste based text sum-
marization. Proceedings of the 1st Conference of the 
North American Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics (NAACL'00), (2000), Se-
attle-Washington 
Knight, K., Marcu, D.: Statistics based summarization 
.step one: Sentence compression, Proceeding of the 
17th National Conference of the American Associa-
tion for Artificial Intelligence (2000)703-710. 
Lacatusu, F., Hickl, A., Roberts, K., Shi, Y., Bensley, J., 
Rink, B., Wang, P., Taylor, L.: LCC?s GISTexter at 
DUC 2006: Multi-Strategy Multi-Document Summa-
rization, Document Understanding Conference 
(2006) 
Lin, C.Y., Hovy, E.: From single to multi-document 
summarization: A prototype system and its evalua-
tion. Proceedings of the ACL, pages 457?464, 2002 
McKeown, K.R., Barzilay, R., Evans, D., Hatzivassi-
loglou, V., Klavans, J.L., Nenkova, A., Sable, C., 
Schiffman, B., Sigelman, S.: Tracking and summariz-
ing news on a daily basis with Columbia's newsblas-
ter. Proceedings of 2002 Human Language Technol-
ogy Conference (HLT), San Diego, CA, 2002 
Paice, C. D., Johns, A. P.: The identification of impor-
tant concepts in highly structured technical papers, 
In: Proceedings of the 16th Annual International 
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Develop-
ment in Information Retrieval (1993) 
Radev, D. R., Blair-Goldensohn, S., Zhang, Z., Ragha-
van R.S.: Newsinessence: A system for domain-
independent, real-time news clustering and multi-
document summarization. Proceedings of 2001 Hu-
man Language Technology Conference (Demo Ses-
sion), San Diego, CA, 2001 
Salton, G., Allan, J., Buckley, C., Singhal, A.: Auto-
matic analysis, theme generation, and summarization 
of machine readable texts, Science, Vol. 264(5164), 
(1994) 1421?1426 
Salton, G. and Buckley, C.. Term weighting approaches 
in automatic text retrieval. Information Processing 
and Management, (1988), 24(5):513523 
Sparck-Jones, K.: Automatic summarizing: factors and 
directions. Mani I, Maybury MT, editors. Advances 
in automatic text summarization. (1999) 10-12 [chap-
ter 1] 
Steinberger, J., Je?ek, K. : Text Summarization and 
Singular Value Decomposition, Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science.Advances in Information Systems, 
Vol. 3261/2004, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg 
New York (2004) 245-254 
738
