Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Computational Linguistics (Coling 2008), pages 473?480
Manchester, August 2008
Reading the Markets:
Forecasting Public Opinion of Political Candidates by News Analysis
Kevin Lerman
Dept. of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY USA
klerman@cs.columbia.edu
Ari Gilder and Mark Dredze
Dept. of CIS
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA USA
agilder@alumni.upenn.edu
mdredze@cis.upenn.edu
Fernando Pereira
Google, Inc.
1600 Amphitheatre Parkway
Mountain View, CA USA
pereira@google.com
Abstract
Media reporting shapes public opinion
which can in turn influence events, partic-
ularly in political elections, in which can-
didates both respond to and shape public
perception of their campaigns. We use
computational linguistics to automatically
predict the impact of news on public per-
ception of political candidates. Our sys-
tem uses daily newspaper articles to pre-
dict shifts in public opinion as reflected
in prediction markets. We discuss various
types of features designed for this problem.
The news system improves market predic-
tion over baseline market systems.
1 Introduction
The mass media can affect world events by sway-
ing public opinion, officials and decision makers.
Financial investors who evaluate the economic per-
formance of a company can be swayed by positive
and negative perceptions about the company in the
media, directly impacting its economic position.
The same is true of politics, where a candidate?s
performance is impacted by media influenced pub-
lic perception. Computational linguistics can dis-
cover such signals in the news. For example, De-
vitt and Ahmad (2007) gave a computable metric
of polarity in financial news text consistent with
human judgments. Koppel and Shtrimberg (2004)
used a daily news analysis to predict financial mar-
ket performance, though predictions could not be
used for future investment decisions. Recently,
c
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported li-
cense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
Some rights reserved.
a study conducted of the 2007 French presiden-
tial election showed a correlation between the fre-
quency of a candidate?s name in the news and elec-
toral success (V?eronis, 2007).
This work forecasts day-to-day changes in pub-
lic perception of political candidates from daily
news. Measuring daily public perception with
polls is problematic since they are conducted by a
variety of organizations at different intervals and
are not easily comparable. Instead, we rely on
daily measurements from prediction markets.
We present a computational system that uses
both external linguistic information and internal
market indicators to forecast public opinion mea-
sured by prediction markets. We use features from
syntactic dependency parses of the news and a
user-defined set of market entities. Successive
news days are compared to determine the novel
component of each day?s news resulting in features
for a machine learning system. A combination sys-
tem uses this information as well as predictions
from internal market forces to model prediction
markets better than several baselines. Results show
that news articles can be mined to predict changes
in public opinion.
Opinion forecasting differs from that of opin-
ion analysis, such as extracting opinions, evaluat-
ing sentiment, and extracting predictions (Kim and
Hovy, 2007). Contrary to these tasks, our system
receives objective news, not subjective opinions,
and learns what events will impact public opinion.
For example, ?oil prices rose? is a fact but will
likely shape opinions. This work analyzes news
(cause) to predict future opinions (effect). This af-
fects the structure of our task: we consider a time-
series setting since we must use past data to predict
future opinions, rather than analyzing opinions in
batch across the whole dataset.
473
We begin with an introduction to prediction
markets. Several methods for new feature extrac-
tion are explored as well as market history base-
lines. Systems are evaluated on prediction markets
from the 2004 US Presidential election. We close
with a discussion of related and future work.
2 Prediction Markets
Prediction markets, such as TradeSports and the
Iowa Electronic Markets
1
, provide a setting sim-
ilar to financial markets wherein shares represent
not companies or commodities, but an outcome
of a sporting, financial or political event. For ex-
ample, during the 2004 US Presidential election,
one could purchase a share of ?George W. Bush
to win the 2004 US Presidential election? or ?John
Kerry to win the 2004 US Presidential election.?
A pay-out of $1 is awarded to winning sharehold-
ers at market?s end, e.g. Bush wins the election.
In the interim, price fluctuations driven by supply
and demand indicate the perception of the event?s
likelihood, which indicates public opinion of an
event. Several studies show the accuracy of predic-
tion markets in predicting future events (Wolfers
and Zitzewitz, 2004; Servan-Schreiber et al, 2004;
Pennock et al, 2000), such as the success of up-
coming movies (Jank and Foutz, 2007), political
stock markets (Forsythe et al, 1999) and sports
betting markets (Williams, 1999).
Market investors rely on daily news reports to
dictate investment actions. If something positive
happens for Bush (e.g. Saddam Hussein is cap-
tured), Bush will appear more likely to win, so
demand increases for ?Bush to win? shares, and
the price rises. Likewise, if something negative for
Bush occurs (e.g. casualties in Iraq increase), peo-
ple will think he is less likely to win, sell their
shares, and the price drops. Therefore, predic-
tion markets can be seen as rapid response indi-
cators of public mood concerning political candi-
dates. Market-internal factors, such as general in-
vestor mood and market history, also affect price.
For instance, a positive news story for a candidate
may have less impact if investors dislike the can-
didate. Explaining market behavior requires mod-
eling news information external to the market and
internal trends to the market.
This work uses the 2004 US Presidential elec-
tion markets from Iowa Electronic Markets. Each
market provides a daily average price, which indi-
1
www.tradesports.com, www.biz.uiowa.edu/iem/
cates the overall market sentiment for a candidate
on a given day. The goal of the prediction system
is to predict the price direction for the next day (up
or down) given all available information up to the
current day: previous days? market pricing/volume
information and the morning news. Market his-
tory represents information internal to the market:
if an investor has no knowledge of external events,
what is the most likely direction for the market?
This information can capture general trends and
volatility of the market. The daily news is the ex-
ternal information that influences the market. This
provides information, independent of any internal
market effects to which investors will respond. A
learning system for each information source is de-
veloped and combined to explain market behavior.
The following sections describe these systems.
3 External Information: News
Changes in market price are likely responses to
current events reported in the news. Investors read
the morning paper and act based on perceptions of
events. Can a system with access to this same in-
formation make good investment decisions?
Our system operates in an iterative (online) fash-
ion. On each day (round) the news for that day is
used to construct a new instance. A logistic re-
gression classifier is trained on all previous days
and the resulting classifier predicts the price move-
ment of the new instance. The system either prof-
its or loses money according to this prediction. It
then receives the actual price movement and labels
the instance accordingly (up or down). This set-
ting is straightforward; the difficulty is in choosing
a good feature representation for the classifier. We
now explore several representation techniques.
3.1 Bag-of-Words Features
The prediction task can be treated as a document
classification problem, where the document is the
day?s news and the label is the direction of the mar-
ket. Document classification systems typically rely
on bag-of-words features, where each feature indi-
cates the number of occurrences of a word in the
document. The news for a given day is represented
by a normalized unit length vector of counts, ex-
cluding common stop words and features that oc-
cur fewer than 20 times in our corpus.
474
3.2 News Focus Features
Simple bag-of-words features may not capture rel-
evant news information. Public opinion is influ-
enced by new events ? a change in focus. The day
after a debate, most papers may declare Bush the
winner, yielding a rise in the price of a ?Bush to
win? share. However, while the debate may be
discussed for several days after the event, public
opinion of Bush will probably not continue to rise
on old news. Changes in public opinion should
reflect changes in daily news coverage. Instead of
constructing features for a single day, they can rep-
resent differences between two days of news cov-
erage, i.e. the novelty of the coverage. Given the
counts of feature i on day t as c
t
i
, where feature i
may be the unigram ?scandal,? and the set of fea-
tures on day t as C
t
, the fraction of news focus for
each feature is f
t
i
=
c
t
i
|C
t
|
. The news focus change
(?) for feature i on day t is defined as,
?f
t
i
= log
(
f
t
i
1
3
(f
t?1
i
+ f
t?2
i
+ f
t?3
i
)
)
, (1)
where the numerator is the focus of news on fea-
ture i today and the denominator is the average
focus over the previous three days. The resulting
value captures the change in focus on day t, where
a value greater than 0 means increased focus and a
value less than 0 decreased focus. Feature counts
were smoothed by adding a constant (10).
3.3 Entity Features
As shown by Wiebe et al (2005), it is important to
know not only what is being said but about whom it
is said. The term ?victorious? by itself is meaning-
less when discussing an election ? meaning comes
from the subject. Similarly, the word ?scandal?
is bad for a candidate but good for the opponent.
Subjects can often be determined by proximity. If
the word ?scandal? and Bush are mentioned in the
same sentence, this is likely to be bad for Bush. A
small set of entities relevant to a market can be de-
fined a priori to give context to features. For exam-
ple, the entities ?Bush,? ?Kerry? and ?Iraq? were
known to be relevant before the general election.
Kim and Hovy (2007) make a similar assumption.
News is filtered for sentences that mention ex-
actly one of these entities. Such sentences are
likely about that entity, and the extracted features
are conjunctions of the word and the entity. For ex-
ample, the sentence ?Bush is facing another scan-
dal? produces the feature ?bush-scandal? instead
of just ?scandal.?
2
Context disambiguation comes
at a high cost: about 70% of all sentences do not
contain any predefined entities and about 7% con-
tain more than one entity. These likely relevant
sentences are unfortunately discarded, although
future work could reduce the number of discarded
sentences using coreference resolution.
3.4 Dependency Features
While entity features are helpful they cannot pro-
cess multiple entity sentences, nearly a quarter of
the entity sentences. These sentences may be the
most helpful since they indicate entity interactions.
Consider the following three example sentences:
? Bush defeated Kerry in the debate.
? Kerry defeated Bush in the debate.
? Kerry, a senator from Massachusetts, de-
feated President Bush in last night?s debate.
Obviously, the first two sentences have very dif-
ferent meanings for each candidate?s campaign.
However, representations considered so far do not
differentiate between these sentences, nor would
any heuristic using proximity to an entity.
3
Effec-
tive features rely on the proper identification of the
subject and object of ?defeated.? Longer n-grams,
which would be very sparse, would succeed for the
first two sentences but not the third.
To capture these interactions, features were ex-
tracted from dependency parses of the news ar-
ticles. Sentences were part of speech tagged
(Toutanova et al, 2003), parsed with a depen-
dency parser and labeled with grammatical func-
tion labels (McDonald et al, 2006). The result-
ing parses encode dependencies for each sentence,
where word relationships are expressed as parent-
child links. The parse for the third sentence above
indicates that ?Kerry? is the subject of ?defeated,?
and ?Bush? is the object. Features are extracted
from parse trees containing the pre-defined enti-
ties (section 3.3), using the parent, grandparent,
aunts, nieces, children, and siblings of any in-
stances of the pre-defined entities we observe. Fea-
tures are conjoined indicators of the node?s lexical
entry, part of speech tag and dependency relation
2
Other methods can identify the subject of sentiment ex-
pressions, but our text is objective news. Therefore, we em-
ploy this approximate method.
3
Several failed heuristics were tried, such as associating
each word to an entity within a fixed window in the sentence
or the closer entity if two were in the window.
475
Feature Good For
Kerry? plan? the Kerry
poll? showed? Bush Bush
won? Kerry
4
Kerry
agenda? ?s? Bush Kerry
Kerry? spokesperson? campaign Bush
Table 1: Simplified examples of features from the
general election market. Arrows point from parent
to child. Features also include the word?s depen-
dency relation labels and parts of speech.
label. For aunts, nieces, and children, the com-
mon ancestor is used, and in the case of grand-
parent, the intervening parent is included. Each
of these conjunctions includes the discovered en-
tity and back-off features are included by remov-
ing some of the other information. Note that be-
sides extracting more precise information from the
news text, this handles sentences with multiple en-
tities, since it associates parts of a sentence with
different entities. In practice, we use this in con-
junction with News Focus. Useful features from
the general election market are in table 1. Note
that they capture events and not opinions. For ex-
ample, the last feature indicates that a statement by
the Kerry campaign was good for Bush, possibly
because Kerry was reacting to criticism.
4 Internal Information: Market History
News cannot explain all market trends. Momen-
tum in the market, market inefficiencies, and slow
news days can affect share price. A candidate who
does well will likely continue to do well unless
new events occur. Learning general market behav-
ior can help explain these price movements.
For each day t, we create an instance using fea-
tures for the price and volume at day t ? 1 and
the price and volume change between days t ? 1
and t ? 2. We train using a ridge regression
5
on
all previous days (labeled with their actual price
movements) to forecast the movement for day t,
which we convert into a binary value: up or down.
4
This feature matches phrases like ?Kerry won [the de-
bate]? and ?[something] won Kerry [support]?
5
This outperformed more sophisticated algorithms, in-
cluding the logistic regression used earlier. This may be due
to the fact that many market history features (e.g. previous
price movements) are very similar in nature to the future price
movements being predicted.
5 Combined System
Since both news and internal market information
are important for modeling market behavior, each
one cannot be evaluated in isolation. For example,
a successful news system may learn to spot impor-
tant events for a candidate, but cannot explain the
price movements of a slow news day. A combina-
tion of the market history system and news features
is needed to model the markets.
Expert algorithms for combining prediction sys-
tems have been well studied. However, experi-
ments with the popular weighted majority algo-
rithm (Littlestone and Warmuth, 1989) yielded
poor performance since it attempts to learn the
optimal balance between systems while our set-
ting has rapidly shifting quality between few ex-
perts with little data for learning. Instead, a sim-
ple heuristic was used to select the best perform-
ing predictor on each day. We compare the 3-
day prediction accuracy (measured in total earn-
ings) for each system (news and market history)
to determine the current best system. The use of
a small window allows rapid change in systems.
When neither system has a better 3-day accuracy
the combined system will only predict if the two
systems agree and abstain otherwise. This strategy
measures how accurately a news system can ac-
count for price movements when non-news move-
ments are accounted for by market history. The
combined system improved over individual evalu-
ations of each system on every market
6
.
6 Evaluation
Daily pricing information was obtained from the
Iowa Electronic Markets for the 2004 US Presi-
dential election for six Democratic primary con-
tenders (Clark, Clinton, Dean, Gephardt, Kerry
and Lieberman) and two general election candi-
dates (Bush and Kerry). Market length varied as
some candidates entered the race later than others:
the DNC markets for Clinton, Gephardt, Kerry,
and Lieberman were each 332 days long, while
Dean?s was 130 days and Clark?s 106. The general
election market for Bush was 153 days long, while
Kerry?s was 142.
7
The price delta for each day
was taken as the difference between the average
6
This outperformed a single model built over all features,
perhaps due to the differing natures of the feature types we
used.
7
The first 11 days of the Kerry general election market
were removed due to strange price fluctuations in the data.
476
price between the previous and current day. Mar-
ket data also included the daily volume that was
used as a market history feature. Entities selected
for each market were the names of all candidates
involved in the election and ?Iraq.?
News articles covering the election were ob-
tained from Factiva
8
, an online news archive run
by Dow Jones. Since the system must make a pre-
diction at the beginning of each day, only articles
from daily newspapers released early in the morn-
ing were included. The corpus contained approxi-
mately 50 articles per day over a span of 3 months
to almost a year, depending on the market.
9
While most classification systems are evaluated
by measuring their accuracy on cross-validation
experiments, both the method and the metric are
unsuitable to our task. A decision for a given day
must be made with knowledge of only the previ-
ous days, ruling out cross validation. In fact, we
observed improved results when the system was
allowed access to future articles through cross-
validation. Further, raw prediction accuracy is not
a suitable metric for evaluation because it ignores
the magnitude in price shifts each day. A sys-
tem should be rewarded proportional to the signif-
icance of the day?s market change.
To address these issues we used a chronological
evaluation where systems were rewarded for cor-
rect predictions in proportion to the magnitude of
that day?s shift, i.e. the ability to profit from the
market. This metric is analogous to weighted accu-
racy. On each day, the system is provided with all
available morning news and market history from
which an instance is created using one of the fea-
ture schemes described above. We then predict
whether the market price will rise or fall and the
system either earns or loses the price change for
that day if it was right or wrong respectively. The
system then learns the correct price movement and
the process is repeated for the next day.
10
Sys-
tems that correctly forecast public opinions from
the news will make more money. In economic
terms, this is equivalent to buying or short-selling a
single share of the market and then selling or cov-
ering the short at the end of the day.
11
Scores were
8
http://www.factiva.com/
9
While 50 articles may not seem like much, humans read
far less text before making investment decisions.
10
This scheme is called ?online learning? for which a
whole class of algorithms apply. We used batch algorithms
since training happens only once per day.
11
More complex investment schemes are possible than
what has been described here. We choose a simple scheme
Market History Baseline
DNC Clark 20 13
Clinton 38 -8
Dean 23 24
Gephardt 8 1
Kerry -6 6
Lieberman 3 2
General Kerry 2 15
Bush 21 20
Average (% omniscience) 13.6 9.1
Table 2: Results using history features for predic-
tion compared with a baseline system that invests
according to the previous day?s result.
normalized for comparison across markets using
the maximum profit obtainable by an omniscient
system that always predicts correctly.
Baseline systems for both news and market his-
tory are included. The news baseline follows the
spirit of a study of the French presidential elec-
tion (V?eronis, 2007), which showed that candidate
mentions correlate to electoral success. Attempts
to follow this method directly ? predicting mar-
ket movement based on raw candidate mentions ?
did very poorly. Instead, we trained our learning
system with features representing daily mention
counts of each entity. For a market history base-
line, we make a simple assumption about market
behavior: the current market trend will continue,
predict today?s behavior for tomorrow.
There were too many features to learn in the
short duration of the markets so only features that
appeared at least 20 times were included, reduc-
ing bag-of-words features from 88.8k to 28.3k and
parsing features from 1150k to 15.9k. A real world
system could use online feature selection.
6.1 Results
First, we establish performance without news in-
formation by testing the market history system
alone. Table 2 shows the profit of the history pre-
diction and baseline systems. While learning beats
the rule based system on average, both earn im-
pressive profits considering that random trading
would break even. These results corroborate the
inefficient market observation of Pennock et al
(2000). Additionally, the general election markets
sometimes both increased or decreased, an impos-
sible result in an efficient zero-sum market.
to make the evaluation more transparent.
477
Figure 1: Results for the different news features and combined system across five markets. Bottom
bars can be compared to evaluate news components and combined with the stacked black bars (history
system) give combined performance. The average performance (far right) shows improved performance
from each news system over the market history system.
During initial news evaluations with the com-
bined system, the primary election markets did ei-
ther very poorly or quite well. The news predic-
tion component lost money for Clinton, Gephardt,
and Lieberman while Clark, Dean and Kerry all
made money. Readers familiar with the 2004 elec-
tion will immediately see the difference between
the groups. The first three candidates were minor
contenders for the nomination and were not news-
makers. Hillary Clinton never even declared her
candidacy. The average number of mentions per
day for these candidates in our data was 20. In con-
trast, the second group were all major contenders
for the nomination and an average mention of 94 in
our data. Clearly, the news system can only do well
when it observes news that effects the market. The
system does well on both general election markets
where the average candidate mention per day was
503. Since the Clinton, Gephardt and Lieberman
campaigns were not newsworthy, they are omitted
from the results.
Results for news based prediction systems are
shown in figure 1. The figure shows the profit
made from both news features (bottom bars) and
market history (top black bars) when evaluated as
a combined system. Bottom bars can be compared
to evaluate news systems and each is combined
with its top bar to indicate total performance. Neg-
ative bars indicate negative earnings (i.e. weighted
accuracy below 50%). Averages across all mar-
kets for the news systems and the market history
system are shown on the right. In each market,
the baseline news system makes a small profit, but
the overall performance of the combined system is
worse than the market history system alone, show-
ing that the news baseline is ineffective. However,
all news features improve over the market history
system; news information helps to explain market
behaviors. Additionally, each more advanced set
of news features improves, with dependency fea-
tures yielding the best system in a majority of mar-
kets. The dependency system was able to learn
more complex interactions between words in news
articles. As an example, the system learns that
when Kerry is the subject of ?accused? his price in-
creases but decreased when he is the object. Sim-
ilarly, when ?Bush? is the subject of ?plans? (i.e.
Bush is making plans), his price increased. But
when he appears as a modifier of the plural noun
?plans? (comments about Bush policies), his price
falls. Earning profit indicates that our systems
were able to correctly forecast changes in public
opinion from objective news text.
The combined system proved an effective way
of modeling the market with both information
sources. Figure 2 shows the profits of the depen-
dency news system, the market history system, and
the combined system?s profits and decision on two
segments from the Kerry DNC market. In the first
segment, the history system predicts a downward
trend in the market (increasing profit) and the sec-
ond segment shows the final days of the market,
where Kerry was winning primaries and the news
system correctly predicted a market increase.
V?eronis (2007) observed a connection between
electoral success and candidate mentions in news
media. The average daily mentions in the general
election was 520 for Bush (election winner) and
478
485 for Kerry. However, for the three major DNC
candidates, Dean had 183, Clark 56 and Kerry
(election winner) had the least at 43. Most Kerry
articles occurred towards the end of the race when
it was clear he would win, while early articles fo-
cused on the early leader Dean. Also, news activity
did not indicate market movement direction; me-
dian candidate mentions for a positive market day
was 210 and 192 for a negative day.
Dependency news system accuracy was corre-
lated with news activity. On days when the news
component was correct ? although not always cho-
sen ? there were 226 median candidate mentions
compared to 156 for incorrect days. Additionally,
the system was more successful at predicting neg-
ative days. While days for which it was incorrect
the market moved up or down equally, when it was
correct and selected it predicted buy 42% of the
time and sell 58%, indicating that the system bet-
ter tracked negative news impacts.
7 Related Work
Many studies have examined the effects of news on
financial markets. Koppel and Shtrimberg (2004)
found a low correlation between news and the
stock market, likely because of the extreme effi-
ciency of the stock market (Gid?ofalvi, 2001). Two
studies reported success but worked with a very
small time granularity (10 minutes) (Lavrenko et
al., 2000; Mittermayer and Knolmayer, 2006). It
appears that neither system accounts for the time-
series nature of news during learning, instead us-
ing cross-validation experiments which is unsuit-
able for evaluation of time-series data. Our own
preliminary cross-validation experiments yielded
much better results than chronological evaluation
since the system trains using future information,
and with much more training data than is actu-
ally available for most days. Recent work has ex-
amined prediction market behavior and underlying
principles (Serrano-Padial, 2007).
12
Pennock et
al. (2000) found that prediction markets are some-
what efficient and some have theorized that news
could predict these markets, which we have con-
firmed (Debnath et al, 2003; Pennock et al, 2001;
Servan-Schreiber et al, 2004).
Others have explored the concurrent modeling
of text corpora and time series, such as using stock
market data and language modeling to identify
12
For a sample of the literature on prediction markets, see
the proceedings of the recent Prediction Market workshops
(http://betforgood.com/events/pm2007/index.html).
Figure 2: Two selections from the Kerry DNC mar-
ket showing profits over time (days) for depen-
dency news, history and combined systems. Each
day?s chosen system is indicated by the bottom
stripe as red (upper) for news, blue (lower) for his-
tory, and black for ties.
influential news stories (Lavrenko et al, 2000).
Hurst and Nigam (2004) combined syntactic and
semantic information for text polarity extraction.
Our task is related to but distinct from sentiment
analysis, which focuses on judgments in opin-
ions and, recently, predictions given by opinions.
Specifically, Kim and Hovy (2007) identify which
political candidate is predicted to win by an opin-
ion posted on a message board and aggregate opin-
ions to correctly predict an election result. While
the domain and some techniques are similar to our
own, we deal with fundamentally different prob-
lems. We do not consider opinions but instead ana-
lyze objective news to learn events that will impact
opinions. Opinions express subjective statements
about elections whereas news reports events. We
use public opinion as a measure of an events im-
pact. Additionally, they use generalized features
similar to our own identification of entities by re-
placing (a larger set of) known entities with gen-
eralized terms. In contrast, we use syntactic struc-
tures to create generalized ngram features. Note
that our features (table 1) do not indicate opinions
in contrast to the Kim and Hovy features. Finally,
Kim and Hovy had a batch setting to predict elec-
tion winners while we have a time-series setting
that tracked daily public opinion of candidates.
8 Conclusion and Future Work
We have presented a system for forecasting public
opinion about political candidates using news me-
479
dia. Our results indicate that computational sys-
tems can process media reports and learn which
events impact political candidates. Additionally,
the system does better when the candidate appears
more frequently and for negative events. A news
source analysis could reveal which outlets most in-
fluence public opinion. A feature analysis could
reveal which events trigger public reactions. While
these results and analyses have significance for po-
litical analysis they could extend to other genres,
such as financial markets. We have shown that fea-
ture extraction using syntactic parses can general-
ize typical bag-of-word features and improve per-
formance, a non-trivial result as dependency parses
contain significant errors and can limit the selec-
tion of words. Also, combining the internal mar-
ket baseline with a news system improved perfor-
mance, suggesting that forecasting future public
opinions requires a combination of new informa-
tion and continuing trends, neither of which can be
captured by the other.
References
Debnath, S., D. M. Pennock, C. L. Giles, and
S. Lawrence. 2003. Information incorporation in
online in-game sports betting markets. In Electronic
Commerce.
Devitt, Ann and Khurshid Ahmad. 2007. Sentiment
polarity identification in financial news: A cohesion-
based approach. In Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL).
Forsythe, R., T.A. Rietz, , and T.W. Ross. 1999.
Wishes, expectations, and actions: A survey on price
formation in election stock markets. Journal of Eco-
nomic Behavior and Organization, 39:83?110.
Gid?ofalvi, G. 2001. Using news articles to predict
stock price movements. Technical report, Univ. of
California San Diego, San Diego.
Hurst, Matthew and Kamal Nigam. 2004. Retrieving
topical sentiments from online document collections.
In Document Recognition and Retrieval XI.
Jank, Wolfgang and Natasha Foutz. 2007. Using vir-
tual stock exchanges to forecast box-office revenue
via functional shape analysis. In The Prediction
Markets Workshop at Electronic Commerce.
Kim, Soo-Min and Eduard Hovy. 2007. Crystal: Ana-
lyzing predictive opinions on the web. In Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).
Koppel, M. and I. Shtrimberg. 2004. Good news or
bad news? let the market decide. In AAAI Spring
Symposium on Exploring Attitude and Affect in Text:
Theories and Applications.
Lavrenko, V., M. Schmill, D. Lawrie, P. Ogilvie,
D. Jensen, and J. Allan. 2000. Mining of concur-
rent text and time series. In KDD.
Littlestone, Nick and Manfred K. Warmuth. 1989. The
weighted majority algorithm. In IEEE Symposium
on Foundations of Computer Science.
McDonald, R., K. Lerman, and F. Pereira. 2006. Mul-
tilingual dependency parsing with a two-stage dis-
criminative parser. In Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Learning (CoNLL).
Mittermayer, M. and G. Knolmayer. 2006. News-
CATS: A news categorization and trading system. In
International Conference in Data Mining.
Pennock, D. M., S. Lawrence, C. L. Giles, and F. A.
Nielsen. 2000. The power of play: Efficiency and
forecast accuracy in web market games. Technical
Report 2000-168, NEC Research Institute.
Pennock, D. M., S. Lawrence, F. A. Nielsen, and C. L.
Giles. 2001. Extracting collective probabilistic fore-
casts from web games. In KDD.
Serrano-Padial, Ricardo. 2007. Strategic foundations
of prediction markets and the efficient markets hy-
pothesis. In The Prediction Markets Workshop at
Electronic Commerce.
Servan-Schreiber, E., J. Wolfers, D. M. Pennock, and
B. Galebach. 2004. Prediction markets: Does
money matter? Electronic Markets, 14.
Toutanova, K., D. Klein, C. Manning, and Y. Singer.
2003. Feature-rich part-of-speech tagging with a
cyclic dependency network. In HLT-NAACL.
V?eronis, Jean. 2007. La presse a fait mieux que les
sondeurs. http://aixtal.blogspot.com/2007/04/2007-
la-presse-fait-mieux-que-les.html.
Wiebe, Janyce, Theresa Wilson, and Claire Cardie.
2005. Annotating expressions of opinions and emo-
tions in language. LREC, 39:165?210.
Williams, L.V. 1999. Information efficiency in betting
markets: A survey. Bulletin of Economic Research,
51:1?30.
Wolfers, J. and E. Zitzewitz. 2004. Prediction markets.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(2):107?126.
480
