Proceedings of the Workshop on Embodied Language Processing, pages 33?40,
Prague, Czech Republic, June 28, 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
A ?person? in the interface: effects on user perceptions of              
multibiometrics  
?lvaro Hern?ndez, Beatriz L?pez, David D?az, 
Rub?n Fern?ndez, Luis Hern?ndez 
GAPS, Signal, Systems and Radiocommunications 
Department 
Universidad Polit?cnica de Madrid                          
Ciudad Universitaria s/n, 28040 Madrid, Spain 
alvaro@gaps.ssr.upm.es 
Javier Caminero 
 
Multilinguism & Speech Technology 
Group 
Telef?nica I+D 
Emilio Vargas,6, 28043,Madrid,Spain 
fjcg@tid.es 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
In this paper we explore the possibilities 
that conversational agent technology offers 
for the improvement of the quality of hu-
man-machine interaction in a concrete area 
of application: the multimodal biometric 
authentication system. Our approach looks 
at the user perception effects related to the 
system interface rather than to the perform-
ance of the biometric technology itself. For 
this purpose we have created a multibio-
metric user test environment with two dif-
ferent interfaces or interaction metaphors: 
one with an embodied conversational agent 
and the other with on-screen text messages 
only. We present the results of an explora-
tory experiment that reveals interesting ef-
fects, related to the presence of a conversa-
tional agent, on the user?s perception of pa-
rameters such as privacy, ease of use, inva-
siveness or system security. 
1 Introduction 
The term biometrics, in Information Technology, 
refers to an array of techniques to identify people 
based on one or more unique behavioural or 
physiological characteristics. The techniques them-
selves have improved considerably over the past 
few decades, in terms of performance 
and reliability, with reported error rates at levels 
that indicate a reasonable level of technological 
maturity (Wayman et al, 2005). But in order to be 
truly useful the technology has to be acceptable to 
people in each of its areas of application. It is 
widely recognised (BioSec, 2004) that to achieve 
this goal a user-centred understanding much deeper 
than that which we have today is needed, and one 
which encompasses the important problem of in-
teraction with the interface. These, of course, are 
basic goals of the more general field of Human-
Computer Interaction, added to which are more 
specific issues regarding security (Sasse, 2004).  
As regards application interface technology, 
ever more realistic animated characters or embod-
ied conversational agents (ECAs) are being gradu-
ally introduced in the hope that they will enhance 
the users? experience and enrich the interaction. 
Some applications of ECAs promise to bring us 
closer to achieving universal usability. For in-
stance, they can be used to communicate with 
hearing impaired people through sign language 
(Huenerfauth, 2005) or lip-reading (Beskow et al, 
2004). Furthermore, language and the appearance, 
style, gesture repertoire and attitude of the charac-
ter can be tuned to each application?s context, to 
user preferences, and more importantly to take into 
account cultural particularities. 
The effects of animated characters on users and 
on the dynamics of user-system interaction are still 
unclear, as is the question of how to use them in 
order to maximize the benefits desired. However, 
the literature does report significant improvements 
in users? perception of the system and their interac-
tion with it when the interface includes an ani-
mated character (Moundridou and Virvou, 2001; 
Mori et al, 2003; Van Mulken et al, 1998). 
33
In what way and to what extent are the percep-
tions of users affected by the presence of an ani-
mated character in the system interface? And how 
does this affect users? opinion and acceptance of a 
biometric authentication system? We designed an 
experiment to learn a bit more about these impor-
tant usability questions. Expanding on previous 
studies of factors that impact on the usability of a 
biometric authentication system, the present paper 
reports the differences we have found in the sub-
jective perceptions of users interacting with our 
biometric authentication system through interfaces 
offering two different forms of assistance: informa-
tion and assistance in the form of text shown on-
screen, and given by a talking animated character. 
In the following section we review a variety of 
social and user perception parameters identified in 
the literature as being potentially affected by an 
ECA. In section 3 we describe our user test frame-
work and we show our results in section 4. 
2 Background 
According to Nass et al (1994) human?machine 
interaction is fundamentally social. This has clear 
implications for user interface design. The user?s 
view of how the system works doesn?t always cor-
respond to the actual way the technology works, 
but, rather, it depends on the user?s preconceptions, 
on the interaction process itself and on mental 
models that are influenced by the system interface. 
Introducing an ECA in the interface can have a 
visual impact on the user that can affect her per-
ception of the system as a whole. Ruttkay et al 
(2002) compile a number of user parameters (such 
as trust, ease of use, effectiveness, and personal 
taste) that have been shown in the literature to be 
affected by the presence of an ECA. 
Basically, there are two lines of work related to 
the effects of ECAs on the users? perception of a 
system. On one hand, the so called ?persona ef-
fect,? associated with the presence of the ECA, and 
on the other, effects connected with the character-
istics or qualities a specific ECA might have. 
2.1 The persona effect 
People seem to like and enjoy using systems with 
ECAs more than without them, they tend to find 
systems easier to use and tasks easier to accom-
plish, and they also feel more motivated and find 
learning easier (both learning to use the system and 
learning about a particular subject in the case of 
teaching applications), even though their perform-
ance is in fact roughly the same as that of users 
interacting without the ECA: Some authors specu-
late that objective performance improvements be-
yond user perceptions will be achieved in the long-
run. For instance, Moundridou and Virvou (2001) 
believe that the increased motivation of students 
using a tutor application with an animated charac-
ter may enhance their learning capacity in the long-
term. 
Animated characters can even help contain user 
stress and frustration caused by difficulties during 
interaction with the system (Mori et al, 2003), and 
as a result they may improve the efficiency of the 
interaction over that of a text-only system (Hone et 
al., 2003). An interesting point is that many of 
these psychological effects are observed as a re-
sponse to the mere presence of the animated char-
acter, without it providing any obvious cues or ex-
pression to help the user: people?s perceptions 
have also been found to be affected by an ECA?s 
behaviour. The phenomenon has been called ?Per-
sona Effect? (Lester et al, 1997). Later research 
(Van Mulken et al, 1998) has shown that the mere 
presence of an ECA can make tasks seem easier 
and more enjoyable to the user. Furthermore, an 
ECA showing greater empathic emotion towards 
the user improves the latter?s overall impression of 
the system and perception of ease of use (Brave et 
al., 2005; Mori et al, 2003). 
The presence of a human-like character can also 
have potential dangers such as the system anthro-
pomorphisation effect that may lead to users hav-
ing unrealistic expectations that are frustrated by 
actual interaction, as Walker et al (1994) points 
out, concluding that a human face in an interface 
can help attract the user?s attention and increase 
her level of motivation. At the same time, how-
ever, it can create high expectations about the in-
telligence of the system, which can lead to frustra-
tion if they are then not met. 
2.2 ECA feature-related effects 
Some authors have studied how the attitude dis-
played by the ECA, for instance regarding its pro-
activity and reactivity (Xiao et. al, 2004), may in-
duce in the user certain responses such as a sense 
of ease of use, system usefulness, frustration or 
sluggishness in task execution. Indeed, it has been 
shown that an affective and empathic attitude on 
34
the part of the ECA can have a very positive effect 
on the user?s perception of the interaction, lower-
ing the level of frustration (Hone et al, 2003; Mori 
et al, 2003) and improving the user?s opinion of 
the system (Brave et. al 2005). 
Another line of research deals with the gestures 
and nonverbal behaviour of the ECA. A good ges-
tural repertoire may promote in the user a percep-
tion of naturalness of interaction with the system 
and system socialness (see, e.g., Cassell and Bick-
more, 2000). 
The physical appearance of the ECA has also 
been seen to have an influence on the user. For 
instance, Leenheer (2006) has studied the effect of 
the colour of the clothing on the ECA, and Hone 
(2006) shows that a female character reduces user 
frustration levels better than a male one. Hone also 
points out that the actual efficiency of the interac-
tion may depend on the ECAs characteristics. 
Dehn and Van Mulken (2000) suggest that the 
great variability of results in the literature may be 
due not only to the different features of the ECAs 
across the studies, but also to the different areas of 
application in which the ECAs were used. In this 
paper we present a study of the influence of an 
ECA in a specific application domain: biometric 
authentication. First we identify the user percep-
tion parameters that we have considered may be 
affected by the ECA. Then we describe our ex-
ploratory test to examine the persona effect. We 
have left the observation of the effects of the 
physical, attitudinal and gestural features of the 
ECA for future experiments. 
3 Test design 
We created a multibiometric authentication test 
platform with two user interfaces, one with an 
ECA guiding the user through the steps of the re-
quired tasks, the other with the same information 
provided only through text displayed on the screen. 
We asked the users to carry out two general tasks: 
a) to try to access the system acting as impostors, 
and b) to enrol using their own biometric traits and 
then authenticate their real identity. 
3.1 System architecture 
The test platform architecture simulates a scenario 
in which a user has to securely access restricted 
information stored on a remote server across an IP 
network (Internet or Intranet). In order to access 
such information the user?s identity must be au-
thenticated on the basis of two biometric traits 
(hence our characterisation of the system as multi-
biometric). The user may choose the two modes 
she wishes to authenticate her identity with from 
among the following four: fingerprint, signature, 
voice and iris pattern. 
The specific technologies used for each biomet-
ric mode were: 
? Fingerprint: Sensor: Precise 100 digital 
fingerprint reader. Software: ?Precise Java? 
by Precise Biometrics. (Precise Biometrics, 
2007). 
? Signature: Sensor: Wacom Intuous2 A6 
digitizing tablet (WACOM, 2007). Soft-
ware: CiC iSign verification software (CIC, 
2007). 
? Voice: Sensor: standard microphone. 
Software: speech and speaker recognition by 
Nuance Communications (Nuance, 2007). 
? Iris: Sensor: Panasonic Autenticam BM-
100ET iris video camera (Panasonic, 2007). 
Software: ?Private ID? recognition algo-
rithms by Iridian (Iridian Technologies, 
2007).  
3.2 User interface 
We have created a web interface (using Java App-
let technology) with five flaps; one to access the 
general instructions of use, and one for each of the 
four biometric modes (in left to right order: finger-
print, signature, voice and iris). Below is a biomet-
ric trait visualisation area and a text message bar 
through which (in addition to the ECA) the system 
guides the user throughout the interaction. 
In addition, we divided the test users into two 
groups to which we presented two different inter-
action ?metaphors?: 
? ECA Metaphor: An ECA is permanently 
present on the right side of the screen to as-
sist the user by giving her general instruc-
tions and guiding her through the steps of 
the interaction. The ECA gives no informa-
tion regarding the details of each particular 
biometric mode. The ECA has been created 
and integrated into our application using the 
technology provided by Haptek (Haptek, 
2007). The ECA uses free Spanish Text-To-
Speech (TTS) software (Lernout and Haus-
35
pie, 2007) to speak to the user. Figure 1 
shows the interface with the ECA. 
? TEXT Metaphor: The user is only guided 
through text messages. 
Note: In the ECA metaphor the text message bar 
remains active, serving as subtitles to what the 
ECA says. The messages read by the ECA are ex-
actly the same as those given in text form in both 
metaphores. 
 
 
Figure 1: User interface for the multibiometric au-
thentication system. 
3.3 Description of the tests 
We designed the tests following the recommenda-
tions issued by the International Biometric Group 
(IBG, 2006). We worked with a sample of 20 us-
ers, half of which interacted with the ECA meta-
phor and the other half with the TEXT metaphor. 
The users carried out the following tasks distrib-
uted in two separate sessions (on different days): 
? On the first day an experimenter trained 
each participant in the use of each biometric 
mode. The training is specific for each mode 
and results in the creation of a biometric 
trait pattern for each user. After creating the 
user models the impostor tests were carried 
out. We allowed the users to consult the 
biometric traits (i.e., fingerprint, signature, 
voice sample and picture of the iris) of four 
people (2 females and 2 males), and we 
asked them to choose one of them in each of 
five impersonation attempts. In order to ac-
cess the system (in this case as impostors) 
users had to successfully mimic any two 
biometric traits of the same person. The sys-
tem returned the result of the attempt (suc-
cess or failure) at the end of the verification 
process. After taking all of the 5 attempts 
the users were directed to a web question-
naire to rate the ease of use, sense of secu-
rity and preference of each of the biometric 
modes, and to give an overall score for the 
system. 
? The second day the users were asked to au-
thenticate their own identity. The task was 
to successfully access the system three times 
in a maximum of 6 attempts. Just as in the 
impostor attempts, users had to enter two of 
their biometric traits in succession, after 
which they were informed of the system?s 
decision to accept or reject them. In case of 
failure in either of the two chosen modes, 
the system didn?t inform the users of which 
mode failed. At the end of this second ses-
sion the users completed another web ques-
tionnaire to give us their evaluation of sys-
tem privacy and an overall score of merit for 
the system, and for each biometric mode 
they rated pleasantness, ease of use and 
preference. In addition, those users who in-
teracted with the ECA metaphor were asked 
to rate the usefulness and pleasantness of the 
ECA. 
In addition to the questionnaire information we 
collected user-system interaction efficiency data 
such as number of failures, verification times and 
so on. However, in this paper we focus primarily 
on the users? impressions. To summarise, the pa-
rameters we have analysed are Preference, Secu-
rity, Ease-of-use, Pleasantness and Privacy, all 
measured on 7-point Likert scales. 
4 Results 
We carried out a series of two sample t-tests on the 
two groups of users (ECA Metaphor and TEXT 
Metaphor) and examined the influence of the ECA 
on the subjective parameters of the interaction. For 
each of the tests we propose a null hypothesis, HO, 
and an alternative hypothesis, H1. We have chosen 
the 5% (p=0.05) significance level to reject the null 
hypothesis. (The questionnaire values were nor-
malised to values between ?3 and 3 for statistical 
processing.) 
36
4.1 Comparative analysis of the ECA y 
TEXT metaphors 
Our general working hypothesis is that interaction 
with the ECA interface will be more pleasant for 
the user, which will result in a higher opinion of 
the system. We specify this in a series of hypothe-
ses for each of the perception parameters we intro-
duced in the previous section: 
 
Hypothesis 1:  
HO: ECA and TEXT Metaphor users rate the 
ease-of-use of the biometric modes equally. 
H1: ECA Metaphor users rate the ease-of-use of 
the biometric modes significantly higher than 
TEXT Metaphor users. 
The average ease-of-use score for the ECA 
Metaphor is: ?ECA = 1,30; and for the TEXT Meta-
phor: ?TEXT = 0.65. The two sample t-test showed 
that the difference was statistically significant 
(t(74)=1.94; p=0.028). Therefore we may accept 
the alternative hypothesis that the ECA increases 
the user?s perception of ease-of-use of biometric 
technology.  
 
Hypothesis 2:  
HO: ECA and TEXT Metaphor users rate the 
pleasantness of the biometric modes equally. 
H1: ECA Metaphor users rate the pleasantness 
of the biometric modes significantly higher than 
TEXT Metaphor users. 
The average pleasantness score for the ECA 
Metaphor is: ?ECA = 1.98; and for the TEXT Meta-
phor: ?TEXT = 1.20; The two sample t-test showed 
that the difference was statistically significant 
(t(77)=2.32; p=0.011). Therefore we may accept 
the alternative hypothesis that the ECA increases 
the pleasantness of the interaction with the biomet-
ric modes.   
 
Hypothesis 3:  
HO: ECA and TEXT Metaphor users rate the 
privacy of the system equally. 
H1: ECA Metaphor users rate the privacy of the 
system significantly higher than TEXT Metaphor 
users. 
The two sample t-test showed no statistically 
significant difference. We are therefore unable to 
reject the null hypothesis. Instead we propose the 
opposite alternative hypothesis:  
 
Hypothesis 3.1:  
H1: ECA Metaphor users rate the privacy of the 
system significantly higher than TEXT Metaphor 
users. 
The average score for the perception of privacy 
for the ECA Metaphor is ?ECA=-1.20; and for the 
TEXT Metaphor: ?TEXT=-0.60. The two sample t-
test showed that the difference was statistically 
significant (t(67)=-3.42 ; p=0.001). Thus we accept 
in this case the alternative hypothesis that users? 
perception of privacy is lower with the ECA Meta-
phor than with the TEXT Metaphor. This result 
might lend support to Zajonc?s (1965) suggestion 
that the presence of a character may enhance 
arousal or user sensitivity, which might explain 
why the user might feel uneasy letting the agent 
have her personal biometric traits. 
 
Hypothesis 4:  
HO: ECA and TEXT Metaphor users rate their 
perception of security of the biometric modes 
equally. 
H1: ECA Metaphor users? trust in the security 
of the biometric modes is higher than in the case 
of the TEXT Metaphor users. 
We obtained no statistically significant results, 
so we reverse the alternative hypothesis: 
 
Hypothesis 4.1:  
H1: ECA Metaphor users? trust in the security 
of the biometric modes is lower than in the case of 
the TEXT Metaphor users. 
Once more, our results were not statistically sig-
nificant. Therefore we cannot infer any relation-
ship between the presence of an ECA and users? 
sense security of a biometric system. 
     
Hypothesis 5:  
HO: Interaction with the ECA Metaphor and 
with the TEXT Metaphor is equally efficient. 
H1: Interaction with the ECA Metaphor is more 
efficient that interaction with the TEXT Metaphor. 
The objective parameter categories compared 
were speed (verification times and reaction times) 
and efficiency (number of verification failures, 
false matches and false rejections). We found no 
statistically significant differences between the 
averages of any of these variables across the two 
metaphors. Therefore we cannot determine any 
influence of the ECA on the actual efficiency of 
the interaction. 
37
The fact that our system is multibiometric ?in 
that it requires simultaneous verification of two 
from among four possible biometric traits? affects 
the complexity of the verification process (Ubuek, 
2003). We now look at the effect our ECA had on 
the users? perception of the cognitive demand and 
of the need for the extra security our multibiomet-
ric system is supposed to provide: 
 
Hypothesis 6:  
HO: ECA and TEXT Metaphor users feel 
equally about the need to require two biometric 
modes for identity verification to ensure security. 
H1: ECA Metaphor users feel that the require-
ment of two biometric modes for verification en-
hances security to a greater extent than in the case 
of the TEXT Metaphor users. 
The average score for the perceived need for the 
enhanced security provided by multibiometrics is, 
for the ECA Metaphor: ?ECA= 2.8; and for the 
TEXT Metaphor: ?TEXT=2.1. The two sample t-test 
showed that the difference was statistically signifi-
cant (t(12)=2.28 ; p=0.021). Therefore we may 
confirm the alternative hypothesis. 
We found no statistically significant differences 
between the two metaphors regarding the users? 
perception of the extra cognitive demand of multi-
biometrics. 
Table 1 summarises our results. 
 
EFFECTS ON THE 
USER 
ECA Metaphor (vs. TEXT 
Metaphor) 
Greater ease-of-use 
Greater pleasantness Subjective impressions 
of users Less privacy 
User behaviour 
throughout the interaction 
with the system 
We didn?t reach definitive 
conclusions 
Improvement in task 
execution 
We didn?t reach definitive 
conclusions 
Impressions regarding 
multibiometrics Enhanced security 
Table 1: Comparative results 
5 Conclusions and future lines of re-
search 
Some of the most serious obstacles to widespread 
use that biometic technology is facing are related 
to user interaction and acceptance. We believe the 
results presented in this paper open interesting new 
lines of research. We found that the presence of an 
ECA (persona effect) makes users experience in-
teraction as easier and more pleasant. Regarding 
sense of security, our results are in line with other 
studies on ECAs. The increased pleasantness of 
use of the biometric modes could help overcome 
users? reluctance to accept biometric systems. On 
the other hand, the presence of the ECA could have 
a negative affect by enhancing the users? percep-
tion of encroachment on their privacy. 
We believe it may be possible to increase the 
level of users? perceived privacy and user trust by 
adopting strategies such as allowing the user to 
personalise the appearance and even the behaviour 
of the avatar, as Xiao et al (2007) suggest. Giving 
the ECA greater and more natural communication 
skills (e.g., small talk, specific gestures, etc.) and a 
more empathic attitude (in line with ideas in the 
area of affective computing) could have further 
positive effects. 
We may mention the inclusion of ECAs on mul-
tibiometric systems as another interesting specific 
line of research, given the enhancement in the us-
ers? perception of the security of such systems 
compared to the same without ECA. 
6 Acknowledgements 
This study has been possible thanks to the support 
grant received from the TEC2006-13170-C02-02 
project of the Spanish Plan Nacional de I+D and 
the 04-AEC0620-000046/06 (?Recognition of fa-
cial and speech patterns for safe multimodal ser-
vices in mobile communications?) project by Tele-
f?nica, funded by the Comunidad Autonoma de 
Madrid. 
7 References 
Jonas Beskow, Inger Karlsson, Jo Kewley and Giam-
piero Salvi, 2004. SYFACE - A Talking Head Tele-
phone for the Hearing-impaired. In Computers help-
ing people with special needs 1178-1186.  
Biosec: Biometry and Security, 2004. Deliverable D6.3: 
Report on results of first phase usability testing and 
guidelines for developers. Available at: 
http://www.europeanbiometrics.info/images/resource
s/73_471_file.pdf (Accessed: 2007, March) 
Scott Brave, Clifford Nass, and Kevin Hutchinson, 
2005. Computers that care: investigating the effects 
of orientation of emotion exhibited by an embodied 
38
computer agent. In International Journal of Human 
Computer Studies, vol. 62, pp. 161-178. 
Justine Cassell and Tim Bickmore, 2000. External 
manifestations of trustworthiness in the interface. In 
Communications of the ACM, vol. 43, pp. 50-56. 
CIC, 2007. Communication Intelligence Corporation, 
?iSign for Java,? 
http://www.cic.com/products/isign/#iSignJava      
(Accessed: 2007, March) 
Doris M. Dehn and Sussane Van Mulken, 2000. The 
impact of animated interface agents: a review of em-
pirical research. In International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, vol. 52, pp. 1-22. 
Haptek, 2007. http://www.haptek.com (Accessed: 2007, 
March) 
Kate Hone, Farah Akhtar and Martin Saffu, 2003. Affec-
tive agents to reduce user frustration: the role of 
agent embodiment. In Proceedings of Human-
Computer Interaction (HCI2003), Bath, UK, 2003. 
Kate Hone, 2006. Empathic agents to reduce user frus-
tration: The effects of varying agent characteristics. 
In  Interacting with Computers, vol. 18, pp. 227-245. 
Matt Huenerfauth, 2005. American Sign Language Gen-
eration: Multimodal LG with Multiple Linguistic 
Channels. In Proceedings of the ACL Student Re-
search Workshop (ACL 2005), pp. 37?42. 
IBG, 2006. International Biometric Group, 2006. Com-
parative Biometric Testing Available at: 
http://www.biometricgroup.com/reports/public/comp
arative_biometric_testing.html (Accessed: 2007, 
March) 
Iridian Technologies, 2007. Private ID. 
http://www.iridiantech.com/products.php?page=1 
(Accessed: 2007, March) 
Rinze Leenheer, 2006. Should ECAs ?dress to im-
press??, 4th Twente Student Conference on IT, 2006. 
James C. Lester, Sharolyn A. Converse, Susan E. 
Kahler, S. Todd Barlow, Brian A. Stone, and Rav-
inder S. Bhogal, 1997. The persona effect: affective 
impact of animated pedagogical agents.In Proceed-
ings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in 
computing systems, pp. 359-366. 
Lernout and Hauspie, 2007. 
http://www.microsoft.com/msagent/downloads/user.a
sp (Accessed: 2007, March) 
Junichiro Mori, Helmut Prendinger and Mitsuru Ishi-
zuka, 2003. Evaluation of an Embodied Conversa-
tional Agent with Affective Behavior. In Proceedings 
of the AAMAS03 Workshop on Embodied Conver-
sational Characters as Individuals , Melbourne, Aus-
tralia. 
Maria Moundridou and Maria Virvou, 2001. Evaluating 
the Impact of Interface Agents in an Intelligent Tu-
toring Systems Authoring Tool. In Proceedings of the 
Panhellenic Conference with International participa-
tion in Human-Computer interaction. 
Clifford Nass, Jonathan Steuer, and Ellen R. Tauber, 
1994. Computers are social actors. In Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems: Celebrating interdependence. CHI 
'94. ACM Press, New York, NY, 72-78. 
Nuance, 2007. Nuance Communications Inc.  
http://www.nuance.com (Accessed: 2007, March) 
Panasonic, 2007. http://www.panasonic.com (Accessed: 
2007, March) 
Precise Biometrics, 2007. 
http://www.precisebiometrics.com/ (Accessed: 2007, 
March) 
Zs?fia Ruttkay, Claire Dormann and Han Noot, 2002. 
Evaluating ECAs - What and How?. In Proceedings 
of AAMAS 2002 Workshop on Embodied Conversa-
tional Agents -- Let's Specify and Evaluate Them!, 
Bologna, Italy. 
Angela Sasse, 2004. Usability and trust in information 
systems. Cyber Trust & Crime Prevention Project. 
University College London. 
Susanne Van Mulken, Elisabeth Andre, and Jochen 
Muller, 1998. The Persona Effect: How substantial is 
it?. In Proceedings of the ACM CHI 1998 Confer-
ence , pp. 53-66. Los Angeles, CA 
WACOM, 2007. http://www.wacom.com   (Accessed: 
2007, March) 
Janet H. Walker, Lee Sproull and R. Subramani, 1994.  
Using a human face in an interface. In Proceedings 
of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in com-
puting systems: celebrating interdependence, pp. 85-
91. 
James Wayman, Anil K. Jain, Davide Maltoni and  
Maio Daio, 2005. Biometric Systems: Technology, 
Design and Performance Evaluation, Springer. 
Jun Xiao, John Stasko and Richard Catrambone, 2004. 
An Empirical Study of the Effect of Agent Compe-
tence on User Performance and Perception. In Pro-
ceedings of the Third International Joint Conference 
on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems-
Volume 1, pp. 178-185. 
Jun Xiao, John Stasko and Richard Catrambone, 2007. 
The Role of Choice and Customization on Users' In-
39
teraction with Embodied Conversational Agents: Ef-
fects on Perception and Performance, Proceedings of 
CHI 2007, San Jose, CA. 
Robert B. Zajonc, 1965. Social Facilitation, Science, 
149, pp. 269-274. 
40
