BusTUC - A natura l  l anguage bus  route  o rac le  
Tore Amble 
Dept. of computer and information science 
University of Trondheim 
Norway, N-7491 
amble@idi, ntnu. no 
Abstract 
The paper describes a natural anguage based expert 
system route advisor for the public bus transport 
in Trondheim, Norway. The system is available on 
the Internet,and has been intstalled at the bus com- 
pany's web server since the beginning of 1999. The 
system is bilingual, relying on an internal anguage 
independent logic representation. 
1 Introduct ion 
A natural anguage interface to a computer database 
provides users with the capability of obtaining in- 
formation stored in the database by querying the 
system in a natural language (NL). With a natural 
language as a means of communication with a com- 
puter system, the users can make a question or a 
statement in the way they normally think about the 
information being discussed, freeing them from hav- 
ing to know how the computer stores or processes 
the information. 
The present implementation represents a a major 
effort in bringing natural anguage into practical use. 
A system is developed that can answer queries about 
bus routes, stated as natural language texts, and 
made public through the Internet World Wide Web 
( http : //www. idi. ntnu. no/bustuc/). 
Trondheim is a small city with a university and 
140000 inhabitants. Its central bus systems has 42 
bus lines, serving 590 stations, with 1900 depar- 
tures per day (in average). That gives approximately 
60000 scheduled bus station passings per day, which 
is somehow represented in the route data base. 
The starting point is to automate the function of 
a route information agent. The following example 
of a system response is using an actual request over 
telephone to the local route information company: 
Hi, I live in Nidarvoll and tonight i 
must reach a train to Oslo at 6 oclock. 
and a typical answer would follow quickly: 
Bus number 54 passes by Nidarvoll skole 
at 1710 and arrives at Trondheim Railway 
Station at 1725. 
In between the question and the answer is a pro- 
cess of lexical analysis, syntax analysis, semantic 
analysis, pragmatic reasoning and database query 
processing. 
One could argue that the information content 
could be solved by an interrogation, whereby the 
customer is asked to produce 4 items: s ta t ion  
of departure, station of arrival, earliest 
departure timeand/or latest arrival time. It 
is a myth that natural language is a better way of 
communication because it is "natural language". 
The challenge is to prove by demonstration that 
an NL system can be made that will be preferred 
to the interrogative mode. To do that, the system 
has to be correct, user friendly and almost complete 
within the actual domain. 
2 Previous Efforts, CHAT-80, 
PRAT-89 and HSQL 
The system, called BusTUC is built upon the clas- 
sical system CHAT-80 (Warren and Pereira, 1982). 
CHAT-80 was a state of the art natural anguage sys- 
tem that was impressive on its own merits, but also 
established Prolog as a viable and competitive lan- 
guage for Artificial Intelligence in general. The sys- 
tem was a brilliant masterpiece of software, efficient 
and sophisticated. The natural anguage system was 
connected to a small query system for international 
geography. The following query could be analysed 
and answered in a split second: 
Which country bordering the Mediterranean 
borders a country that is bordered by a 
country whose population exceeds the 
population of India? 
(The answer 'Turkey' has become incorrect as 
time has passed. The irony is that Geography was 
chosen as a domain without time.) 
The abi!ity to answer ridiculously long queries is 
of course not the main goal. The main lesson is that 
complex sentences are analysed with a proper under- 
standing without sacrificing efficiency. Any superfi- 
cial pattern matching technique would prove futile 
sooner or later. 
2.1 Making a Norwegian CHAT-80, 
PRAT-89 
At the University of Trondheim (NTNU), two stu- 
dents made a Norwegian version of CHAT-80,called 
PRAT-89 (Teigen and Vetland, 1988),(Teigen and 
Vetland, 1989). (Also, a similar Swedish project 
SNACK-85 was reported). 
The dictionary was changed from English to Nor- 
wegian together with new rules for morphological 
analysis. The change of grammar from English to 
Norwegian proved to be amazingly easy. It showed 
that the langauges were more similar than one would 
believe, given that the languages are incomprehen- 
sible to each other's communities. 
After changing the dictionary and graramar, the 
following Norwegian query about the same domain 
could be answered correctly in a few seconds. 
Hvilke afrikanske land som hat en 
befolkning stoerre enn 3 millioner 
og mindre enn 50 millioner og er nord 
for Botswana og oest for Libya hat en 
hovedstad som hat en befolkning stoerre 
enn 100 tusen. 
( A translation is beside the point o.f being a long 
query in Norwegian.) 
2.2 HSQL - Help System for SQL 
A Nordic project HSQL (Help System for SQL) was 
accomplished in 1988-89 to make a joint Nordic ef- 
fort interfaces to databases. 
The HSQL project was led by the Swedish State 
Bureau (Statskontoret), with participants from Swe- 
den, Denmark, Finland and Norway (Amble et al, 
1990). The aim of HSQL was to build a natural 
language interface to SQL databases for the Scandi- 
navian languages Swedish, Danish and Norwegian. 
These languages are very similar, and the Norwe- 
gian version of CHAT-80 was easily extended to the 
other Scandinavian languages. Instead of Geogra- 
phy, a more typical application area was chosen to 
be a query system for hospital administration. We 
decided to target an SQL database of a hospital ad- 
ministration which had been developed already. 
The next step was then to change the domain 
of discourse from Geography to hospital adminis- 
tration, using the same knowledge representation 
techniques used in CHAT-80. A semantic model of 
this domain was made, and then implemented in the 
CHAT-80 framework. 
The modelling technique that proved adequate 
was to use an extended Entity Relationship (ER) 
model with a class (type) hierarchy, attributes be- 
longing to each class, single inheritance ofattributes 
and relationships. 
Coupling the system to an SQL database. 
After the remodelling, the system could answer 
queries in "Scandinavian" to an internal hospital 
database as well as CHAT-80 could answer Geog- 
raphy questions. HSQL produced a Prolog-like code 
FOL (First Order Logic) for execution. A mapping 
from FOL to the data base Schema was defined, and 
a translator from FOL to SQL was implemented. 
The example 
Hvilke menn ligger i en kvinnes seng? 
(Which men lie in a woman's bed? ) 
would be translated ryly into the SQL query: 
SELECT DISTINCT 
T3.name,Tl.sex,T2.reg_no,T3.sex, 
T4.reg_no,T4.bed_no,T5.hosp_no,T5.ward_no 
FROM PATIENT TI,OCCUPANCY T2,PATIENT T3, 
OCCUPANCY T4,WARD T5 
WHERE 
(Tl.sex='f') AND 
(T2.reg_no=Tl.reg_no) AND 
(T3.sex='m') AND 
(T4.reg_no=T3.reg_no) AND 
(T4.bed_no=T2.bed_no) AND 
(T5.hosp_no=T4.hosp_no) AND 
(T5.ward_no=T4.ward_no) 
2.3 The The Understanding Computer 
The HSQL was a valuable xperience in the effort 
to make transportable natural anguage interfaces. 
However, the underlying system CHAT-80 restricted 
the further development. 
After the HSQL Project was finished, an inter- 
nal reseach project TUC (the Understanding Com- 
puter) was initiated at NTNU to carry on the results 
from HSQL. The project goals differed from those of 
HSQL in a number of ways, and would not be con- 
cerned with multimedia interfaces . On the other 
hand, portability and versatility were made central 
issues concerning the generality of the language and 
its applications. The research goals could be sum- 
marised as to 
? Give computers an operational understanding 
of natural language. 
? Build intelligent systems with natural language 
capabilities. 
? Study common sense reasoning in natural an- 
guage. 
A test criterion for the understanding capacity is 
that after a set of definitions in a Naturally Read- 
able Logic, NRL, the system's answer to queries in 
NRL should conform to the answers of an idealised 
rational agent. 
Every man that lives loves Mary. 
John is a man. John lives. 
Who loves Mary? 
==> John 
NRL is defined in a closed context. Thus in- 
terfaces to other systems are in principle defined 
through simulating the environment as a dialogue 
partner. 
TUC is a prototypical natural language proces- 
sor for English written in Prolog. It is designed to 
be a general purpose easily adaptable natural lan- 
guage processor. It consists of a general grammar 
for a subset of English, a semantic knowledge base, 
and modules for interfaces to other interfaces like 
UNIX, SQL-databases and general textual informa- 
tion sources. 
2.4 The  TABOR Project 
It so happened that a Universtity Project was start- 
eded in 1996, called TABOR ( " Speech based user 
interfaces and reasoning systems "), with the aim of 
building an automatic public transport route oracle, 
available over the public telephone. At the onset of 
the project, the World Wide Web was fresh, and not 
as widespread as today, and the telephone was still 
regarded as the main source of information for the 
public. 
Since then, the Internet became the dominant 
medium, and it is as likeley to find a computer with 
Internet connection, as to find a local busroute table. 
( The consequtive wide spreading of cellular phones 
changed the picture in favour of the telephone, but 
that is another story). 
It was decided that a text based information sys- 
tem should be built, regardless of the status of the 
speech rocgnition and speech synthesis effort, which 
proved to lag behind after a while. 
The BusTUC system 
The resulting system BusTUC grew out as a natural 
application of TUC, and an English prototype could 
be built within a few months (Bratseth, 1997). 
Since the summer 1996, the prototype was put 
onto the Internet, and been developed and tested 
more or less continually until today. The most im- 
portant extension was that the system was made 
bilingual (Norwegian and English) during the fall 
1996. 
In spring 1999, the BusTUC was finally adopted 
by the local bus company in Trondheim ( A/S 
Trondheim Trafikkselskap), which set up a server ( 
a 300 MHz PC with Linux). 
Until today, over 150.000 questions have been an- 
swered, and BusTUC seems to stabilize and grow 
increasingly popular. 
3 
3 Anatomy o f  the  bus  route  orac le  
The main components of the bus route information 
systems are: 
? A parser system, consisting of a dictionary, a 
lexical processor, a grammar and a parser. 
? A knowledge base (KB), divided into a semantic 
KB and an application KB 
? A query processor, contalng a routing logic sys- 
tem, and a route data base. 
The system is bilingual and contains a double set 
of dictionary, morphology and grammar. Actually, it 
detects which language is most probable by count- 
ing the number of unknown words related to each 
language, and acts accordingly. The grammars are 
surprisingly similar, but no effort is made to coa- 
lesce them. The Norwegian grammar is slightly big- 
ger than the English grammar, mostly because it is 
more elaborated but also because Norwegian allows 
a freer word order. 
3.1 Features  of  BusTUC 
For the Norwegian systems, the figures give an in- 
dication of the size of the domain: 420 nouns, 150 
verbs, 165 adjectives, 60 prepositions, etc. 
There are 1300 grammar ules ( 810 for English) 
although alf of the rules are very low level. 
The semantic net described below contains about 
4000 entries. 
A big name table of 3050 names in addition to 
the official station names, is required to capture the 
variety of naming. A simple spell correction is a part 
of the system ( essentially 1 character errors). 
The pragmatic reasoning is needed to translate the 
output from the parser to a route database query 
language . This is done by a production system 
called Pragma, which acts like an advanced rewrit- 
ing system with 580 rules. 
In addition, there is another ule base for actually 
generating the natural anguage answers (120 rules). 
The system is mainly written in Prolog (Sicstus 
Prolog 3.7), with some Perl programs for the com- 
munication and CGI-scripts. 
At the moment, there are about 35000 lines of 
programmed Prolog code (in addition to route tables 
which are also in Prolog). 
Average response time is usually less than 2 sec- 
onds, but there are queries that demand up to 10 
seconds. 
The error rate for single, correct, complete and 
relevant questions is about 2 percent. 
3.2 The Parser System 
The Grammar System 
The grammar is based on a simple grammar for 
statements, while questions and commands are de- 
rived by the use of movements. The grammar 
formalism which is called Consensical Grammar, 
(CONtext SENSitive CompositionAL Grammar) is 
an easy to use variant of Extraposition Grammar 
(Pereira and Warren, 1980), which is a generalisa- 
tion of Definite Clause Grammars. Compositional 
grammar means that the semantics of a a phrase is 
composed of the semantics of the subphrases; the ba- 
sic constituents being a form of verb complements. 
As for Extraposition grammars, a grammar is trans- 
lated to Definite Clause Grammars, and executed as 
such. 
A characteristic syntactic expression in Consen- 
sical Grammar  may define an incomplete construct 
in terms of a "difference " between complete con- 
structs. When possible, the parser will use the sub- 
tracted part in stead of reading from the input, after 
a gap if necessary. The effect is the same as for Ex- 
traposition grammars, but the this format is more 
intuitive. 
Examples of grammar rules. 
which is analysed as 
for which X is it true that 
the (X) person has a dog that barked? 
where the last line is analysed as a statement. 
Movement is easily handled in Consensical Gram- 
mar without making special phrase rules for each 
kind of movement. The following example shows 
how TUC manages a variety of analyses using move- 
ments: 
Max said Bill thought 
Joe believed Fido Barked. 
Who said Bill thought 
Joe believed Fido barked? ==> Max 
Who did Max say thought 
Joe believed Fido barked? ==> Bill 
statement(P) ---> 
noun_phrase(X,VP,P), 
verb_phrase(X,VP). 
statement(Q) ---> 
verb_complementsO(VC), 
ZZ initial optional verb complements 
statement(Q) -... 
verb_complementsO(VC). 
ZZ may be inserted after a gap 
whoseq(P) ---> Z whose dog barked? 
\[whose\], 
hOlm(N), 
whoq(P) - ~ without gap 
(\[who\],\[has\],\[a\],noun(N),\[that\]). 
whoq(P) ---> 
\[who\], 
whichq(P) - (\[which\],\[person\]). 
whichq(which(X)::P) ---> 
\[which\], 
statement(P) - the(X). 
Example: 
Whose dog barked? 
is analysed as if the sentence had been 
Who has a dog that  barked? 
which is analysed as 
Which person has a dog that  barked? 
Who did Max say Bill thought 
believed Fido barked? ==> Joe 
The parser 
The experiences with Consensical grammars are a 
bit mixed however. The main problem is the parsing 
method itself, which is top down with backtracking. 
Many principles that would prove elegant for small 
domains turned out to be too costly for larger do- 
mains, due to the wide variety of modes of expres- 
sions, incredible ambiguities and the sheer size of the 
covered language. 
The disambiguation is a major problem for small 
grammars and large languages, and was solved by 
the following guidelines: 
? a semantic type checking was integrated into the 
parser, and would help to discard sematica/ly 
wrong parses from the start. 
? a heuristics was followed that proved almost ir- 
reproachable: The longest possible phrase of a 
category that is semantically correct is in most 
cases the preferred interpretation. 
? due to the perplexity of the language, some 
committed choices (cuts) had to be inserted into 
the grammar at strategic places. As one could 
fear however, this implied that wrong choices 
being made at some point in the parsing could 
not be recovered by backtracking. 
These problems also made it imperative to intro- 
duce a timeout on the parsing process of embarass- 
ing 10 seconds. Although most sentences, would be 
parsed within a second, some legal sentences ofmod- 
erate size actually need this time. 
4 
3.3 The semantic knowledge base 
Adaptability means that the system does not need 
to be reprogrammed foreach new application. 
The design principle of TUC is that most of the 
changes are made in a tabular semantic knowledge 
base, while there is one general grammar and dictio- 
nary. In general, the logic is generated automatically 
from the semantic knowledge base. 
The nouns play a key role in the understanding 
part as they constitute the class or type hierarchy. 
Nouns are defined in an a-kind-of hierarchy. The 
hierarchy is tree-structured with single inheritance. 
The top level also constitute the top level ontology 
of TUC's world. 
In fact, a type check of the compliances of verbs, 
nouns adjectives and prepositions i  not only neces- 
sary for the semantic processing but is essential for 
the syntax analysis for the disambiguation aswell. 
In TUC, the legal combinations are carefully assem- 
bled in the semantic network, which then serves a 
dual purpose. 
These semantic definitions are necessary to allow 
for instance the following sentences 
The dog saw a man with a telescope. 
The man saw a dog with a telescope. 
to be treated differently because with telescope 
may modify the noun man but not the noun dog, 
while with telescope modifies the verb see, re- 
stricted to person. 
3.4 The Query Processor 
Event Calculus 
The semantics of the phrases are built up by a kind 
of verb complements, where the event play a central 
role. 
The text is translated from Natural anguage into 
a form called TQL (Temporal Query Language/ 
TUC Query Language) which is a first order event 
calculus expression, a self contained expression con- 
taining the literal meaning of an utterance. 
A formalism TQL that was defined, inspired by 
the Event Calculus by Kowalski and Sergot (Kowal- 
ski and Sergot, 1986). 
The TQL expressions consist of predicates, func- 
tions, constants and variables. The textual words 
of nouns and verbs are translated to generic predi- 
cates using the selected interpretation. The follow- 
ing question 
Do you know whether the bus goes 
to Nidar on Saturday ?
would give the TQL expression below. Typically, 
the Norwegian equivalent 
Vet du om bussen gaar 
til Nidar paa soendag ? 
5 
gives exactly the same code. 
test:: % 
isa(real,program,tuc), % 
isa(real,bus,A), % 
isa(real,saturday,B), % 
isa(real,place,nidar), % 
event(real,D), % 
Type of question 
tuc is a program 
A is a real bus 
B isa saturday 
Nidar is a place 
D is an event 
know(whether,tuc,C,D), Y. C was known at D 
event (C , E) , Y. E is an event in C 
action(go,E), Y. the action of E is Go 
actor(A,E), Y. the actor of E is A 
srel(to,place,nidar,E),Y. E is to nidar 
srel(on,time,B,E), y, E is on the saturday B 
The event parameter plays an important role in 
the semantics. It is used for various purposes. The 
most salient role is to identify a subset of time and 
space in which an action or event occured. Both the 
actual time and space coordinates are connected to 
the actions through the event parameter. 
Pragmatic reasoning 
The TQL is translated to a route database query 
language (BusLOG) which is actually a Prolog pro- 
gram. This is done by a production system called 
Pragma, which acts like an advanced rewriting sys- 
tem with 580 rules. 
In addition, there is another rule base for actually 
generating the natural language answers (120 rules). 
4 Conc lus ions  
The TUC approach as as its goal to automate the 
creation of new natural language interfaces for a well 
defined subset of the language and with a minimum 
of explicit programming. 
The implemented system has proved its worth, 
and is interesting if for no other reason. There is 
also an increasing interest from other bus compa- 
nies and route information companies alike to get a 
similar system for their customers. 
Further work remains to make the parser really 
efficient, and much work remains to make the lan- 
guage coverage complete within reasonable imits. 
It is an open question whether the system of this 
kind will be a preferred way of offering information 
to the public. 
If it is, it is a fair amount of work to make it a 
portable system that can be implemented lsewhere, 
also connecting various travelling agencies. 
If not, it will remain a curiosity. But anyway, a
system like this will be a contribution to the devel- 
opment of intelligent systems. 
Re ferences  
Tore Amble, Erik Knudsen, Aarno Lehtola, Jan 
Ljungberg, and Ole Ravnholt. 1990. Naturlig 
Spr~k och Grafik - nya vSgar inn i databaser. 
Statskontoret. Rapport om HSQL, ett kunskaps- 
baseret hj~lpsystem fSr SQL. 
Jon S. Bratseth. 1997. BusTUC - A Natural Lan- 
guage Bus Traffic Informations System. Master's 
thesis, The Norwegian University of Science and 
Technology. 
R. Kowalski and M. Sergot. 1986. A logic based 
calculus of events. New Generation Computing, 
8(0):67-95. 
F.C.N. Pereira and D.H.D. Warren. 1980. Definite 
clause grammar for language analysis. Artificial 
Intelligence, 0(3). 
J. Teigen and V. Vetland. 1988. Syntax analysis of 
norwegian language. Technical report, The Nor- 
wegian Institute of Technology. 
J. Teigen and V. Vetland. 1989. Handling reason- 
able questions beyond 
the linguistic and conceptual coverage of 
natural anguage interfaces. Master's thesis, The 
Norwegian Institute of Technology. 
D.H.D Warren and F.C.N. Pereira. 1982. An effi- 
cient and easily adaptable system for interpreting 
natural language queries. Computational Linguis- 
tics, 8(3-4). 
6 
